CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SANTA FE, TEXAS 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
PUBLISHED BY THE ORDER OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF SANTA FE, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
JIM WOOD 
Mayor 
____________ 
MAX D. TULLY 
PERRY MORRIS, JR. 
JOHN ROBERTS 
GARY UTLEY 
JIM BURNAM 
Aldermen 
____________ 
MAFIE McMATH 
City Secretary 
____________ 
ELLIS ORTEGO 
City Attorney 
ORDINANCE NO. 14-80 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE, TEXAS, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED; PROVIDING EXCEPTIONS; PROVIDING FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR CODE DESIGNATIONS, CATCHLINES, DEFINITIONS, AMENDMENTS, SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR TAX ADMINISTRATION REGULATIONS; DESIGNATING AN OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER, FISCAL YEAR, AND CITY DEPOSITORY; ADOPTING COMPREHENSIVE ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS; ADOPTING THE 1979 EDITIONS OF THE STANDARD BUILDING, PLUMBING, FIRE PREVENTION CODES AND THE 1978 EDITION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE; ADOPTING SUBSTANDARD BUILDING, HOUSE MOVING, EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS, OBSTRUCTIONS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, AND OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS; ADOPTING CARNIVAL, CIRCUS, SHOW, AND PARADE REGULATIONS; ADOPTING AMBULANCE AND WRECKER REGULATIONS; ESTABLISHING AN ARSON REWARD; PROVIDING FOR HEALTH AND SANITATION REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO TRASH AND LITTER, NOISE, DRAINAGE OBSTRUCTIONS AND POLLUTION, AND ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS; PROVIDING FOR MUNICIPAL COURT REGULATIONS; CREATING COMPREHENSIVE SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; AND PROVIDING FOR A PENALTY NOT TO EXCEED TWO HUNDRED DOLLARS ($200.00). 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE, GALVESTON COUNTY, TEXAS: 
SECTION 1: 
That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of chapters 1 through 10, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Santa Fe, Texas," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance, which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the city council on or before October 9, 1980, to the extent provided herein. 
SECTION 2: 
That all ordinances of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 9th day of October, 1980, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Santa Fe enacted on final passage on or before October 9, 1980, and not included in this Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are hereby repealed from and after the 9th day of October, 1980, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the city is repealed by this ordinance. 
SECTION 3: 
That the repeal provided for in section 2 above shall not affect any of the following: 
(a)  Any events or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(b)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(c)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(d)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(e)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, or affecting the right-of-way of any street or public way in the city. 
(f)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the State of Texas; 
(g)  Any ordinances establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(h)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(i)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(j)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(k)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(l)  Any ordinance enacted after October 9, 1980; 
(m)  Any ordinance pertaining to the holding of municipal elections. 
The repeal provided for in section 2 shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
SECTION 4: 
That wherever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense or for each day such offense shall continue, if it is one classified as continuing offense; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the State of Texas. 
SECTION 5: 
That any and all amendments and additions to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Santa Fe, Texas," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
SECTION 6: 
That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 4 of this ordinance shall apply to the section as amended, or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section of the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section as amended, unless penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
SECTION 7: 
That a copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary in loose-leaf form. It shall be the express duty of the city secretary, or someone authorized by the city secretary, to insert in the designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such Code, when the same has been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city council. Such copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same at any time during regular business hours. 
SECTION 8: 
That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Santa Fe to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 4 of this ordinance. 
SECTION 9: 
That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
SECTION 10: 
That sections 1 through 6 of chapter 1, pertaining to Code designation, catchlines, definitions, amendments, penalties, and severability; that section 7, subsection A of chapter 1, providing for tax administration; and that sections 10 through 12, designating an official newspaper, fiscal year, and city depository, are hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 11: 
That sections 1 through 6 of chapter 2, pertaining to livestock and fowl, wild animals, maintenance of stables, pens, houses, and yards, dogs, cruelty to animals, and the keeping of bees, are hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 12: 
That sections 1 through 3 of chapter 3, adopting the 1979 Standard Building Code, 1979 Standard Plumbing Code, and 1978 National Electrical Code and additional electrical code provisions; and that sections 5 through 10, pertaining to substandard buildings, house moving, excavation in streets, obstructions in public rights-of-way, and off-street parking, are hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 13: 
That section 2 of chapter 4, adopting carnival, circus and show provisions; and that section 3 of chapter 4, requiring parade permits; and that sections 7 and 8 of chapter 4, pertaining to ambulance regulations and wrecker regulations; and that section 10, pertaining to public utilities, are hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 14: 
That section 1 of chapter 5, adopting the 1979 Standard Fire Prevention Code; and that section 4 of chapter 5, providing for an arson reward, are hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 15: 
That section 1 and sections 4 through 6 of chapter 6, pertaining to trash and litter, noise, declaring pollution or obstruction of drainage system a public nuisance, and prohibiting abandoned refrigerators, are hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 16: 
That section 4 of chapter 7, pertaining to the municipal court, is hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 17: 
That sections 1 through 9 of chapter 8, adopting comprehensive subdivision regulations pertaining to interpretation, purpose and enforcement, variances, preliminary conference, preliminary plat, final plat, resubdivision, maintenance bond, unavailability of public water and/or sewage facilities, and standards and specifications, are hereby adopted as printed and included in this Code of Ordinances. 
SECTION 18: 
That this ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage and publication of caption, as the law in such cases provides. 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Santa Fe City Council on this the 9th day of October, 1980. 
APPROVED: 
	/s/ Jim Wood 
      Mayor, City of Santa Fe 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Mafie McMath 
      City Secretary 	
 	 
 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
SECTION 1: - HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Santa Fe, Texas" and may be so cited.  
SECTION 2: - CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines are amended or reenacted.  
SECTION 3: - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
A.  CHAPTER 
Whenever the words "this ordinance," "section," "subsection," "paragraph," or "article" are used, they shall pertain to the chapter or section of this Code of Ordinances in which they are found unless specifically and clearly in reference to a separate chapter or section. 
B.  CITY 
The words "this city" or "the city" shall mean the City of Santa Fe, Galveston County, Texas. 
C.  CITY COUNCIL 
Whenever the words "city council" or "the council," "board of aldermen" or "governing body" are used, they shall mean the Santa Fe City Council, Galveston County, Texas. The city council shall be composed of a mayor and five (5) aldermen. 
D.  MALES AND FEMALES 
Throughout this Code, words used expressing masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine.  
SECTION 4: - AMENDMENTS OR ADDITIONS TO CODE 
All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code, which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code, and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"That chapter _______, section _______, of the Code of Ordinances, City of Santa Fe, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows…" 
The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
In the event of a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: 
"That chapter _______, of the Code of Ordinances, City of Santa Fe, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered section _______ which said section shall read as follows…" 
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
It is hereby provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this Code in the manner provided for above, shall not be deemed invalid as a result of such failure to follow the procedure outlined in this section.  
SECTION 5: - GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF CODE 
Whenever this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever is such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by fines as established in Article 4.14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure & Section 29.003 of the Government Code as follows: 
(1)  Maximum fine—$2000.00 for violations of regulations that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse. 
(2)  Maximum Fine—$500.00 for violations of other provisions of this Code or other city ordinance. 
(Ordinance No. 33-98 of November 12, 1998)  
SECTION 6: - SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
(Provision for inclusion of sections 1 through 6 above provided for in ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances.)  
SECTION 7: - AD VALOREM TAX 
A.  TAX ADMINISTRATION 
The administration of all ad valorem tax functions will be performed in accordance with the state property tax code, and should any provision of this section conflict therewith, the provisions of said state code shall prevail. 
(Provision for inclusion of section 7, subsection A above provided for in ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances.) 
B.  TAX RATE 
Ad valorem property taxes on all real and personal property located within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, as of January 1, of the applicable tax year, shall be taxed at a rate to be fixed by ordinance annually by the Santa Fe City Council, subject to all exceptions and exemptions provided by the constitution and statutes of the State of Texas and subsection E of this section. 
C.  ASSESSMENT 
All property to be assessed under or in compliance with this section shall hereby be assessed at one hundred percent (100%) of the actual market value. 
(Ordinance No. 13-79 of August 13, 1979, as amended) 
D.  DUE DATE, DELINQUENCY, PENALTIES AND INTEREST 
(1)  Ad valorem property taxes levied by the city council each year shall become due on the first day of October of the year for which the levy is made and may be paid up to the following January 31 without penalty. Such taxes shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on the following day, February 1. Penalty and interest shall accrue on delinquent taxes as provided for in the State Property Tax Code. 
(Ordinance No. 19-82 of December 6, 1982) 
(2)  A delinquent tax incurs a penalty of six percent (6%) of the amount of the tax for the first calendar month it is delinquent plus one percent (1%) for each additional month or portion of a month the tax remains unpaid prior to July 1 of the current year. However, a tax delinquent on July 1 of the current year incurs a total penalty of twelve percent (12%) of the amount of the delinquent tax without regard to the number of months the tax has been delinquent. A delinquent tax accrues interest at a rate of one percent (1%) for each month or portion of a month the tax remains unpaid. 
(3)  An additional penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of taxes, penalty, and interest due shall be charged if collection of the same has been placed in the hands of an attorney pursuant to the terms of Section 33.07 and Section 6.30 of the Property Tax Code. 
(Ordinance No. 19-97 of September 11, 1997; Ordinance No. 18-2008 of Sept. 11, 2008, Sec. 7) 
E.  EXEMPTIONS 
The first fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) of the market value of residence homesteads of persons, married or unmarried, including those living alone, who are under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under Federal Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance or its successors or of married or unmarried persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older, including those living alone, shall be exempt from all ad Valorem taxes hereby levied. An eligible disabled person who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older may not receive both exemptions in the same year but may choose either. Exemptions shall be allowed for disabled veterans, as defined by Section 2 of Article VIII of the Constitution of the State of Texas to the maximum extent as allowed thereby. All lands designated as agricultural lands under the provisions of Article VIII of the Constitution of the State of Texas shall be eligible for agricultural valuation. 
(Ordinance No. 19-97 of September 11, 1997) 
F.  RESERVED. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 14-2002, adopted September 17, 2002, deleted Chapter 1, Section 7, Subsection F., in its entirety. Former Subsection F. pertained to "Election Required for Collection by Other Than City Employees" and derived from Ordinance No. 09-89 adopted November 9, 1989. 
G.  TAXATION OF FREEPORT GOODS 
The City of Santa Fe elects to tax that tangible personal property described in Article VIII, Section I-J, Subsection (a) of the Texas Constitution and Section 11.251, Texas Property Tax Code, known as "freeport goods," which would otherwise be exempt. 
(Ordinance No. 06-90 of February 8, 1990) 
Editor's note— See also Article 10 of Home Rule Charter. 
H.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Disabled has the same meaning as set forth in the Texas Tax Code Section 11.13(m)(1), as it currently exists or may be amended. 
(2)  Residence homestead has the same meaning as set forth in the Texas Tax Code Section 11.13(j)(1), as it currently exists or may be amended. 
(3)  Tax Code means the Texas Tax Code, as it currently exists or may be amended. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2004 of March 11, 2004, Sec. 2) 
I.  RESIDENCE HOMESTEAD TAX FREEZE FOR ELDERLY OR DISABLED PEOPLE 
There is hereby created and established a tax freeze on the amount of property taxes imposed by the City of Santa Fe on the homesteads of disabled individuals or individuals age sixty-five (65) or older, which shall be governed by Texas Tax Code Section 11.261, as follows: 
(1)  The tax freeze shall become effective beginning with the 2004 tax year and shall remain effective for each successive tax year until otherwise amended or repealed by the City Council or other appropriate authority. 
(2)  The total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homesteads of a person who qualified that residence homestead for the exemption in accordance with the Tax Code as that of a person who is disabled or is sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or sixty-five (65) years of age or older. 
(3)  If the person who is disabled or is sixty-five (65) years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if (i) the surviving spouse is fifty-five (55) years of age or older at the time of the person's death; (ii) the residence homestead of the deceased person is also the residence homestead of the surviving spouse on the date of the person's death; and (iii) the residence homestead remains the residence homestead of the surviving spouse. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein, taxes on the residence homestead may be increased to the extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other than improvements made to comply with governmental requirements. 
(5)  A person may not receive freeze taxes for more than one (1) residence homestead, no matter where located, in the same year. A person may designate a new residence homestead within the City in accordance with the Tax Code. 
(6)  The limitation on taxes provided by this Subsection may expire in accordance with Texas Tax Code Section 11.261(d). If a tax limitation is erroneously allowed, back taxes may be assessed in accordance with Texas Tax Code Section 11.261(e). 
(Ordinance No. 06-2004 of March 11, 2004, Sec. 3)  
SECTION 8: - SALES TAX 
A.  LOCAL SALES TAX ADOPTED 
(1)  As authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act (Article 1066c, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), the voters of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, adopted the one percent (1%) local sales tax at an election held on August 12, 1978 (274 for; 39 against). 
(Election authorized by Ordinance 6-78 of July 6, 1978) 
(2)  The City of Santa Fe, Texas adopted Section 4B sales and use tax at the rate of one half of one percent (½%) for economic development projects identified as public works infrastructure improvements, specifically water/wastewater expansion, drainage, and streets and roads, including the maintenance and operating expenses for those projects developed with economic development funds designed to promote new or expanded businesses enterprises, as authorized by Section 4B of Article 5190.6, V.T.C.S., as amended, (The Development Corporation Act of 1979), at an election held on May 5, 2001 (629 for; 512 against). 
(3)  The City of Santa Fe, Texas adopted an additional sales and use tax within the City at the rate of one-half of one percent (½%) to be used to reduce the property tax rate, at an election held on May 5, 2001 (731 for; 414 against). 
(Resolution No. 2001-09 of May 8, 2001) 
B.  LOCAL SALES TAX RETAINED ON RESIDENTIAL GAS AND ELECTRICITY 
The City of Santa Fe, Texas, by majority vote of the membership of its governing body, hereby votes to continue the taxes authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, effective October 1, 1979, as authorized by Section 6 of House Bill No. 1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session. 
C.  TAXATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 
(1)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the City of Santa Fe, Texas. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunication device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(2)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for all other Local Sales and Use Taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas. 
(3)  The City Secretary shall forward to the Comptroller of the State of Texas by United States Registered or Certified Mail a copy of this ordinance along with a copy of the minutes of the City Council's vote and discussion of this ordinance. 
(4)  This section shall become effective on January 1, 2003. 
(Ordinance No. 4-79 of April 11, 1979; Ordinance No. 10-2002 of August 22, 2002)  
SECTION 9: - BINGO TAX 
There shall be imposed a two percent (2%) gross receipts tax on all bingo games conducted within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. All such taxes shall be collected, subject to the penalties, as provided by the Bingo Enabling Act. 
(Ordinance No. 04-89 of May 11, 1989)  
SECTION 10: - OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER 
The Galveston County Daily News is hereby designated as the official newspaper of the City of Santa Fe for the publication of all ordinances, notices, and other matter required by the Charter, by the ordinances of the City, or by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas to be published. It shall also be the designated newspaper for publication of items the City may deem necessary or desirable to publish. 
(Ordinance No. 18-98 of July 23, 1998; Ordinance No. 20-2000 of September 14, 2000; Ordinance No. 26-2004 of December 9, 2004) 
Editor's note— See also Section 12.12 of the Home Rule Charter.  
SECTION 11: - FISCAL YEAR 
The fiscal year of the City of Santa Fe shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September of each subsequent calendar year. 
(Provision for inclusion of Section 11 above provided for in ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances.)  
SECTION 12: - CITY DEPOSITORY 
The City will seek applications for a depository services contract as authorized and in accordance with state law. The City may approve, execute, and deliver any depository services contract whose term does not exceed the maximum term allowed by state law. Accounts necessary to conduct city business shall be established at the selected depository. All accounts shall be established with the requirement that withdrawal transactions shall be conducted by at least two (2) of the following city officials: 
(1)  Mayor. 
(2)  Mayor Pro-tem. 
(3)  City Secretary/Treasurer. 
Transfers from account to account may be transacted by any one (1) of the three (3) officials listed above. Special funds, such as the cash bond escrow account and the DARE account, may be established and designed to permit other authorized city representatives to transact business on behalf of the City under the direction of the City Manager. 
(Ordinance No. 15-97 of July 10, 1997; Ordinance No. 06-2003 of March 27, 2003)  
SECTION 13: - OBSCENE MATTER AND PERFORMANCES PROHIBITED 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For purposes of this section the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
(1)  Matter means any book, magazine, newspaper, or printed, or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation, or any statute or other figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines, or materials. 
(2)  Performance means any play, motion picture, dance or other exhibition or presentation, whether pictured, animated, or live, performed before an audience of one (1) or more person(s). 
(3)  Any matter or performance is obscene if: 
(a)  The average person, applying contemporary community standards, finds that the matter or performance, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, and 
(b)  The matter or performance depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct; normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and 
(c)  The matter or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(4)  Sexual Conduct means acts of masturbation, excretory functions, lewd exhibition of the genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, homosexuality, lesbianism, bestiality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast or breasts of a female for the purpose of sexual stimulation, gratification, or perversion. 
(5)  Sadomasochistic Abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(6)  Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity. 
(7)  Distribute means to transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
(8)  Knowingly means knowing or having good reason to know the character of the matter or performance. 
(9)  Owner means any person who owns or has legal right to possession of any matter. 
B.  PROHIBITED ACTS - MATTER 
It shall be unlawful for any person who knowingly sends or causes to be sent, or brings or causes to be brought, into the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for sale or distribution, or in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, possesses, prepares, publishes, or prints, with intent to distribute or to exhibit to another, or who offers to distribute, distributes, or exhibits to another any obscene matter. 
C.  PROHIBITED ACTS - PERFORMANCES 
It shall be unlawful for any person who knowingly engages or participates in, manages, produces, sponsors, presents, or exhibits any obscene performance. 
D.  DEFENSES 
It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section for the defendant to show: 
(1)  That the distribution was made to the recipient by a bona fide school, museum, or public library or by an employee of such organization or of a retail outlet affiliated with and serving the educational purpose of such organization acting in the course of his employment; or, 
(2)  That the act was done for legitimate scientific or educational purposes. 
E.  ARREST AND SEIZURE 
Where the subject matter is offered for distribution to the public as stock in trade of a lawful business or activity, or, as in the case of films, is exhibited at a commercial theater showing regularly scheduled performances to the general public, no person shall be arrested for a violation of any of the provisions of this section unless the arresting officer shall have first obtained an arrest warrant, and no property shall be seized as evidence unless a search warrant shall have first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this section. Provided, however, that the quantity of matter seized shall encompass no more than is reasonable and necessary for the purpose of obtaining evidence. 
F.  HEARING 
At any time after arrest and seizure, and prior to trial, the state, defendant, owner, or other party in interest of any matter seized, may apply for and obtain a prompt adversary hearing for the purpose of obtaining a preliminary determination of obscenity. The defendant or owner of any matter seized may apply for and, upon a showing that other copies of the film or motion picture are not available to be exhibited, the court shall order that the applicant be permitted to copy the film or motion pictures, at his own expense, so that showing can be continued pending a judicial determination of obscenity in an adversary hearing. 
G.  PENALTY 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction, be fined in any amount not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ordinance 8-79 of July 12, 1979)  
SECTION 14: - SALE OR EXHIBITION TO MINORS OF INDECENT PUBLICATIONS, PICTURES, OR ARTICLES 
A.  UNLAWFUL 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to willfully or knowingly engage in the business of selling, lending, giving away, showing, advertising for sale, or distributing to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years or to have in possession with intent to engage in the said business or to otherwise offer for sale or commercial distribution to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years or to display at newsstands or any other business establishment frequented by minors under the age of eighteen (18) years or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public, any motion picture or live show, or any still picture, or photograph, or any book, pocket book, pamphlet, or magazine the cover or content of which exploits, is devoted to, or is principally made up of descriptions or depictions of illicit sex or sexual immorality or which is lewd, lascivious, or indecent, or which consists of pictures of nude or partially denuded figures posed or presented in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or to exploit sex, lust, or perversion for commercial gain or any article or instrument of indecent or immoral use. 
B.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
(1)  Description or Depictions of Illicit Sex or Sexual Immorality shall mean human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. 
(2)  Nude or Partially Denuded Figures shall mean less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(3)  Knowingly shall mean having knowledge of the character and content of the publication or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclose the content and character of the same. 
C.  PUNISHMENT UPON CONVICTION 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the terms hereof shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ordinance 2-79 of February 8, 1979)  
SECTION 15: - CURFEW FOR MINORS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning. 
Emergency shall mean an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term shall include but not limited to a fire, natural disaster, vehicular accident, or a serious medical condition of sudden onset. 
Guardian shall mean the person who, under a court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or the public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor , for the purposes of this section, shall mean any person under the age of seventeen (17) years. 
Parent shall mean a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court appointed guardian or other person eighteen (18) years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(Ordinance No. 13-94 of November 10, 1994; Ordinance No. 04-2004 of February 26, 2004) 
B.  OFFENSES 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of seventeen (17) to knowingly remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public place in the City between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 5:00 a.m. on any day of the week or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed by this Code. 
(Ordinance No. 08-96 of June 13, 1996) 
C.  DEFENSES 
It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection B of this section that: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; 
(2)  The minor was accompanied by an adult designated by his or her parent or guardian; 
(3)  The minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency; 
(4)  The minor was attending a school, religious, or government-sponsored activity or was traveling to or from a school, religious, or government-sponsored activity; 
(5)  The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going directly to or coming directly from lawful employment; 
(6)  The minor was on an errand directed by his or her parent or guardian; 
(7)  The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation; 
(8)  The minor was engaged in, participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function or activity for which the application of Subsection B of this section would contravene his or her rights protected by the Texas or United States Constitution; 
(9)  The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities or minority removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code; or 
(10)  With respect to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. only, that the offense occurred during the school summer vacation break period of the school in which the minor is enrolled or on a holiday observed by the closure of classes in the school in which the minor is enrolled or that the minor has graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission to be absent from school or be in a public place from an authorized school official. In the case of a child being educated in a home school, a parent shall be deemed a school official. 
D.  ENFORCEMENT 
Notwithstanding the penal effect of this section the Chief of Police is encouraged to develop alternative enforcement strategies, which may include but not limited to the return of minors to their residence or schools, counseling with minors and their parents or guardians, the issuance of citations (formal and/or warnings) to minors or their parents or guardians, or the referral of instances that appear to also involve the violation of school attendance laws to those officers who are responsible for the enforcement of those laws. 
E.  PENALTY 
Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
F.  SEVERABILITY 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that if any of the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this section shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise illegal by the valid judgement or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such event shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and subsections of this section, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this section of any such unconstitutional or illegal phase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ordinance No. 13-94 of November 10, 1994)  
SECTION 16: - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 
A.  FINDING AND INTENT 
The foregoing recitals are hereby found to be true and correct and are hereby adopted by the City Council and made a part hereof for all purposes as findings of fact. Further, the City Council finds that sex offenders that use physical violence and who are convicted of preying on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of children. Sex offenders are likely to use physical violence, to repeat an offense, have many more victims than are ever reported, are prosecuted for only a fraction of their actual sexual offenses, and children not only lack the ability to protect themselves but additional measures should be taken to keep known sex offenders from having access to children in areas where children generally feel safe. 
It is the intent of this ordinance to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
B.  DEFINITIONS 
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning. 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
C.  SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY PROHIBITION; PENALTY; AND EXCEPTIONS 
(1)  If a person is required to register on the Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database because of a violation involving a victim who was less than sixteen (16) years of age, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any premise where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in Article 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas. It shall be prima facie evidence that this chapter applies to such a person if the person's record appears on the Database and the Database indicates that the victim was less than sixteen (16) years of age. 
(2)  For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in the case of multiple residences on one (1) property, measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking/driveway, which ever is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. A map generally depicting the prohibited areas is attached to this ordinance for representation purposes. The city shall review the map at least annually for changes, and it will be available at the Santa Fe Police Department. 
(3)  Penalty. Any person violating a provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Section 5 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Exceptions. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to modify or reduce the State's child safety ban. A person, as described in subsection (1), residing within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of those places where children commonly gather does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following apply: 
(a)  The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
(b)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(c)  The person is a minor. 
(d)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of the person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
(e)  The person proves that the information on the Database is incorrect and that, if corrected, this chapter would not apply to the person. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2015 of May 14, 2015) 
D.  PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO SEX OFFENDERS; PENALTY 
(1)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this chapter, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet, as defined in Subsection C(2), of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in Article 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas. 
(2)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Section 5 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2006 of May 11, 2006, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 06-2015 of May 14, 2015)  
SECTION 17: - EMERGENCY ACTION OF EMPLOYEES, OFFICERS AND AGENTS 
Every officer, agent or employee of the City, while responding to emergency situations is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provisions shall prevail over every other ordinance of the City, and to the extent to which the City has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the City nor the employee shall be liable for nay failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(Ordinance No. 07-86 of June 12, 1986)  
SECTION 18: - CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES AGAINST CITY 
A.  NOTICE REQUIRED FOR CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES AGAINST CITY 
The City of Santa Fe, Texas, shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall within sixty (60) days or within six (6) months for good cause shown from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city, and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
B.  PLAINTIFF TO APPLY FOR RELIEF FROM CITY PRIOR TO INSTITUTING SUIT 
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the City of Santa Fe, Texas, unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council, refused. 
C.  SERVING NOTICES FOR CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES AGAINST CITY 
All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the City Secretary at the following location: City of Santa Fe, City Hall, 12002 Hwy. 6, Santa Fe, Texas, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2019 of September 26, 2019) 
D.  NO PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION CAN BE WAIVED 
Neither the mayor, a city councilmember nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this section. 
E.  NOTICE TO BE SWORN TO 
The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Ordinance No. 06-86 of June 12, 1986)  
SECTION 19: - STREET ABANDONMENT 
A.  All persons desiring to have the City exercise its powers regarding an abandoning, altering, closing and vacating streets, alleys and other public ways and portions thereof, shall file their request with the City Secretary, in writing, directed to the City Council. Such request shall contain a legal description of the street, alley or portion thereof, and attached to said request shall be the names of all owners abutting said street, alley or portion thereof, together with the last known mailing address of all such owners. In the event that all abutting property owners do not join in said request, a statement shall be attached to said request showing the reason for nonparticipation. The tax rolls shall be conclusive as to the names of the abutting property owners for the purpose of this section. 
B.  Upon filing of such request and payment of a non-refundable filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), the City Secretary shall mail notices of said request and release forms to all abutting property owners. In addition, the City Secretary shall mail notices of said request to all utility companies (phone, electric, gas, cable, drainage, water and sewer). In the event the request is for only a portion of a through street, alley or public way which is open to public access from either direction, then the City Secretary shall also notify the abutting and adjoining property owners for that portion which is to remain open in either direction up to the next intersection with another street, alley or public way. The City Tax Assessor Collector shall certify whether or not the requestor and all abutting property owners are current in the payment of City ad valorem taxes. 
C.  Streets or alleys whether owned by the City of Santa Fe or whether such streets or alleys are designed by easements, only when abandoned, shall then belong properly to the owner or owners of the abutting property. In order to abandon any street or alley or portion thereof, all property owners abutting said street or alley or portion thereof to be closed shall have consented to the abandonment or such abandonment shall not be approved by the City Council. Consent by the abutting and adjoining property owners for that portion which is to remain open is not required. No street or alley or portion thereof shall be abandoned until a survey of the property that is the subject of the abandonment request has been provided to the City by the requestor, and an additional payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or the appraised market value of the street or alley or portion thereof based upon at least one bona fide appraisal by an appraiser selected by the City at petitioner's expense, whichever is greater. After abandonment of such street or alley or portion thereof, the City will deliver a deed without warranty to the owners as to their proportionate ownership interest, upon payment of their proportionate share of the market value of the street, alley, public way, or portion thereof. The market value or proportionate ownership going to the abutting property owner of any street or alley or portion thereof shall ultimately be approved by the City Council. The preparation of all transfer documents shall be at the expense of petitioner. Recipients of such deeds shall be required to record their deeds with the County Clerk and to render the acquired property to the Central Appraisal District. 
D.  Upon fulfillment of the requirements of Subsections A and B, the City Secretary shall submit said request to the Planning Commission for its recommendation to the City Council. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and formulate its recommendation to the City Council within sixty (60) days from receipt of said petition. 
E.  This section shall not be construed to give any person the vested right to compel the City to abandon or vacate a street or alley or portion thereof. 
(Ordinance No. 05-91 of April 11, 1991; Ordinance No. 13-2003 of April 24, 2003; Ordinance No. 09-2008 of May 22, 2008)  
SECTION 20: - RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
A.  DEFINITION OF CITY OF SANTA FE, TEXAS, RECORDS 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by City of Santa Fe, Texas, or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
B.  ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Department Head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, that creates or receives records. 
(2)  Essential record means any record of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, necessary to the resumption of continuation of operations of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
(3)  Permanent record means any record of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
(4)  Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the City of Santa Fe, Texas, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
(5)  Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purpose of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
(6)  Records liaison officers means the persons designated under Subsection J of this section. 
(7)  Records management committee means the committee established in Subsection F of this section. 
(8)  Records management officer means the person designated in Subsection E of this section. 
(9)  Records management plan means the plan developed under Subsection G of this section. 
(10)  Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
C.  CITY OF SANTA FE, TEXAS, RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY 
All City of Santa Fe, Texas, records as defined by subsection A of this section are hereby declared to be the property of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. No City official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
D.  POLICY 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all City records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
E.  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER 
The City Clerk, and successive holders of said office, shall serve as Records Management Officer for the City of Santa Fe, Texas. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office as applicable. 
F.  ESTABLISHMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE; DUTIES 
A Records Management Committee consisting of the City Manager, Police Chief, Finance Director, and Librarian is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  assist the Records Management Officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  review and approve records control schedules submitted by the Records Management Officer; 
(4)  give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  actively support and promote the records management program throughout the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
G.  RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL OF PLAN; AUTHORITY OF PLAN 
(1)  The Records Management Officer and the Records Management Committee shall develop a records management plan for the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for submission to the City Council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the City, and to properly preserve those records of the City that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this section effectively. 
(2)  Once approved by the City Council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed. 
(3)  State laws relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this section and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
H.  DUTIES OF THE RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER 
In addition to other duties assigned in this section, the Records Management Officer shall: 
(1)  administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  in cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each City office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the City; 
(5)  establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the City of Santa Fe, Texas; 
(7)  provide records management advice and assistance to all City departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the record management program and the City's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  disseminate to the City Council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  instruct Records Liaison Officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  direct Records Liaison Officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this section; 
(12)  ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of City records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of the state law; 
(13)  maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  report annually to the City Council on the implementation of records management plan in each department of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under paragraph 13; and 
(15)  bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by department heads or other City personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
I.  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS 
In addition to other duties assigned in this section, department heads shall: 
(1)  cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this section; 
(2)  adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, and the requirements of this section. 
J.  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS 
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as Records Liaison Officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the Records Management Officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one Records Liaison Officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of Records Liaison Officers specified by the Records Management Officer. Persons designated as Records Liaison Officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a Records Liaison Officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as Records Liaison Officer for his or her department. 
K.  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITY OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS 
In addition to other duties assigned in this section, Records Liaison Officers shall: 
(1)  conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  in cooperation with the Records Management Officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
L.  RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL; FILING WITH STATE 
(1)  The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department heads and Records Liaison Officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of City records as the records management plan may require. 
(2)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(3)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and members of the Records Management Committee. 
(4)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
M.  IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES: DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS UNDER SCHEDULE 
(1)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under Subsection G shall be implemented by department heads and Records Liaison Officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(2)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(3)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records Management Officer from the Records Management Committee. 
N.  DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
O.  RECORDS CENTER 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by Subsection G, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Records Management Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operation and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under Subsection G. 
P.  MICROGRAPHICS 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the City Council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the Records Management Officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of City records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the Records Management Officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ordinance No. 01-91 of January 10, 1991)  
SECTION 21: - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 
All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each calendar month at 7:00 o'clock p.m. at such place designated by the City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 3-96 of April 25, 1996) 
Editor's note— See also Section 3.12 of the Home Rule Charter.  
SECTION 22: - ZONING ORDINANCE 
Editor's note— The City of Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance, as adopted by Ordinance No. 04-96 has not been reprinted in this Code of Ordinances, but is saved from repeal and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.  
SECTION 23: - POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning. 
Minor means a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco. 
B.  OFFENSE 
(1)  It is unlawful for a minor to possess a tobacco product. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section, that the minor possessed a tobacco product: 
(i)  as an employee on the premises of a person holding a state permit to engage in the business as a distributor, wholesaler, bonded agent, or retailer of tobacco products, for the purpose of carrying out the business of the permittee; or 
(ii)  while in the presence of an adult parent, guardian, or spouse, or other adult to who he has been committed by a court. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a minor to purchase a tobacco product. 
(3)  It is unlawful for a minor to falsely state that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or older or to present any document that indicates that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or older to a person engaged in the selling of tobacco products. 
C.  ENFORCEMENT 
The chief of police is encouraged to develop alternate enforcement strategies, which may include but not limited to counseling with minors and their parents or guardians, the issuance of citations (formal and/or warnings) to minors. 
D.  PENALTY 
Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ordinance No. 12-94 of October 13, 1994)  
SECTION 24: - CERTAIN SUBSTANCES BANNED 
A.  OFFENSE 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give, or barter any one or more of the following substances within the city limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas: 
a.  Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
b.  (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol commonly known as HU-210; 
c.  1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole commonly known as JWH-018 Spice or K2; 
d.  1-Butyl-3-(1naphthoyl)indole commonly known as JWH-073; 
e.  N-benzylpiperazine commonly known as BZP; 
f.  1-(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine commonly known as TFMPP; 
g.  Any other synthetic cannabinoid; or 
h.  Any similar substance which when inhaled or otherwise ingested produces intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner, changes, distorts, or disturbs the auditory, visual, or mental process and the product or substance has no other apparent legitimate purpose for consumers. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person, knowingly, to breathe, inhale, drink, or otherwise ingest any compound, liquid, or chemical listed within this section, or a similar substance for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner, changing, distorting, or disturbing the auditory, visual, or mental process. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2010 of October 14, 2010, Sec. 1) 
B.  DEFENSE 
It is not a violation of this section if a person was acting under the supervision of an authorized law enforcement officer to enforce or ensure compliance with this section. This section does not apply to any person who commits any act described in this section pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist licensed by the State of Texas to direct or prescribe such act. This section likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical or dental purpose. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2010 of October 14, 2010, Sec. 1) 
C.  PENALTY 
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00). Each day in which any violation shall occur, or each occurrence of any violation, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2010 of October 14, 2010, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 25: - PAYMENT OF FEES AND OTHER CHARGES 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
As used in this section, the following words shall have the definitions ascribed to them by this section: 
1.  Cash shall mean legal tender issued by the United States of America. 
2.  Personal Check shall mean a check provided by the issuer and drawn on a bank in a form acceptable to the City Manager of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, provided said check is not otherwise defective on its face and provided the issuer of said check has not tendered checks for payment to the City of Santa Fe in the past which were returned for insufficient funds. 
3.  Money Order shall mean a payment order for a pre-specified amount of money made payable to the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
4.  Cashier's Check shall mean a check guaranteed by a bank made payable to the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
5.  Credit Card shall mean a card, plate, or similar device issued by a banking institution and used to make purchases on credit or to borrow money, or a similar card used to directly debit a bank account, provided said card is issued by an issuer acceptable to the City Manager of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
B.  METHOD OF PAYMENT 
The City Manager shall be and is hereby authorized to accept cash, personal checks, money orders, cashier's checks, or where the City has appropriate equipment for the receipt of same, credit cards as a means of payment of fees, fines, court costs, or other charges due and payable to the City. The City Manager is authorized to determine which methods of payment are appropriate for each department of the City. The City shall not be obligated to accept payment by credit card where the amount due and payable to the City is less than ten dollars ($10.00) and acceptance of payment by credit card is hereby authorized by personal presentment of the credit card, telephonic, or other electronic means. 
(Ordinance No. 16-2019 of December 12, 2019, Sec. 1) 
C.  PROCESSING FEE 
The City Manager shall be and is hereby authorized and directed to assess a processing fee of one dollar ($1.00) or five percent (5%), whichever is greater, of the amount of a fee, fine, court cost, or other charge being paid by the use of a credit card, as an amount reasonably necessary and related to the expense incurred by the City to accept said payment by credit card. 
(Ordinance No. 16-2019 of December 12, 2019, Sec. 2) 
D.  SERVICE CHARGE 
If for any reason a payment by credit card to the City is not honored by the credit card company on which the funds are drawn, the City Manager shall be and is hereby authorized to collect a service charge from the person who owes the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge to the City. The service charge is in addition to the original fee, fine, court cost, or other charge and is for the collection of that original amount. The amount of the service charge shall be the same amount as the fee charged by the depository bank for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds. 
E.  ENCUMBRANCE OF CREDIT CARD; FEE 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with companies which issue credit cards to collect and seize credit cards issued by the company that are outdated or otherwise unauthorized, and the City Manager is further authorized to charge the company a fee for the return of said credit cards. 
F.  DISPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL FEES AND CHARGES 
The City Manager shall ensure that amounts collected by the City pursuant to this section for convenience fees, service charges, or other fees incidental to the use of credit cards are deposited into the general fund of the official depository of the City. 
G.  AUTHORIZATION TO ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS 
The City Manager of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, shall be and is hereby authorized to enter into all necessary agreements with credit card issuers, equipment vendors, or other entities necessary and incident to implementation of this ordinance, including but not limited to form of payment agreements, customer processing agreements, equipment agreements (purchasing or rental agreements), or other similar agreements. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2011 of February 24, 2011, Sec. 2)  
CHAPTER 2 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-2016, §§ 1, 2(Exh.A), adopted Sept. 22, 2016, amended Ch. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2, §§ 1—9, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 06-81, adopted April 9, 1981; Ord. No. 03-93, adopted Feb. 11, 1993; Ord. No. 14-99, adopted June 10, 1999; Ord. No. 13-2004, adopted May 27, 2004; Ord. No. 12-2015, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 10, 2025; and Ord. No. 06-2016, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 2016. Section 2(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 08-2016 states: "For purposes of this Ordinance, animal maintenance is further restricted by intensity and relation to human domestic density according to the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance. Conditions and restrictions contained in the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance are incorporated as a part of this Ordinance by this reference thereto." 
State Law reference— Animals, V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 821.001 et seq.; Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 121.001 et seq.; Rabies Control Act of 1981, V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 826.001 et seq.; livestock, V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code, § 141.001 et seq.; permitting a head of cattle or a domestic turkey to run at large in certain counties, V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code, § 143.082; cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 42.11; dog fighting, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 42.111; keeping vicious dog, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 42.12; certain tax exemptions for charitable organizations, V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 11.18. 
 
SECTION 1. - GENERAL 
A.  PURPOSE 
The primary function and intent of this chapter is protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people within the city by controlling the animal population and species and establishing uniform rules for the control and eradication of rabies. 
B.  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE 
Animal population, animal control, prohibition and exceptions for keeping wild or exotic animals, rabies vaccination, rabies eradication, licenses, permits, fees, revocation of permits or licenses, quarantining, impoundment, nuisances, animal establishments, etc., shall be accomplished and regulated in accordance and conformance with this chapter and V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 826.001 et seq., as amended, the "Rabies Control Act of 1981," the "Rabies Control and Eradication" rules of the Texas Department of Health 169.21 through 169.33, and V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 822.041 et seq., as amended, the Vicious Dog Act, or the current or latest addition and/or revision of said rule or law which are made part of this chapter by reference provided that the exceptions and/or additions contained herein shall also apply. 
C.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this chapter the definitions as stated in the current or latest "Rabies Control and Eradication" rules of the Texas Department of Health shall also apply with the following exceptions and/or additions: 
1.  Animal shall mean a warm or cold blooded animal. 
2.  Animal control officer shall mean the city's animal control officer or his duly authorized agent or representative. 
3.  Animal establishment shall mean any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, or kennel. 
4.  Animal shelter shall mean any facility operated by the city, a humane society, municipal agency or any other governmental entity or their authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
5.  At large shall mean that a dog is not under the control of the owner or that of a person or persons authorized by the owner to care for said dog, either by cord, leash, chain or confinement. 
6.  Auctioneer shall mean any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, or where animals are sold to the highest bidder, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners. 
7.  Circus shall mean a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
8.  Confined or confinement shall mean confined within a building, house or structure or within a fenced yard or premises, so that the animal cannot escape from said building, house, structure or fenced yard or premises without human assistance. 
9.  Enclosure means a house or a building or a fence or a structure/pen. The fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. The structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements for the animal. The regulatory authority shall have the right to require that the fence be higher than six (6) feet or require a secure top and/or a secure bottom be added to the structure/pen if the need is demonstrated. This additional requirement shall be based upon the type of animal to be kept in the enclosure and its anticipated ability to escape. 
10.  Exotic animal shall mean the same as "wild animal." 
11.  Grooming shop shall mean a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed. 
12.  High risk animals include skunks, bats, foxes and raccoons. 
13.  Hobby breeder shall mean any person engaged in the part-time recreational activity of raising or breeding animals to strengthen or further develop the species. This can include the occasional sale or trade of the offspring as a means to recover expenses and reduce the population of the animals housed. A person engaged in the hobby breeding of birds shall have no more than twenty (20) birds. Qualification as a hobby breeder shall be determined by the animal control officer. 
14.  Kennel shall mean any lot, enclosure, premises, structure or building whereon four (4) or more dogs or cats or combination thereof over the age of three (3) months are held, kept, or maintained for any purpose whatsoever including commercial pet services such as doggie daycares, obedience training or grooming facilities, except a licensed veterinary clinic. 
15.  Licensing authority shall have the same meaning as regulatory authority. 
16.  Livestock shall mean hooved animals such as llamas, sheep, goats, bovine and equine animals, swine, poultry (including egg-producing poultry), and other animals with agricultural animal husbandry uses with the exclusion of dogs and cats. 
17.  Low risk animals are all animals of the orders marsupialia, insectivora, rodentia, lagomorpha and xenartha. 
18.  Multiple dwelling shall mean any structure designed and intended to accommodate more than one (1) family and includes, but is not limited to, duplex buildings and apartment buildings. 
19.  Owner shall mean any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping or harboring one (1) or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed, sheltered or allowed or permitted to remain on a person's property or property under control of said person for three (3) or more days without said person notifying the office of the regulatory authority. If the owner/keeper of an animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of that minor shall be responsible for compliance with the specifications of this chapter. 
20.  Pen shall mean a fenced or enclosed area used to hold animals whether it be a yard or pasture used for grazing, coop or hutch. 
21.  Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, public or private corporation, association, trust or estate. 
22.  Pet shop shall mean any building, establishment, premises or places used for or in the business of buying, selling, trading or boarding any species of animal which shall include, but not be limited to, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice, rabbits, birds, dogs, cats and reptiles. This definition shall not include a licensed kennel or individual sales of animals by owners. This definition does not include hobby breeders or persons engaging in the raising or breeding of large domesticated animals such as cattle, horses or sheep. 
23.  Quarantine shall mean complete and total isolation in such a place and in such a manner and for a period of time as may be prescribed by the animal control officer. 
24.  Regulatory authority shall mean the animal control officer or his duly authorized agent or representative. 
25.  Restraint shall mean a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device that attaches a dog to a stationary object. 
26.  Riding school or stable shall mean any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro. 
27.  Stable shall mean a building in which livestock, especially horses, are kept. A building that is divided into separate stalls for individual animals but may also include an open sided shed used to shelter from the elements. 
28.  T.D.H. shall mean the Texas Department of Health. 
29.  Veterinary hospital shall mean any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
30.  Vicious dog shall mean a dog which is unruly, refractory or has displayed an inclination to approach or growl at a person or persons in an angry, threatening or ill-tempered manner when such person or persons was or were not doing acts ordinarily calculated to cause well-tamed dogs to respond in such manner or to bite, to bite at, to snap, or to attack a person or persons, or has displayed habits indicating a lack of docility or lack or complete taming. 
31.  Wild animal shall mean and include any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which is of a species which is wild by nature, and of a species which, due to size, vicious nature or other characteristic, is or may be dangerous to human beings. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, lynx, wolves, raccoons, ferrets, skunks, (whether deodorized or not), monkeys, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, any wild animal whose normal weight exceeds forty (40) pounds, alligators, crocodiles, bats, and all forms of poisonous reptiles. The term "wild animal" as used in this chapter shall not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice or rabbits. 
32.  Zoological park shall mean a tract of land set aside in a natural or manmade state which displays or exhibits more than one (1) non-domesticated animal, which animals are under the control and supervision of a trained, experienced professional animal handler and cared for by a licensed veterinarian. The animal control officer may require proof of training and experience. The park shall be constructed in such a manner as to preclude the possibility of an animal escaping from such park and/or cages or pens. Park construction, pens, cages and equipment shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to protect the animals and the public. Proof of acceptable design and construction may be required by the regulatory authority. All animals therein and their enclosures shall be approved by the animal control officer. Where required, all zoological parks shall be federally inspected and licensed. A park attendant shall be on duty at all times the park is open or accessible to the public. 
D.  PENALTY 
1.  Whenever in this chapter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or whenever in such chapter the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each violation and each day the violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  The owner of an animal which inflicts severe injury or death to a person or bites a person on public or private property or which kills a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) but not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
3.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a vicious animal to kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding, any domestic animal belonging to or in the possession of any person, or for a vicious animal to attack, assault, bite or otherwise injure any person or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any person while out of or within the enclosure of the owner whether or not such vicious animal was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether the vicious animal escaped without fault of the owner. The regulatory authority is empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious animal in an expeditious and humane manner. In addition the owner shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
E.  ENFORCEMENT 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control officer or his delegated representative. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with the animal control officer or his delegated humane officer or any other delegated representative of the animal control officer in the performance of their duties. 
F.  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER MAY PROMULGATE RULES 
The animal control officer shall have the power, with the approval of the city council, to prescribe and promulgate such rules and regulations, which are consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state, as may be deemed necessary to effectively perform the duties imposed herein. 
G.  DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 
Under authority of the city council, the animal control officer shall have the following duties and powers: 
1.  Enforce rules. 
To enforce any or all regulations contained in this chapter: 
a.  The animal control officer may temporarily suspend, postpone or defer enforcement of any part, section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter in any part, section or area of the city or in the city as a whole when in his opinion said part, section, subsection or paragraph is unnecessary at a particular time to control the animal population and protect the health and safety of the people; or 
b.  The animal control officer may enforce any and all requirements of this chapter in any and all parts of the city as he may deem necessary to control the animal population and protect the health and safety of the people. 
2.  Collect fees. 
To collect all fees set by the city council necessary to recover the costs incurred in meeting the requirements of this chapter. The animal control officer may further collect for the creditor all unpaid cost, fees or charges incurred by the animal while in violation of this chapter. 
3.  Make inspections. 
To make all inspections required in this chapter. 
4.  To take up and impound. 
To take up and impound or cause to be taken up or impounded all animals in the city, on public or private property, which are in violation of this chapter. The regulatory authority may trap, capture, shoot, tranquilize or use any other means or methods that may be deemed necessary and prudent to perform the duties imposed herein. Any person who has control or possession of an animal which is in violation of this chapter shall upon demand, turn over such animal to the regulatory authority. 
H.  APPEALS FROM DECISION OF THE ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 
Whenever in this chapter provision is made for a hearing before the animal control officer, any person aggrieved by the decision of the animal control officer following such hearing, may appeal such decision to the city manager by giving notice thereof, served upon the city secretary, within seventy-two (72) hours following the date the decision was so rendered. The city manager shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days following notice of appeal. Any notice of appeal shall be served in writing, stating the interest of the person appealing, the reason for the appeal, and a general description of the factual grounds upon which the appellant contends the decision of the animal control officer was incorrect. 
I.  TAKING ANIMAL INTO CUSTODY; NOTICE 
Every person other than the animal control officer that takes up any animal under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise shall immediately thereafter give notice thereof to the regulatory authority. Every such person, or any person in whose custody such animal may in the meantime be placed, shall upon demand deliver such animal to the regulatory authority. The animal shall be delivered to a place designated by the regulatory authority, without fee or charge, and the regulatory authority shall thereupon hold and dispose of such animal as though such animal had been found running at large and impounded by the regulatory authority. 
J.  ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS 
In addition to or in lieu of impounding an animal which is in violation or has violated any section or subsection of this chapter or in addition to or in lieu of suspension or revocation of a license or permit, the animal control officer or any full-time salaried police or law enforcement officer may issue to the owner of such animal or holder of such license or permit a notice of violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner or holder of such license or permit a penalty which shall be stated on the notice, which may, at the discretion of the animal owner or holder of the permit or license, be paid to the agency designated by the regulatory authority within the time specified on the notice in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event that such penalty is not paid within the time period prescribed, a complaint will be filed in a court of law and upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the owner shall be punished as provided in Section 1, Subsection D, of this chapter. 
K.  KEEPING OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED WITH EXCEPTIONS 
The primary purpose and intent of this section is to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. In this endeavor the animal control officer may limit wild and/or exotic animals within the city to persons who have the knowledge, expertise and ability of animal care and the grounds, facilities and equipment to care for such animals. It is also the purpose and intent of this section to prevent the owning, keeping or harboring of wild and/or exotic animals as pets within the city. 
1.  Possession prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell, possess, keep, permit, suffer, cause or allow any wild or exotic animal upon or within any premises within the city except as permitted herein. 
2.  Temporary permit. 
The regulatory authority may issue a temporary permit for the keeping, care, and protection of an infant animal native to this area which has been deemed to be homeless or injured. The application for a temporary permit shall be accompanied with a letter or statement of approval from the Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife. 
3.  Exceptions. 
This section shall not be construed to apply to veterinary hospitals or zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses which have applied for and received a permit from the regulatory authority as provided for and required in this chapter. 
L.  RELEASING OR DUMPING OF ANIMALS 
1.  Violation to dump. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to dump, release or abandon any dog, cat or other animal whatsoever on any property, whether public or private, within the city. An animal shall be considered abandoned if the owner has not provided care, including food, water or shelter, for three (3) or more consecutive days. 
2.  Person having knowledge of dumping. 
Any person having knowledge of an animal which has been or is believed to have been dumped, released or abandoned shall so notify the animal control officer and shall give all pertinent information including description and location of the animal and the name, address, car license number, or any other information or description of the person who dumped, released or abandoned the animal, if known. 
3.  Keeping, harboring or feeding strays. 
Any person who keeps, harbors, feeds, shelters or otherwise allows any stray animal or any animal which has been dumped, released or abandoned, to remain on the person's property for three (3) or more days without notifying the regulatory authority, shall hereby be deemed the owner of said animal. 
M.  PUBLIC NUISANCE 
1.  Definitions. 
The following definitions are in addition to those set out in Section 1, Subsection C, of this chapter. 
a.  Public nuisance, as used in this section, shall mean a condition which injures or endangers the public health, safety, and welfare, gives offense to the senses, gives material annoyance, inconvenience, or discomfort to a person of ordinary sensibilities, or interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of public or private property. 
b.  Fowl shall mean and shall include chickens, turkeys, guineas, ducks, pigeons, peacocks, emus, and other similar birds. 
c.  Owner of fowl shall mean a person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping or harboring fowl. Fowl shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed, sheltered or allowed or permitted to remain on a person's property or property under the control of said person for three (3) or more days. 
2.  Failure to exercise proper care prohibited. 
Failure of an owner to exercise proper care and control of his animal(s) or fowl and the premises where said animal(s) or fowl are kept to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance is prohibited. 
3.  Condition constitutes nuisance. 
a.  Animals. 
All of the following conditions, situations or occurrences are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and constitute a failure of the owner to exercise proper care and control of his animal and/or the premises where said animals are or have been kept: 
1.  Any animal which turns over garbage containers or scatters garbage or which otherwise damages private or public property; 
2.  Any dog or livestock at large or free-roaming off of private property owned or controlled by the owner, keeper, or person in charge of said dog or livestock; 
3.  Any animal that barks, whines, howls, or makes other sounds or noises in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; or 
4.  Any building, room, cage, kennel, yard, run, stable, shed, pen, fenced pasture, or any other place or facility where animals are kept or harbored which is not maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as to prevent obnoxious odors, the attraction, breeding or potential breeding of flies, the attraction, harboring or breeding of rodents or potential breeding of rodents, or the creation of any other public health nuisances. 
b.  Fowl. 
All of the following conditions, situations or occurrences are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and constitute a failure of the owner to exercise proper care and control of his fowl and/or the premises where said fowl are or have been kept: 
1.  Any fowl at large or free-roaming off of private property owned or controlled by the owner, keeper, or person in charge of said fowl; 
2.  Any fowl that makes sounds or noises in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; or 
3.  Any building, room, cage, yard, shed, pen, or any other place or facility where fowl are kept or harbored which is not maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as to prevent obnoxious odors, the attraction, breeding or potential breeding of flies, the attraction, harboring or breeding of rodents or potential breeding of rodents, or the creation of any other public health nuisances. 
4.  Abatement. 
a.  Notice. 
Should the city manager, or any person designated by him, determine that a public nuisance, as defined by this section, exists within the city, he shall cause notice to be given, as appropriate, to either the owner of the animal(s) or fowl causing the condition which constitutes the nuisance or to the owner of the premises where such animal(s) or fowl are kept. Such notice shall identify the condition that constitutes the nuisance, and direct the owner to take such action as is reasonable, appropriate, and necessary to remove the nuisance. Such notice shall be delivered personally to the owner in writing, or by letter addressed to such owner at his post office address. 
b.  Action. 
If the owner fails or refuses to remove said nuisance within two (2) days following notice as provided in paragraph 4.a above, the city manager, or any person designated by him, may institute proceedings in municipal court against such owner for violation of the provisions of this section. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
N.  LIVESTOCK AND FOWL 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any cows, horses, mules, jacks, jennys, goats, sheep, swine, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens, or any other livestock or fowl to run at large upon the streets, alleys, public highways, public parks, public lands, or upon any vacant lot or lots within the City of Santa Fe. 
O.  MAINTENANCE OF STABLES, PENS, HOUSES, AND YARDS 
All stables, pen, houses, and yards used for the keeping of animals or fowl within the City shall be kept in a clean sanitary condition. All such stables, pens, houses and yards shall be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any residence not occupied by the owner of such animals or fowl, except that it shall be unlawful to keep swine within five hundred feet (500') of any residence not occupied by the owners of such swine; provided, however, it shall not be considered a violation of this section if the owner of such animals or fowl obtain written permission of the owners(s) of the residence(s) located within the distance requirement. 
P.  KEEPING OF BEES 
It shall be unlawful to keep bees in any area of the city except in those areas where the bee hives will be located at least three hundred feet (300') or more from the nearest dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner of the bees. It shall further be unlawful to keep bees, regardless of the above limitation, in such numbers that they congregate in excessive numbers on property, other than that of the owner of the bees, in such a way as to interfere with the peaceful occupancy of such other property. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2016 of September 22, 2016, Sec. 2(Exh. A))  
SECTION 2. - DOGS AND CATS 
A.  GENERALLY 
1.  Running at large prohibited. 
a.  At large - Riding in vehicle. 
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit or allow such dog to run at large within the limits of the city. The owner or keeper of any animal running at large or not confined shall be in violation of this section. Unrestrained animals in the back of pickup trucks which are not covered with a camper cover or other such device shall be considered at large. Animals in vehicles shall be restrained in a manner which will not cause injury and will prevent the animal from reaching the outside of the vehicle. 
b.  Same - Animal establishment. 
Any animal off the premises of an animal establishment or outside the approved confinement area within said animal establishment without written approval from the animal control officer shall be considered at large and a violation of this section. 
c.  At large on private property. 
Any dog found trespassing or running at large upon any private property may be taken up by any person and delivered to the regulatory authority. 
2.  Number of dogs and cats limited. 
a.  Private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or allow to be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats or a combination of said animals with the total number exceeding four (4), over three (3) months old, upon or within any premises owned, occupied or under the control of such person within the city except where specifically exempt. 
b.  Multiple dwellings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or allow to be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained more than two (2) dogs or two (2) cats or a combination of said animals with the total number exceeding two (2), over three (3) months old, upon any premises or within any apartment of a multiple dwelling structure within the city. The animal control officer shall have full authority to limit the number of dogs, cats and any and all other animals per apartment in any specific area of the complex, or in the multiple dwelling complex as a whole and he shall have the authority to enforce any such regulation as he may deem necessary for the control of rabies and for the health and safety of the people within such multiple dwelling complexes. 
c.  Litters. 
Only one (1) litter from animals permitted under Section 2, Subsection A(2) of this chapter shall be allowed at any given time. 
d.  Exemptions. 
The provision of this section limiting the number of animals shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Veterinary hospitals; 
2.  Pet shops; 
3.  Kennels; 
4.  Circuses; and 
5.  Animal shelters. 
3.  Defecation by dogs or cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, feces left by a dog or cat being handled by that person on property, public or private, other than the premises of the owner or handler of such dog or cat. For the purposes of this section, "handler" means the person having custody and control of such dog or cat, whether by leash or voice and sight. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to walk a dog or cat on public property or the private property of someone other than the owner or handler of such dog or cat without having in their possession a container or other instrument suitable for the removal and disposal of such animal's feces in a sanitary manner. This section shall not, however, apply to handicapped persons using guide dogs or to peace officers while using animals in the discharge of law enforcement activities. 
4.  Female dogs in heat. 
The owner of a female dog is in violation of this section if the dog while in heat is at large. Such female dogs in heat shall be securely confined by the owner to the premises of the owner in such a manner as shall not create or cause to be created a nuisance of any kind to any person or persons. 
5.  Prohibition against the restraint of dogs and mandating that dog enclosures must provide adequate space. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning and/or controlling a dog or dogs, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, licensed or unlicensed, to leave a dog or dogs or to allow said dog or dogs to be left outside and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the animal's or animals' movement. The prohibitions of this subsection shall apply to the owner of any such dog or dogs as well as to all persons with an ownership interest or a possessory interest in the property on which said animal is restrained. 
b.  Any dog confined within an enclosure as defined in Section 1, Subsection C, shall be provided with access to adequate food and water. 
c.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners or others walking dogs with a handheld leash. 
d.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners from allowing dogs to be attached to stationary objects so long as the restraint used to attach the dog is at least ten (10) feet in length, is such that the dog cannot become entangled, and allows the dog to move unheeded. Any dog attached to a stationary object as allowed pursuant to this subsection shall be provided with access to adequate shelter, food, and water. 
e.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners from reasonably restraining dogs to protect those dogs from endangering themselves from storms, thunder, lightning, loud noise or other stimuli; provided that any dog so restrained shall be provided with access to adequate shelter, food, and water. 
f.  Any person who intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence violates any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined, except as otherwise provided herein, in a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
B.  LICENSE 
1.  Required. 
Every person owning, harboring or having in his or her possession a dog or cat is hereby required to obtain from the licensing authority for each dog or cat an annual license which must be obtained within seven (7) days following an annual rabies vaccination as required herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or have in his possession within the city on the premises owned, occupied or controlled by the person, or at any other place, a dog or cat for which a current license has not been obtained as provided in this chapter, and said current license shall be valid and unrevoked. 
2.  Exceptions. 
The provision of this section requiring the licensing of dogs and cats shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Dogs and cats under the age of four (4) months, if kept confined. 
b.  Dogs or cats owned by, or in custody or under the control of persons who are nonresidents of the city, traveling through the city or temporarily sojourning therein for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
c.  Dogs or cats brought to the city exclusively for the purpose of entering the same in any show or exhibition and which are actually entered in and kept at such show or exhibition. 
d.  Dogs duly and properly trained to aid or assist blind persons when such dogs are actually used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding or assisting such blind persons in going from place to place. 
e.  Dogs duly and properly trained to aid or assist deaf persons when such dogs are actually used by deaf persons for the purpose of aiding or assisting such deaf persons in going from place to place. 
f.  Dogs or cats kept in qualified institutions, approved by the animal control officer, for teaching or research purposes. 
g.  Dogs or cats kept in veterinary hospitals or animal shelters as defined in Section 1, Subsection C. 
3.  Proof of vaccination. 
A license for a dog or cat shall not be issued unless there is exhibited to the licensing authority a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the animal to be licensed has been inoculated with an approved rabies vaccine in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer. 
4.  Valid period. 
The license and registration shall be valid for a period of up to one (1) year and shall coincide with the beginning and expiration date of the rabies vaccination certificate. 
5.  Animals brought into city. 
Any owner of a dog or cat brought into the city from other areas shall within seven (7) days of arrival obtain a license for each dog or cat as required herein. Said license shall be valid for the time stated but under any condition shall not be valid for longer than one (1) year from the date of the last rabies vaccination. 
6.  Identification tags. 
a.  Required. 
Upon acceptance of the license application or rabies vaccination certificate and payment of a license fee, the licensing authority shall issue a durable tag, stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance; and said tag and/or the receipt for payment of said license tag shall be presented to the licensing authority upon demand. Failure to present the license tag or the receipt for said tag, as required herein, shall constitute a violation of this section. 
b.  Tags attached. 
The owner of every dog or cat shall attach the license identification tag to a collar or harness and said collar or harness with tags shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times when off the premises of the owner. Tags shall not be switched from one animal to another. 
c.  Tags lost. 
The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued and this record shall be available to the public. If the license tag has been lost, a duplicate may be obtained from the licensing authority for three dollars ($3.00). 
C.  RABIES IMMUNIZATION 
1.  Rabies vaccination required. 
Each person owning, harboring or having in his or her possession a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by the time the animal is four (4) months of age by means of an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the animal control officer. The rabies vaccine shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian. The immunization shall be for a period of up to one (1) year. No dog or cat over four (4) months of age shall be brought into the city which has not been vaccinated for rabies. 
2.  Certificate of vaccination. 
Every veterinarian who vaccinates any dog or cat within the city shall issue a certificate of vaccination to the owner, stating the name and address of the owner, description of the dog or cat, the date of vaccination, number of the rabies vaccination tag, and in addition, other information as specified by the veterinary licensing agency which the owner shall present or give to the animal control officer upon request. 
3.  Rabies vaccine administered. 
a.  Vaccination. 
To prevent improper vaccination of animals and the accidental exposure of humans to rabies, rabies vaccine for animals shall be administered only by or under the direct supervision of a veterinarian who is licensed to practice in the State of Texas. 
b.  Sale of vaccine. 
No person shall sell or distribute rabies vaccine for animals to any person except a licensed veterinarian or in a veterinary clinic who accepts the vaccine on behalf of the veterinarian. 
c.  Licensed pharmacy. 
This section does not prohibit a pharmacy licensed by the Texas State Board of Pharmacy from supplying rabies vaccine for animals to licensed veterinarians. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2016 of September 22, 2016, Sec. 2(Exh. A))  
SECTION 3. - DANGEROUS, VICIOUS, MISCHIEVOUS ANIMALS 
A.  DANGEROUS, VICIOUS TENDENCIES DEFINED 
1.  Any animal that inflicts severe injury or death to a person or bites a person on public or private property; or 
2.  Any animal that has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or 
3.  Any animal which chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack such that the person reasonably believes that the animal will cause physical injury to that person; or 
4.  Any individual animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of persons or domestic animals; and 
5.  All animals defined as wild animals under Section 1, Subsection C, of this chapter. 
B.  MISCHIEVOUS TENDENCIES 
If any animal overturns a garbage container or removes any garbage from any such container or otherwise destroys or damages any property, then such animal shall be conclusively presumed to be a mischievous animal and an animal of mischievous propensities and tendencies. 
C.  DECLARATION OF A DANGEROUS, VICIOUS ANIMAL 
1.  An animal shall be automatically declared to be a vicious animal under Section 3, Subsection A, of this chapter if the owner is convicted under Section 1, Subsection D(2) or Subsection D(3), of this chapter. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any vicious dog to keep or permit same in or about any public house, public place, street, or alley in the City of Santa Fe Texas. 
3.  The animal control officer may find and declare an animal to be a vicious animal if the official has cause to believe that an animal is a vicious animal under Section 3, Subsection A(1), of this chapter. 
D.  NOTIFICATION OF DECLARATION OF VICIOUS, MISCHIEVOUS ANIMAL 
The animal control officer will notify the owner of the animal of its designation as a vicious animal and of the requirements for owners of vicious animals as set out in Section 3, Subsection H, of this chapter. The notice required herein shall be served as stated in Section 6, Subsection O(3), of this chapter. 
E.  HEARING REQUEST 
If the animal is declared to be vicious or mischievous under this chapter, the notice shall inform the owner of the animal that a Determination Hearing may be requested to contest the declaration. The request for a hearing must be in writing and must be received by the animal control officer within ten (10) days of the date of the vicious animal declaration. Failure to appeal the declaration of vicious animal within the ten-day period shall result in the animal control officer's declaration as final. 
F.  DEFENSE TO DECLARATION OF VICIOUS ANIMAL 
It is a defense to the determination of an animal as vicious and to the prosecution of the owner of an animal previously declared to be vicious if: 
1.  The person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal; or 
2.  The person was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or 
3.  The domestic animal killed was at the time teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal; or 
4.  The animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault; or 
5.  The animal was injured and responding to pain; or 
6.  The animal was protecting her puppies, itself or its kennel mates. 
G.  VICIOUS ANIMAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
1.  The owner of an animal declared vicious under this chapter shall, within ten (10) days of the date of the vicious animal declaration, register the animal with the regulatory authority. 
2.  The owner shall notify the regulatory authority as soon as possible, but under any circumstance not later than twenty-four (24) hours, if a vicious animal is loose, stolen, unconfined in an approved enclosure, has attacked another animal or has attacked a person, or has died. 
3.  The regulatory authority may at the authority's discretion allow or disallow the relocation, giving away or selling of a vicious animal. Approval to give away, sell or relocate a vicious animal shall be in writing. 
4.  If the owner of a vicious animal obtains approval to relocate, sell or give away a vicious animal, the owner shall provide the regulatory authority with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner or location of the new approved enclosure. The new owner must sign a sworn statement that he will comply with all of the requirements of owners of vicious animals. The new owner must comply with the requirements of owners of vicious animals within thirty (30) days of receipt of the animal. 
H.  REQUIREMENTS OF VICIOUS ANIMAL OWNERS 
An owner of an animal declared to be a vicious animal under this chapter must comply with the following within thirty (30) days of such final determination. Compliance with these requirements will be determined by the animal control officer: 
1.  The animal must be registered in accordance with this chapter; 
2.  The vicious animal must be kept in a proper enclosure; 
3.  The owner must present to the animal control officer a Certificate of Public Liability Insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover any damages caused or which may be caused by the vicious animal. The insurance shall be for a twelve-month period and shall not be canceled unless the animal is no longer kept by the owner; and 
4.  The vicious animal, when taken outside the enclosure, must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the vicious animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal and the vicious animal must be restrained by a substantial chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of one thousand (1,000) pounds and not exceed six (6) feet in length; 
5.  The owner shall post a sign on his premises warning that there is a vicious animal on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway; and 
6.  The vicious animal must be spayed or neutered. 
If the owner of an animal declared to be vicious under this section is unable or unwilling to comply with the ownership requirements listed above, the animal shall be euthanized by an animal shelter, animal control agency, licensed veterinarian or the regulatory authority. An animal declared to be vicious under this chapter shall not be offered for adoption or sale and shall not be moved from the approved enclosure or city jurisdiction without written permission from the animal control officer. 
I.  DANGEROUS OR MISCHIEVOUS ANIMAL AT LARGE 
Any dangerous, vicious or mischievous animal having dangerous, vicious or mischievous propensities and tendencies found at large after the owner thereof has previous knowledge or notice that such animal is dangerous, vicious or mischievous or has dangerous, vicious or mischievous propensities and tendencies, may be killed by any law enforcement officer stated in Section 4, Subsection C, of this chapter without the officer having to catch or impound such animal or notifying the owner of the animal. 
J.  MUZZLES REQUIRED 
Any dog tied or staked on public property shall be securely muzzled by the owner in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal. Further, the owner of any animal which has been conclusively presumed to be dangerous or vicious shall muzzle such animal when: 
1.  The animal is not confined in a secure enclosure or is off the premises of the owner; and/or 
2.  The animal is on the premises of a business when such business is open and/or accessible to the public; and/or 
3.  The animal is on the outside premises of private property and not confined in such a manner as to preclude contact with casual visitors such as a mail person or delivery person, meter reader, children, etc.; and/or 
4.  The animal is on the outside of premises of private property where appropriate and adequate warning signs which are visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway have not been posted; and/or 
5.  On a leash, on or off the owner's property and not confined as required in Section 3, Subsection H(2) of this chapter. 
K.  LICENSE REVOCATION OF DANGEROUS, VICIOUS OR MISCHIEVOUS ANIMAL 
The animal control officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a license for any animal whose owner has been notified that the animal has been conclusively presumed to be dangerous, vicious or mischievous if said animal: 
1.  Is not confined or is found running at large; 
2.  Is a vicious animal and is not muzzled as required herein; 
3.  Bites or attempts to bite any person or chases or otherwise attempts to catch a person; 
4.  Attacks or attempts to attack any other animal when in violation of any section or part of this chapter; 
5.  The owner has been convicted of any violation of federal, state or local law, ordinance or rule pertaining to said animal; 
6.  The owner does not have insurance coverage for the vicious animal in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) against liability of the person for damages resulting from bodily injury to an individual caused by the animal. A person has thirty (30) days from the date on which the person knows his animal has engaged in vicious conduct to obtain the required insurance coverage. The insurance coverage shall not be allowed to expire or lapse; or 
7.  The owner does not register the vicious animal as required in Section 3, Subsection G, of this chapter; or 
8.  The owner does not build, obtain or provide an enclosure for the vicious animal, have the enclosure approved by the regulatory authority, and confine the vicious animal within the enclosure. The owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date on which the owner knows his animal has engaged in vicious conduct to obtain the approved enclosure. 
L.  EXEMPTIONS 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any law enforcement agency where a dog is being used for law enforcement. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2016 of September 22, 2016, Sec. 2(Exh. A))  
SECTION 4. - RABIES CONTROL 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, the definitions as stated in the current or latest "Rabies Control and Eradication Rules" of the Texas Department of Health shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter. 
B.  REPORT OF ANIMAL ATTACKS 
Any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch or other attack on an individual or of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, shall report the incident or animal to the animal control officer. The report shall include the name and address of any victim and of the owner of the animal, if known, and any other information which may aid in the locating of the victim or the animal. The person shall make said report as soon as possible, but not later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the incident. 
C.  KILLING ANIMALS WITH RABIES, ETC 
It is hereby made the duty of the sheriff and his certified deputies, the chief of police and his certified officers or the animal control officer or his duly authorized representative and Galveston County constables and their full time salaried deputies to exterminate any and all animals at large, where said animals are, or appear to be, affected with rabies, or any other infectious, contagious, or dangerous disease or when an animal is attacking, or when such animal is sick, injured, or in such other condition as it may not be expected to live; provided that any animal suspected of rabies shall be killed in such a manner as not to damage the brain. It shall not be necessary to impound or advertise such animals by posting notice, notifying the owner or otherwise, but it shall be the duty of said officers to exterminate any and all such animals instantly; provided, however, that the officer killing such animals and before disposing of same, shall report it to the animal control officer who shall order the disposal of the carcass as he deems necessary and said officer shall further submit a written report to the animal control officer containing the facts thereof. 
D.  QUARANTINING OF RABIES SUSPECTS 
1.  Approved shelter. 
Any animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or that bites, scratches or otherwise attacks any person within the city shall be quarantined by the owner of said animal. The owner shall quarantine the animal as soon as possible, but not later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the incident. The quarantine period shall be ten (10) days or longer in a public or other place of confinement designated or approved by the animal control officer and under such conditions and in such a manner as may be prescribed by the animal control officer. It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner or any other person to remove any animal that is required to be quarantined or euthanized or which is otherwise in violation of these rules from the jurisdiction of the city without written permission from the animal control officer. 
2.  Release animal to animal control officer. 
The owner, keeper or person in charge of any animal that has rabies, or that has been exposed to rabies, or that has symptoms thereof, or that has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person or other animal or that is in quarantine as a rabies suspect, shall on demand, turnover said animal to the animal control officer. 
3.  Unowned dogs and cats. 
At the discretion of the animal control officer, an unowned dog or cat which has bitten a human may be humanely killed in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a T.D.H. certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. 
4.  High risk animals. 
If the biting animal is a high risk animal it shall be humanely killed and the brain submitted for rabies testing. 
5.  Low risk animals. 
If the biting animal is a low risk animal, a quarantine or rabies test will not be required unless the animal control officer has cause to believe the biting animal is rabid. 
6.  Wild animals. 
No wild animal will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely killed in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. T.D.H. certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. If the biting animal is a high risk animal, it shall be humanely killed and the brain submitted for rabies. 
7.  Exceptions. 
Any animal inflicting a severe bite to an individual shall be humanely killed and the brain tested for rabies. An exception to this requirement may be granted by the local health authority providing the following criteria are met: 
a.  The biting animal is a domestic dog or domestic cat; 
b.  It is currently vaccinated against rabies; and 
c.  It was not in violation of any law at the time of the bite. 
If an exception is granted, the dog or cat shall be quarantined in accordance with this chapter. However, home quarantine is prohibited. 
8.  Head submitted - Quarantine. 
If the biting animal is not a dog or cat or is not included in Section 4, Subsections D(3), (4), (5), or (6), of this chapter, the biting animal will be humanely killed and the brain tested for rabies or the local health authority may require the animal to be quarantined for thirty (30) days as an alternate method to killing and testing. 
9.  Home quarantine. 
Whenever and wherever in this chapter an animal is required to be impounded or confined in quarantine, the time, place and method of impoundment or confinement shall be at the discretion of the animal control officer; however, the owner of the animal may request permission from the animal control officer for home quarantine if the following criteria can be met: 
a.  Secure quarantine facilities are available at the home of the animal's owner and are approved by the animal control officer; 
b.  The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies; 
c.  The animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian observes the animal at least on the first and last day of the quarantine period. If the animal becomes ill during the observation period, the animal control officer must be notified by the person having possession of the animal. At the end of the observation period the release from quarantine must be accomplished in writing; and 
d.  The animal was not in violation of any laws, ordinances or rules at the time of the bite or at the time of ordered confinement; and 
e.  The owner of the animal was not in violation of a law at the time of the bite or at the time of ordered confinement. 
10.  Submitted to laboratory. 
Any animal ordered confined in quarantine that cannot be maintained or placed for any reason in secure quarantine, shall be humanely destroyed and the brain submitted to a T.D.H. certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. The owner of an animal which has been declared dangerous or vicious that bites a person shall, upon demand, turn over the animal to the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall humanely kill the animal and the brain shall be submitted for rabies examination. 
11.  Fees and costs. 
Transportation, capture, laboratory cost, veterinarian fees, impoundment or quarantine costs, euthanasia, body disposal, and any and all other fees, costs, charges and duties shall be the direct responsibility of the animal owner or custodian. Failure of the owner to pay such costs and fees shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
12.  Release or removal from quarantine prohibited. 
No animal shall be released or removed from the place of approved confinement, except by the animal control officer, until after the ten-day quarantine period and then only after inspection of the animal has been made and its release approved by the animal control officer. 
13.  Vaccination of quarantined animals. 
No animal confined or quarantined as a rabies suspect as required herein shall be given a rabies vaccination until after the ten-day quarantine period. All unvaccinated animals will then be vaccinated. 
14.  Rabies suspected. 
If a quarantined animal is found to be rabid or, if in the opinion of the animal control officer or veterinarian, is suspected of being rabid, the animal control officer shall humanely destroy the animal or cause the animal to be humanely destroyed and the brain submitted to a T.D.H. certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2016 of September 22, 2016, Sec. 2(Exh. A))  
SECTION 5. - IMPOUNDMENT 
A.  NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT 
As soon as possible after an animal has been delivered to or picked up by the regulatory authority, a record of said animal will be made. The record should include a description of each animal, whether bearing a license tag or not, and the number of the tag and the name of the person registering the animal in each case where the animal bears a license tag. In case the animal bears a license tag, the animal control officer may, but is not obligated to, notify the person to whom such license tag was issued. The owner of said animal may be notified in person, by letter, postal card, telephone or written notice left at his last known residence. The owner shall be deemed notified upon mailing of said letter or postal card or leaving of said written notice whether the owner of the animal receives the notice or not. 
B.  RELEASE OF QUARANTINED AND IMPOUNDED ANIMALS 
If a quarantined or impounded animal is found to be free from rabies or other infectious or contagious diseases, the animal control officer shall release it to the owner following the quarantine or impoundment period as specified in this chapter if: 
1.  The owner pays the pound fee for each animal so redeemed in addition to the tax or fine, if any, and, in addition to the pound fee, the owner shall pay five dollars ($5.00) for each dog or cat and ten dollars ($10.00) for all other animals for each day or part of the day after the first day which such animals may be impounded. No wild or exotic animal shall be released except to persons who qualify and comply with the requirements of this chapter; and 
2.  The owner redeems his animal within seventy-two (72) hours after capture and/or impoundment; 
3.  The owner of a dog or cat has an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate and license for the animal; or 
4.  The dog or cat is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense and a license for the animal is obtained; and 
5.  The owner presents proper identification and proof of ownership; and 
6.  All fees, costs or charges incurred have been paid by the owner of the animal. 
C.  DISPOSAL OF QUARANTINED AND IMPOUNDED ANIMALS 
1.  Owner fails to claim. 
The regulatory authority may sell and retain the proceeds, keep, or humanely destroy or destroy in such a manner as the regulatory authority may deem necessary, under the circumstances, any animal that the owner or custodian does not take possession of as provided in Section 5, Subsection B, on or before the third day following the final day of quarantine or on or before the third day of impoundment. 
2.  Sick or injured animals. 
It is expressly provided that in the case of diseased, sick, injured or otherwise unhealthy animals impounded under these regulations, other than those affected or thought to be affected by rabies, it shall be unnecessary to await the expiration of the impoundment or redemption period before disposing of such animals. 
D.  DISPOSAL OF CARCASSES 
1.  Disposal method. 
All animal carcasses shall be disposed of in such place and in such manner as may be designated or prescribed by the animal control officer. 
2.  Person responsible. 
The owner or person having control or charge of an animal before or at the time of death shall be totally responsible for the disposal of the animal carcass and shall contact the regulatory authority for direction for the disposal of said carcass. 
3.  Fees, costs or charges. 
All fees, costs or charges incurred in the disposal of the animal carcass shall be the responsibility of the animal owner or person having charge or control of said animal at the time of or prior to the animal's death. 
4.  Disposal within forty-eight hours. 
The carcasses of all animals shall be properly disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as soon as possible, but under no circumstance later than forty-eight (48) hours after death. 
5.  Owner not identified. 
If the owner of the dead animal cannot be identified, the property owner or the person having charge or control of the property containing the carcass shall be responsible for the carcass disposal and is subject to all provisions contained herein. If the owner of the animal is located or identified after carcass disposal has been effected said owner shall reimburse the property owner or person disposing of the carcass and is subject to all costs, conditions and penalties contained in this chapter. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2016 of September 22, 2016, Sec. 2(Exh. A))  
SECTION 6. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
A.  KENNELS 
1.  Location. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or construct a kennel within five hundred (500') of any dwelling, school, church, hospital, nursing home or day care and within five hundred (500') from any residential property line except that the owner or operator of such kennel may maintain a residence within the distance limitation. 
b.  Existing kennels operating legally at the time of the passage of this section are exempt from the distance limitation. Once a kennel ceases to operate continuously for ninety (90) days or more, it shall be subject to all the requirements of the section and the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  Exception: 
Kennels meeting at least the minimum standards of the Zoning Ordinance Article 5.10.02 Qualifications for separation reduction for kennels, boarding, indoor use or veterinary and animal clinic use. 
2.  Additional Requirements. 
a.  The regulation of the Galveston County Health District pertaining to the permitting of kennels are hereby adopted. No person may construct or operate a kennel without having first obtained a permit from the health district. 
b.  In no event shall such kennel create a nuisance because of noise, smell, or any other reason. 
c.  Any person conducting, managing, owning, or maintaining an animal establishment must have a valid, neither suspended nor revoked, permit for said establishment. 
B.  FEES 
Any person in the city conducting, managing, owning, or maintaining an animal establishment shall obtain a permit to do so from the animal control officer and pay a permit fee as follows: 
1.  For each kennel authorized to house less than ten (10) dogs or cats .....$50.00 
2.  For each kennel authorized to house ten (10) to twenty-five (25) dogs or cats .....60.00 
3.  For each kennel authorized to house over twenty-five (25) dogs or cats .....80.00 
4.  For each pet shop .....80.00 
5.  For each riding stable .....80.00 
6.  For each auction .....80.00 
7.  For each zoological park .....80.00 
8.  For each circus .....80.00 
9.  For each performing animal exhibition .....80.00 
10.  For each grooming shop .....80.00 
C.  EACH FACILITY SEPARATE 
Each and every facility regulated by this chapter and listed in Section 6, Subsection B, shall be considered a separate enterprise and requires an individual permit. 
1.  Location. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or construct a kennel within five hundred (500) feet of a dwelling, school, or church, except that the owner or operator of such kennel may maintain a residence within the distance limitation. 
b.  Existing kennels operating legally at the time of the passage of this section are exempt from the distance limitation. Once a kennel ceases to operate for any length of time or changes ownership, it shall be subject to all the requirements of this section. 
D.  CONSTRUCTION PLANS 
All plans for construction of animal establishments shall be submitted to and approved by the regulatory authority before any building permit is issued or any construction is begun. Submission of plans and general compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
E.  SEGREGATION FROM RESIDENCE 
No animal establishment shall be operated within the confines of a residential structure unless that portion used for the animal establishment can be operated separately from the dwelling with ingress and egress to the animal establishment completely independent from any portion of the building which is used for residential purposes. 
F.  EXCEPTIONS 
No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter, government-operated zoological park or institutions approved by the animal control officer for teaching or research purposes. 
G.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
Any person desiring to construct or operate an animal establishment listed in Section 6, Subsection B, shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. 
H.  PLANS INSPECTED 
Prior to the approval of an application for a permit the animal control officer shall inspect the plans and specifications of the proposed establishment to determine compliance with this chapter and the "Construction Standards for Animal Establishments" adopted by the Galveston County Health District. 
I.  EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
All animal establishments must meet the minimum equipment and facility requirements as set by the animal control officer. 
J.  VALIDATION PERIOD 
The animal control officer shall issue a permit to the applicant if the animal control officer's final inspection establishment complies with the "Construction Standards for Animal Establishments" adopted by the Galveston County Health District. Each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period beginning January 1 and, regardless of date issued, will expire December 31. 
K.  INSPECTIONS 
It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that the animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where the animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, suspend and/or revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner and said owner will be subject to all penalties as provided in this chapter. 
L.  ANIMAL CRUELTY 
No person who is or has been convicted of cruelty to an animal shall be issued or allowed to hold a permit to operate an animal establishment. 
M.  COLLECTION OF FEES 
1.  Fees prerequisite. 
All permit and license fees shall be paid to and collected by the city or its duly authorized agent or representative. 
2.  Accounting. 
The city or its duly authorized agent or representative shall keep a current and accurate accounting of all permit and license fees and other monies collected, the name of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, the date and amount therefor. 
N.  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT 
1.  Failure to comply. 
The animal control officer may, without warning, prior notice or hearing suspend any animal establishment permit at any time for failure of the permit holder to keep his or her establishment and/or premises in a sanitary condition. A permit may also be suspended for serious, willful, or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this chapter or any federal, state or other local law, ordinance, or rule governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
2.  Hearing request. 
Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended, and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The animal control officer may end the suspension at any time, if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
O.  REVOCATION 
1.  Failure to comply. 
The animal control officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit or license for serious, willful or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this chapter or any state, federal or other local law or ordinance or for interference with the animal control officer in the performance of his duties. Two (2) or more convictions within a twelve-month period shall constitute repeated violations. The animal control officer may suspend, revoke or withhold a permit or license if the applicant withholds, falsifies or misrepresents any information on the application form. 
2.  Hearing request. 
Prior to revocation, the animal control officer shall notify the holder of the permit or license, or the person in charge, in writing of the reason for which the permit or license is subject to revocation and that the permit or license shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the animal control officer by the holder of the permit or license within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit or license becomes final and no part of the permit or license fee shall be refunded. 
3.  Service of notice. 
A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or license or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit or license and regardless if the letter is or is not received by the holder of the permit or license. 
P.  HEARINGS 
The hearings provided for in this chapter shall be conducted by the animal control officer at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the evidence presented at such hearing, the animal control officer shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. 
Q.  DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS AFTER REVOCATION 
Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within ten (10) days after revocation: 
1.  Humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored by such person in a manner approved by the regulatory authority; 
2.  Relocate animals to areas or places approved by the regulatory authority. The animal control officer may, at his discretion, allow or disallow relocation; or 
3.  Release animals to the regulatory authority and pay all costs incurred in the handling of said animals such as transporting, housing, feeding, and disposal. 
R.  APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION 
Whenever a revocation has become final, the person whose permit or license has been revoked may not apply for nor receive a new permit or license for a period of one (1) year from the date of the revocation. One (1) year after the date of revocation a person may reapply for a permit or license and shall include with the application verification that all reasons and conditions which led to the revocation have been corrected. Any person reapplying for a permit under this section shall be subject to all requirements as stated in this chapter. Any person having a permit or license revoked for the second time shall not be eligible for a new permit or license. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2016 of September 22, 2016, Sec. 2(Exh. A))  
SECTION 7. - BIRD SANCTUARY 
State Law reference— Protection of birds, nests and eggs, V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code, §§ 64.002, 64.003. 
A.  DESIGNATION 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
B.  UNLAWFUL TO MOLEST BIRDS 
It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests within the city. Provided however, if sparrows, blackbirds, pigeons, crows or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, then said birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by and under the supervision of the Chief of Police of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
C.  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES 
1.  If European starlings, English sparrows, grackles, ravens, red-winged blackbirds, cowbirds, feral rock doves (Columba livia) or crows are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality within the city, and by such congregating constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the city council or of its duly appointed representative, the proper health authority or council shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club and/or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given three (3) days' actual notice of time and place for such meeting with representatives of the clubs. 
2.  In the event that as a result of such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, the birds constituting such nuisance may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as may be deemed advisable by the health authorities or council under supervision of the chief of police, or such other person as may be appointed by the council to supervise such destruction. 
D.  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ordinance No. 08-2016 of September 22, 2016, Sec. 2(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violating provisions relating to birds, V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code, §§ 12.406, 64.005.  
CHAPTER 3 - CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS[1] 
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 09-2004, adopted May 13, 2004, amended Ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3, §§ 1—17, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ordinance No. 06-80, adopted June 12, 1980; Ordinance No. 04-82, adopted April 8, 1982; Ordinance No. 11-82, adopted January 31, 1983; Ordinance No. 19-85; adopted June 12, 1985; Ordinance No. 11-86, adopted September 22, 1986; Ordinance No. 01-87, adopted March 12, 1987; Ordinance No. 03-87; adopted March 12, 1987; Ordinance No. 06-88, adopted May 12, 1988; Ordinance No. 18-90, adopted December 20, 1990; Ordinance No. 09-91, adopted September 12, 1991; Ordinance No. 01-92, adopted February 13, 1992; Ordinance No. 05-93, Sec. 7, adopted February 11, 1993; Ordinance No. 06-96, adopted May 9, 1996; Ordinance No. 14-98, adopted June 11, 1998; Ordinance No. 33-98, adopted November 12, 1998; Ordinance No. 27-2000, adopted November 9, 2000; Ordinance No. 14-2001, adopted May 24, 2001; Ordinance No. 03-2003, adopted March 13, 2003; Ordinance No. 16-2003, Sec. 1, adopted August 14, 2003; Ordinance No. 21-2003, adopted August 28, 2003; and Ordinance No. 23-2003, adopted September 11, 2003. 
 
SECTION 1: - GENERAL 
A.  SEVERABILITY 
If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or its reference codes is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter and its reference codes. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and each Section, Subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more Sections, Subsections, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  AFFECT 
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  CERTIFICATION 
The City Secretary shall certify to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval as required by law. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  CONFLICT 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the building codes adopted by reference herein and any provision of the City Code of Ordinances, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  ENFORCEMENT 
The codes and provisions contained within this chapter shall be enforced by a properly qualified person, who shall inspect and approve the work, on an as-needed basis, under whatever arrangement the City Council deems to be in the best interests of the City of Santa Fe. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  APPEALS 
Any person aggrieved by any interpretation of the codes adopted by reference within this chapter, or by any decision or ruling by the City's designated inspector, shall have the right to make an appeal to the Santa Fe Board of Adjustments. Such appeal shall be perfected by written notice submitted to the Community Services Director and addressed to the Zoning Board of Adjustments, along with the required fee, asking for a hearing by the Board of Adjustments. The decision by the Board of Adjustments shall be final. The Board of Adjustments shall be empowered to solicit such independent professional testimony as it shall find necessary for the effective performance of its duties. Such professional testimony may be that of citizens or non-citizens of the community who possess professional knowledge, experience, training and education bearing directly on the issues before the Board and may rely on such testimony in the performance of their duties. When the appeal or determination is from the provisions of the International Electrical Code, the Commission shall solicit the testimony and advice of the Santa Fe Electrical Board. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  PENALTY 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, unless otherwise stated herein, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Section 5, as amended, of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  PERMITS AND FEES 
All permits and fees required by the codes adopted by reference in this chapter shall be issued under procedures, and in amounts, as shall be provided by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
I.  VARIANCES 
Generally, the Santa Fe Board of Adjustments, as established by the City of Santa Fe, Texas, shall hear requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter except in those cases where the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council are specifically designated as the variance review and issuing body. Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
BUILDING CODES  
SECTION 2: - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 
A.  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODES, 2012 EDITION, ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A "EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS", C "AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS", E "SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS", F "RODENT PROOFING", G "FLOOD RESISTENT CONSTRUCTION", H "SIGNS", I "PATIO COVERS", and J "GRADING", as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas; for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 1) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert as Name of Jurisdiction: "City of Santa Fe, Texas" 
Section 112 Amend by deletion of paragraph 112.3, QUALIFICATIONS and by adding the following: "Appeals to the interpretations of this section shall be administered according to Section 1, GENERAL, (F) APPEALS, herein." 
Section 903 Amend paragraph 903.2.1.3, Group A-3 to provide the following exception: 
Exception: Bonafide 501C-3 (Non-Profit) activities are exempt from installing an automatic sprinkler system where there exists an inadequate public water system to support the required automatic sprinkler system; or where no adequate on-site storm water detention/capacity capable of supporting the required automatic sprinkler system exists; or where no adequate containerized water storage system is available to support the required automatic sprinkler system. 
Section 1006  Amend paragraph 1006.01 Illumination required by adding the following: "This includes all commercial restroom facilities." 
Section 1612.3 Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: "City of Santa Fe, Galveston County, Texas" 
Section 1612.3 Insert as DATE OF ISSUANCE: "April 8, 1971, revised 1983" 
Section 3409.2 Insert as DATE OF ORIGINAL CODE: "October 9, 1980" 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 08-2005 of May 26, 2005; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 18-2019 of December 12, 2019, Sec. 1) 
C.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the International Building Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 3: - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 
A.  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters: Appendix E, "MANUFACTURED HOUSING USED AS DWELLINGS", Appendix G, "SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS", Appendix H, "PATIO COVERS", Appendix J, "EXISTING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES", and Appendix K, "SOUND TRANSMISSION" Appendix L, "INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ELECTRICAL PROVISIONS/NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE CROSS REFERENCE", as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code for the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 2; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 2) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section R101.1 Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: "The City of Santa Fe, Galveston County, Texas". 
Section R112.3 Amend by adding the following: "Appeals to the interpretations of this section shall be administered according to Section 1, GENERAL, (F) APPEALS, herein." 
Table R301.2(1) 
GROUND SNOW LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMEC DESIGN
CATEGORY 	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER DESIGN TEMP 	ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED 	FLOOD HAZARDS 	AIR FREEZING INDEX 	MEAN ANNUAL TEMP 
	Speed (mph) 	Topographic effects 		Weathering 	Frost line depth 	Termite 			NFIP Adopted: March 12, 1987 		
zero 	120 	no 	A 	negligible 	none 	Very heavy 	negligible 	No 	FIRM Map: # 485470 0145 C Rev: 05/02/83 	9 	69.6° F 
									FIRM Map: # 485470 0195 C 
Rev: 05/02/83 		
									FIRM Map: #481562 0020 B 
Rev: 10/18/83 		
									FIRM Map: #485470 0150 D 
Rev: 11/16/90 		
									FIRM Map: #485470 0155 C 
Rev: 05/02/83 		
									FIRM Map: #485620 0010 B 
Rev: 10/18/83 		
 
Section R309.5 Fire Sprinklers for private garages shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Section R312.2 Window Fall Protection shall be deleted in its entirety 
Section P2603.5.1 Insert: "2 inches" (septic tanks) and "6 inches" (building sewers). 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 2; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 2) 
C.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the International Residential Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 4: - INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
A.  INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters: Appendix B, "SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES" and Resource A, GUIDELINES ON FIRE RATINGS OF ARCHAIC MATERIALS AND ASSEMBLIES, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of the occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 3; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 3) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: City of Santa Fe. 
Section 112 Amend by deletion of paragraph 112.3, QUALIFICATIONS and by adding the following: "Appeals to the interpretations of this section shall be administered according to Section 1, GENERAL, (F) APPEALS, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 3; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 3) 
C.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the International Existing Building Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 5: - INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 
A.  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapter: Appendix A "COMBUSTION AIR OPENINGS AND CHIMNEY CONNECTOR PASS-THROUGHS", as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 4; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 4) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 4; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 4) 
C.  ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL LICENSE LAW 
Before any person, firm or corporation shall contract or engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering heating, air-conditioning or mechanical refrigeration equipment in any building, structure or premises in the City, he shall be licensed as provided in the Mechanical License Law, the same being Article 8861, Texas Civil Statutes. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the International Mechanical Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 6: - ELECTRICAL CODE 
A.  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, as published by the National Fire Prevention Association, be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Electrical Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B. of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 5; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 5; Ordinance No. 12-2019 of September 26, 2019, Sec. 1) 
B.  RESERVED 
Section 1 of Ord. No. 12-2019 deleted subsection 6.B entitled "Revisions," which derived from: Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 5; and Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 5. 
C.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the National Electrical Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 12-2019 of September 26, 2019, Sec. 1) 
D.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein, and in case of willful and continuous violation of this section by any person, firm, or corporation, the city electrical board, after hearing and notice shall have the power to revoke and repeal any license under which said person may be acting, and to revoke and repeal all permits, privileges, and franchises granted to said person, firm, or corporation. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  ELECTRICAL WORK TO BE DONE ONLY BY OR UNDER LICENSED MASTER ELECTRICIAN 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to do electrical work within the City unless such person is a Master Electrician licensed under the State of Texas, or does such electrical work under the supervision, direction, and control of a Master Electrician licensed under the State of Texas. The term "electrical work" as used in this subsection is meant the installing, maintaining, altering, preparing or erecting of any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment for which a permit is required under the terms and provisions of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 6) 
G.  ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR DEFINED 
An electrical contractor is any person, firm, or corporation who contracts for and engages in the business of installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, or erecting of any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment for which a permit is required under the terms and provisions of this section. No person shall be licensed as an electrical contractor unless he holds a valid master electrician license or has in his employ a master electrician license to do electrical work. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  MASTER ELECTRICIAN DEFINED 
The holder of the licenses provided for in Subsections F. and G. above shall be known as Master Electricians. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 7) 
I.  JOURNEYMAN AND APPRENTICE ELECTRICIAN DEFINED 
Electricians employed by contractors and working under the supervision of a licensed Master Electrician to install, repair, alter, and maintain electrical appliances, wiring, apparatus, devices, fixtures, or equipment for which a permit is required under the terms and conditions of this section, and licensed by the City or Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation as such, shall be known respectively as a journeyman or apprentice electrician. Apprentices shall only perform electrical work under the direct supervision of a licensed Journeyman or Master Electrician. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 12-2019 of September 26, 2019, Sec. 1) 
J.  MAINTENANCE ELECTRICIAN DEFINED 
Electrician regularly employed on a permanent basis by any person, and who perform work only in the confines of the building or in or on the premises where they are regularly employed on a permanent basis, and who do "electrical work" as defined in Subsection L. shall be known as maintenance electricians. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
K.  DEFINITION OF "ELECTRICAL MAINTENANCE WORK" 
"Electrical maintenance work" shall mean the keeping in safe repair of any and all electrical installations, apparatus and equipment, and the keeping in safe repair or moving and relocating of electrical equipment within a building or in or on the premises where the maintenance electrician, as defined in Subsection J., is regularly employed on a permanent basis, for which a work permit is required under the terms and provisions of this section, but does not include the installation of new and additional electrical work, electrical equipment, or electrical apparatus. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
L.  ANNUAL PERMIT OF EMPLOYER OF MAINTENANCE ELECTRICIAN; PERMIT FOR MOVING AND RELOCATING EQUIPMENT 
(1)  An annual permit shall be required of and upon application therefore, be issued to any person employing an electrician, performing electrical maintenance work, as that term is defined in Subsection J., for the keeping in safe repair of any and all electrical installation, apparatus, and equipment within the confines of the building or in or on the premises where he is employed. The application for this annual permit shall be made in writing to the City Electrical Inspector and shall contain a description of the premises on which work is to be done under the permit and information concerning the type of work to be done on such premises under such permit. 
(2)  If requirements of the annual permit as herein set forth are not met, or if work is not done in compliance with this section, the City Electrical Inspector shall suspend all rights conveyed by such permit until such time as all deficiencies have been corrected or the permit expires. 
(3)  Notice of such suspension shall be in writing to the person to whom the permit was issued. 
(4)  The fee for such annual permit shall be as established by Council resolution and shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such permit is issued; and the fee for the remainder of the year shall be prorated in like manner as provided for license fees in this section. 
(5)  A permit in accordance with the other provisions of this section, pertaining to permits, inspections and licenses, shall be required for all moving and relocating of electrical equipment authorized under the terms and conditions of this section by a maintenance electrician. 
(6)  Each such certificate issued to a maintenance electrician shall specify the name and address of the person to whom the certificate is issued, the location of the premises in or on which the maintenance work is to be done, and the date of the issuance thereof. 
(7)  Every holder of a maintenance electrician's license shall notify the Electrical Inspector immediately when such holder makes any change in his employment; giving in such notice the name of new employer and the location of the premises in or on which he is to be employed to perform maintenance electrical work. 
(8)  Every holder of such maintenance electrician's license shall have his certificate upon or about his person while performing the acts which such license entitles him to perform. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
M.  ELECTRICAL SIGN CONTRACTOR DEFINED 
An electrical sign contractor is any person, firm, or corporation who contracts for and engages in the business of installing, maintaining, wiring, altering, repairing, and erecting electrical signs, including gas or vacuum signs, gas or vacuum decorations or gas or vacuum illuminating signs or systems. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
ELECTRICAL BOARD 
N.  ELECTRICAL BOARD 
There is hereby created an electrical board which shall consist of five (5) members, of which two (2) shall be ex-officio members and three (3) shall be master electricians and be appointed by the City Council. The ex-officio members shall be the city fire marshal and the City Manager or his/her designee, and shall be non-voting members. Any member of the board shall be subject to removal at the will and pleasure of the City Council. The members of the board shall not receive compensation for their services. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
O.  TERMS OF ELECTRICAL BOARD MEMBERS 
Members of the electrical board appointed as provided in Subsection A. above shall serve for a period of two (2) years from the date of their appointment, except ex-officio members, whose terms shall correspond to their respective official tenure. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
P.  FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE ELECTRICAL BOARD 
Assist the electrical inspector with interpretations of the electrical code requirements; conduct hearings concerning violations of this section; recommend suspension, probation, or revocation of license for violations; and recommend amendments to the National Electrical Code. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
Q.  APPEAL FROM ACTION OF THE ELECTRICAL BOARD 
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the electrical board shall have the right to appeal to the City Council from any action of the electrical board within ten (10) days from the action appealed from, which appeal shall be perfected by addressing a letter to the said City Council stating that an appeal from the ruling of the electrical board is desired within ten (10) days after the action appealed from. Upon receipt of notice of such appeal, the City Council shall set time for hearing and shall notify the appellant and also the chairman of the electrical board of the date of such hearing. The electrical board, as well as the appellant, shall have the right to be heard at the appeals above provided for. Furthermore, the City Council shall have the right to affirm, modify, or reverse the action or decision complained of. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
R.  PERMITS 
No such permit shall be issued to any person who is not the holder of an electrical license, except as provided under Home Owners' Rights, Subsection U. 
The application for a permit shall describe the work to be done and shall be made in writing by a person holding a master electrician's license or a maintenance electrician's license. The permit when issued shall be issued to such applicant to cover work as described and detailed. Any changes or additions must be covered by additional permits at the time changes are made. 
No such plans, specifications, and schedules shall be submitted and no such plans, specifications, and schedules will be examined under the provisions of this section, unless the same are submitted by the holder of a master electrician's license or home owner. If it is found that the installation as described will be in general conformity to the requirements of this section, and if the applicant has complied with all provisions of the ordinances of the City, a permit for such installation will be issued; provided, however, that the issuance of a permit will not be taken as permission or as a license to violate any of the requirements of this section or any other ordinance of the City. Any license of any class may be suspended or revoked by the Santa Fe Board of Adjustments of the City of Santa Fe, should the holder violate any ordinance, law, or lawful regulation, relating to or governing electrical wiring, repairing, or construction. Any person whose license shall have been revoked shall not again be licensed within a period of one (1) year from the date of such action, but no license shall be suspended or revoked unless the license shall have been given an opportunity to appear and be heard, of which hearing he must have had at least ten (10) days' written notice specifying the charges against him. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9; Ordinance No. 12-2019 of September 26, 2019, Sec. 1) 
S.  TRANSFER OF LICENSE 
No licensed electrical contractor shall transfer his license to any other person, for the purpose of obtaining a permit, or to do any work under his license; provided, however, a licensed electrical contractor may authorize an employee or associate to obtain a permit in his name and to do work but only under his direction. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
T.  AUTHORIZED ELECTRICAL WORKERS 
No electrical contractor shall send any person on any job (requiring a license) in the capacity of an electrician unless such person is the holder of, and in possession of a master electrician or a journeyman electrician license. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
U.  HOME OWNERS' RIGHTS 
Personal installation by an owner under these home owner rights shall be by himself, for himself, on his own homestead premises, without compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him in any way on such work and shall be inspected as considered necessary by the electrical inspector. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
V.  INSPECTION 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the city inspector or any duly authorized assistant, to issue permits for and inspect all electrical wiring, apparatus, or equipment for the utilization of the service supply company in providing electrical energy for lights, heat, and power inside of or attached to the building or other structures within the limits of the City of Santa Fe, and to look after the enforcement of laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the same and to exercise a general supervision over all electrical construction and over all electrical contractors and electricians licensed to carry on their business or trade under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any electrical supply company operating under a franchise granted by the City of Santa Fe or from any person, firm, or corporation furnishing electric current for light, heat, and power to connect his, theirs, or its distribution system with any installation of wiring apparatus or fixtures installed after this section becomes effective in or to any building or other structure within the limits of the City of Santa Fe, without first having received written permission from the city inspector to furnish current for such wiring, apparatus, or fixtures; such permission shall be given by the city inspector at any time after the certificate hereinafter provided for shall have been issued. 
(3)  The city inspector may also before such certificate is issued, give temporary permission to connect and furnish electric service to any wiring, apparatus, or fixtures that are in such condition that current may be safely connected therewith, and there exists an urgent necessity for such use when written application is filed with him requesting such permission. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
W.  WIRING 
(1)  Approved wiring methods: 
Method A—Standard rigid steel conduit. 
Method B—Metal under floor raceways. 
Method C—Nonmetallic sheathed cable. 
Method D—Flexible steel conduit ½ minimum. 
Method E—Approved cable. 
Method F—Armored cable. 
Method G—Surface metal raceways. 
Method H—Electrical—metallic—tubing. 
(2)  Conduit connections to rotating or movable apparatus; Method D, if length is six feet (6') or less. 
(3)  Drop cords shall not be installed in clothes closets or in places where wearing apparel is likely to be hung. Approved ceiling fixtures shall be used. 
(4)  In no case shall conductors of a size smaller than NO. 12 AWG wire be used. 
(5)  No aluminum wire shall be used in any mode or application in any electrical system or installation in the City unless aluminum wiring is encased in rigid metal conduit (indoors) or rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit type PVC (outdoors and underground). 
(6)  All mobile home panels to be protected at the service panel. 
(7)  Non-metallic sheathed cable is only allowed in R-3 buildings of less than three (3) stories. 
(8)  New buildings of mixed occupancy (residential and commercial) shall be classed as commercial buildings and shall be wired as such, according to the rules and regulations of this section and of the current National Electrical Code. 
(9)  All commercial structures shall be wired in metallic conduit or metallic armored cable. Non-metallic conduit may be approved by the Building Official prior to installation of same. Existing structures converted to commercial uses and existing non-conforming commercial structures shall comply with this regulation, to an extent determined by each item's qualification, under the following conditions: 
(a)  Any increase in service panel capacity—Rewire entire facility. 
(b)  Any exposed non-conforming wiring—Rewire exposed portions back to nearest junction box or panel. 
(c)  Any additions—Shall be wired fully in compliance and home runs extended back to panel in compliance to this provision. 
(d)  Any wiring exposed as a result of renovation, repair, upgrade, fire, or other physical damage to building—Shall be wired fully in compliance and home runs extended back to panel in compliance to this provision. 
(e)  Substantial renovation of the building as determined by the Building Official—Rewire entire facility. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9; Ordinance No. 12-2019 of September 26, 2019, Sec. 1) 
X.  EMERGENCY WIRING 
Emergency wiring may be permitted by the electrical inspector for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days at which time said emergency wiring or service must be removed. If service is required for a longer period on large construction jobs only, said service or emergency wiring shall be re-inspected and a two-dollar fee shall be charged for re-inspection each ninety (90) days thereafter. Emergency wiring permit applications must be accompanied by a letter to the city inspector signed by both the electrical contractor and by the owner or occupant of the building or premises on which they are installed, stating the period for which emergency wiring is desired and signifying that emergency work will be promptly removed after expiration of the emergency permit. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
Y.  SERVICE CONNECTIONS 
(1)  The service conduit and wires leading from the outside of the customer's building to the meter cabinet and main line switch are to be supplied, owned, and controlled by the property owner but the installation of service drops and the connection of these wires to the supply lines is to be made by the electric public service company owning and operating the supply lines. The owner must provide a location for brackets or other attachments to the building to which the service wires are to be connected. Such a location must not be more than eighteen inches (18") from the service conduit outlet. On residences two (2) stories or more, the location shall be as is practical on the building, but in no event shall it be more than twenty-five feet (25') or less than ten feet (10') from the ground and must be located so as not to be within reach from any porch or stairs landing. 
(2)  Service conduit extending through the roof and used for a service support shall be sealed at the roof with a lead or aluminum flashing and extend a minimum of thirty inches (30") above the roof. Such service conduit shall be anchored just before entering the roof. Two-inch conduit shall extend a maximum of thirty-two inches (32") and three-inch conduit a maximum of forty inches (40") above the roof support. 
(3)  Copper wire of a size not smaller than No. 6 AWG gauge will be allowed between the point where the service drops of the power company terminate on the owner's premises and the main line entrance switch, and such wire must be enclosed in rigid galvanized metal conduit, not smaller than one inch (1"). Not less than three feet (3') of each conductor shall be left at the service head for connection to service wire from public service company's service drop. 
(4)  A means of disconnect shall be provided at the meter and readily accessible to homeowners or emergency personnel. There shall be an outside main disconnect provided for all new commercial and residential structures. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
Z.  METERS 
(1)  All meter loops for the installation of electric meters to measure service rendered by the electric public service company shall be in meter cabinets approved by the electric public service company and installed by the owner or his agent. Said meter loops must be ahead of or on the line side of the main switch. 
(2)  Meters installed to measure the service rendered to residents, apartments, and combination residences and commercial or industrial establishments shall be set on the outside of the building at a point not more than six feet (6') or less than five feet (5') from the ground to the dial of the meter. Closed in rear or front porches are not considered as outdoor location. 
(3)  For convenience of ready access, all meter cabinets shall be located on outside walls of buildings nearest the point of service, except in cases where exposed to mechanical injury by vehicles, as in commercial section, make such impractical or by nature of the location of the premises, then location shall be designated by the electrical inspector after consultation with local power company. 
(4)  Where changes or additions are being made to existing electrical installations, necessitating changes or additions to the service entrance or to the service switch of the meter loop, the service entrance conduit and main line switch and meter loop shall be changed to conform to the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Any public service company, firm, or persons furnishing electric current to the public under franchise granted by the City for lighting, heating, or other services shall have the right to install and connect or disconnect and remove their meters and their protective devices at their option without permit. 
(6)  Where meters are not installed at inaccessible places in houses or buildings and the electric public service company desires to relocate said meter loop for the convenience in rendering its service or for the purpose of standardization of its service in the public interest, it may, upon request to the electrical inspector have a licensed electrical contractor reinstall meter loop at a point desired by it and all such work so done at the request of the electrical public service company shall be performed at its own expense without cost to the owner. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
AA.  MAXIMUM CURRENT 
(1)  Not more than ten (10) current outlets shall be connected to a 20-ampere general use branch circuit. 
(2)  Not more than two (2) current outlets shall be connected to a 20-ampere appliance circuit in kitchen. 
(3)  Not more than three (3) heavy-duty lamp holders shall be connected to a 15-ampere branch lighting circuit. 
(4)  Not more than four (4) heavy-duty lamp holders shall be connected to a 20-ampere lighting circuit. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9) 
BB.  GROUNDING 
Ground conductor must be enclosed in armor cover or conduit. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Secs. 8, 9; Ordinance No. 12-2019 of September 26, 2019, Sec. 1) 
Editor's note— Section 6 was formerly entitled "International Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions," which was renamed as herein set out above by Ord. No. 12-2019.  
SECTION 7: - INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE[2] 
A.  INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B. of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 6) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: "City of Santa Fe" 
Section 106.6.2 Insert: "Fees shall be those adopted by Resolution by the City Council." 
Section 106.6.3 Insert: "ten percent (10%)" and "ten percent (10%)" 
Section 108.4 Amend by deletion of paragraph 108.4 and by adding the following: "Violations Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this code shall be guilty of a violation as set out in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section (5) GENERAL PENALTY OF VIOLATIONS OF CODE, herein. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense." 
Section 109 Amend by deletion of paragraph 109.2, "Membership of Board" and by adding the following: "Appeals to the interpretations of this section shall be administered according to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section (F) APPEALS, herein." 
Section 305.4.1 Insert: "two (2)" and "six (6)" 
Section 702.3 Amend Table 702.3 by deletion of SDR35 and SDR41 as approved materials. 
(Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 6) 
C.  ADOPTION OF PLUMBING LICENSE LAW 
Before any person shall do any work or make any connections with the water, sewer, or gas systems in the City or do any plumbing work connected, or; intended to be connected with the water, sewer, or gas systems, he shall be licensed as provided in the Plumbing License Law of 1947, as amended, the same being Article 6243-101, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. 
(Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 6) 
D.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the International Plumbing Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 6) 
E.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 6) 
F.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 6) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-2015, § 6, adopted Mar. 26, 2015, amended § 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 7, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; and Ord. No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 10. 
 
SECTION 8: - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 
A.  INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International FUEL GAS CODE, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of fuel gas systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B. of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 11; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 7) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: "City of Santa Fe" 
Section 106.6.2 Insert: "Fees shall be those adopted by Resolution by the City Council." 
Section 106.5.3 Insert: "ten percent (10%)" and "ten percent (10%)" 
Section 108.4 Insert the following sentence: "Penalties shall be as specified elsewhere in the Santa Fe Code of Ordinances." 
Section 108.5 Insert: "the amount set out elsewhere in the Santa Fe Code of Ordinances" 
Section 109 Amend by deletion of paragraph 109.2, "Membership of Board" and by adding the following: "Appeals to the interpretations of this section shall be administered according to Section 1, GENERAL, (F) APPEALS, herein." 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 11; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 7) 
C.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the International Fuel Gas Code the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 9: - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
A.  INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, including the Appendix Chapter, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B. of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 12; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 8; Ordinance No. 07-2016 of August 25, 2016, Sec. 1) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1, Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: "City of Santa Fe." 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 8) 
C.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with the International Energy Conservation Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 10: - RESERVED  
SECTION 11: - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
A.  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Santa Fe, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Santa Fe, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Santa Fe are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B. of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 13; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 9) 
B.  REVISIONS 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert as NAME OF JURISDICTION: "City of Santa Fe". 
Section 102.3 Amend by replacing: "International Zoning Code" with "Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance". 
Section 103.5 Insert: "Fees shall be those adopted by Resolution by the City Council." 
Sections 108 and 109: Insert: 
The Code Official shall not proceed with the condemnation process until directed by the Santa Fe Building Standards Commission. 
Section 111 Amend by deletion of paragraph 111.2, "Membership of Board" and by adding the following: "Appeals to the interpretations of this section shall be administered according to Section 1, GENERAL, (F) APPEALS, herein." 
Section 111.4 Amend by deleting "two-thirds" and by replacing with "four-fifths". 
Section 111.6 Amend by deleting "concurring vote of majority" and by replacing with "concurring vote of four-fifths of majority". 
Section 302.4 Insert as [JURISDICTION TO INSERT HEIGHT IN INCHES] "the standards established by CHAPTER 6: HEALTH AND SANITATION CITY OF SANTA FE, TEXAS, CODE OF ORDINANCES" 
Section 304.14 Insert: "January 1" and "December 31" 
Section 602.3 Insert: "November 1" "March 31" 
Section 602.4 Insert: "November 1" "March 31" 
The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code are further amended wherever such code is in conflict with the following additional regulations. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 03-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 13; Ordinance No. 03-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 9) 
C.  ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER C OF CHAPTER 54 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS AND PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SAID CHAPTER WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS 
The City of Santa Fee does adopt the provisions of Chapter 54 of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas and Subchapter C thereof, which is entitled "Quasi-Judicial Enforcement of Health and Safety Ordinances of Home-Rule Municipality," and does declare the implementation of that Subchapter and the creation of the Building and Standards Commission which shall be composed of five (5) members and a number of alternate members not to exceed four (4). Such alternates shall serve at the designation of the Mayor or the City Manager. 
In addition, the Commission shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities as shall be from time to time provided for and delegated to the City of Santa Fe by the Legislature of the State of Texas, it being the intent of the City of Santa Fe to fully implement Subchapter C of Chapter 54 of the Local Government Code and to further provide to the Building Standards Commission, as well as any other commission, officer or legal authority as provided for under the provisions of state law such powers, privileges and rights as may be from time to time provided for by the Legislature of the State of Texas without restriction or limitation. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION CREATED 
There is hereby created a Building Standards Commission, to be composed of five (5) members and two (2) alternates who shall serve in the event of the absence or resignation of any of the five (5) members of the Commission. The Mayor may designate an alternate to serve in the event of the absence or resignation of a regular member. Neither members nor alternates shall be City Council members or employees of the City. All such members and alternates shall hold office for a period of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified as required by law. 
Members of the Commission shall be qualified in one (1) or more of the fields of fire prevention, building construction, sanitation, health and public safety. However, failure of a person to be qualified in any such fields shall not prevent or disqualify that person from sitting on the Commission. 
The members of the City of Santa Fe Board of Adjustment may serve as the Building Standards Commission. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 
The Building Official shall perform such duties as are necessary to carry out the directives of the City Council of the City of Santa Fe, as provided herein, and the orders of the Building and Standards Commission of the City of Santa Fe, constituted and acting pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 54 of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas and Subchapter C thereof relating to the Quasi-Judicial Enforcement of Health and Safety Ordinances of Home-Rule Municipality. In addition, the Building Official shall inspect all buildings or structures reported or believed to be substandard and shall present preliminary reports to the Commission. Further, upon proper notice to property owners and occupants and upon direction of the Commission, the Building Official shall present testimony to the Commission in support of any allegations of substandard character of buildings and structures. 
The Building Official, in performance of the duties of said office, shall give notices and shall take such actions as shall be from time to time provided for and directed by the Legislature of the State of Texas, as currently set out in the provisions of Chapter 54 of the Local Government Code and Subchapter C thereof, as well as any amendments and changes which shall be from time to time made. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  STANDARDS FOR DECLARING SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 
The Building Standards Commission shall hear evidence and shall, upon finding of the conditions and circumstances as hereinafter set out, declare a building or structure substandard and may order its repair, vacation or demolition as it may deem just, proper and appropriate, taking into consideration the circumstances and conditions found to exist. Such conditions and circumstances are: 
(1)  Deteriorated building or structure. A building or structure which has become deteriorated and unsafe through natural causes or by damage as a result of fire or of exposure to the elements, to the extent that the roof, windows and doors or portions of the house, building or structure which protect from the weather will no longer reasonably protect from the elements or to the extent that the building or structure has become structurally unsound, thereby threatening the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the City. 
(2)  Fire hazard. A building or structure which, because of its wiring, construction or present status, constitutes a fire hazard. 
(3)  Pestilence. A building or structure which constitutes a menace to the health and safety of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the City because of the existence of conditions therein which are conducive to the harboring or rats or mice or other disease-carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease. 
(4)  Structural deformities. A building or structure which has been built and constructed in such a manner as to be hazardous in that the construction of the building or structure is of such a nature that it has placed the same in jeopardy of collapse or that the building or structure will not reasonably withstand customary and ordinary exposure to the elements; a building or structure which, because of the deficiency of its materials, methods or means of construction, including the foundation, structural elements, wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances or exits, renders the building or structure unsafe and dangerous. 
(5)  Inadequate fire safety provisions. A building, structure or improvements which, because of the materials used, types of construction or design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires, or location, design or width of the entrances or exits, make the structure hazardous. 
(6)  Other. The existence of such other conditions or circumstances which may from time to time be delineated under the terms and provisions of law and within the scope of authority of the Building Standards Commission. 
(7)  Additional conditions. Violations of the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code not otherwise set out above. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  PROCEDURE 
The procedure set out herein shall be the minimum necessary for the Building Standards Commission to enter a valid order concerning any building or structure in the City. A case before the Commission may be commenced by the Building Official or by the Commission on its own initiative; in either case, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  Upon written report of the Building Official or recommendation of the Building Standards Commission, the Commission shall establish a docket and make inquiry into the present conditions and circumstances of any building or structure alleged to be substandard under the criteria set out herein. If, upon receipt of such information, the Building Standards Commission believes and concludes that there is a reasonable basis upon which to investigate such preliminary allegations and findings, then the Commission shall proceed as herein provided. 
(2)  Notice shall be provided to the property owners and all occupants and lienholders of the property, identifying such property owners and occupants and lienholders as can best be determined and further identifying the property, its location and the improvements thought to be substandard. A title examination should occur in order that all owners and lienholders might be identified. Such notice shall state the possible result if the condition(s) described are judged substandard and shall state any deadlines that have been established for the hearing and review process. The owners and occupants shall be given notice of an opportunity to appear and show cause why said building, structure or improvements should not be declared substandard under the criteria set out in this Code and why the Commission should not enter appropriate orders to remedy the conditions determined to exist. 
Such notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the known owners and occupants and lienholders at their last known business address or place of residence and may also be personally delivered to the owners, tenants or occupants residing upon the property. Notice to all unknown owners shall be given by posting the same by nailing a copy to the front door or as close to the front door as practicable on each structure situated on the affected property. The notice shall be mailed and posted before the tenth day before the date of the hearing before the Commission and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality on one (1) occasion before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing. 
(3)  On the day set in such citation and notice to show cause, a hearing shall be held before the Building Standards Commission. The Building Official or other designated individual appointed by the City Manager shall present evidence before the Commission, and the Commission shall hear any additional evidence or rebuttal that may be presented. Based upon the evidence and solely under the criteria set out in this Code, the Commission shall then determine whether or not such building or structure is a substandard building or structure. 
(4)  The Building Standards Commission shall have the power to order the demolition, partial demolition, repair, renovation or remodeling of any structure found to be substandard under the criteria herein provided. The Commission shall issue an order as to any decision made; and such order shall specify the action to be taken and the time in which such action is to be taken and shall make affirmative findings as to the name of the property owner(s) and/or tenants and lienholders. 
A copy of the final order of the Commission shall be served upon the property owners and occupants and lienholders in the same manner as provided for the service of the notice herein required. 
(5)  In the event any notice which is required herein to be served in person or by certified mail cannot be served because neither the owner nor occupant can be found, such notice shall be deemed to have been served if the same is published in a newspaper of general circulation. Any notice so published need not be the exact text of the notice intended to be mailed but may be a synopsis thereof so long as the same is of sufficient clarity and content to place all persons on notice as to the intent thereof. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  EMERGENCY PROCEDURE 
(1)  When it shall appear that a building or structure in the City is a substandard building under the terms of this section and that such building or structure or the manner of its use constitutes an immediate and serious danger to life or property, the condition shall be deemed a condition justifying the use of emergency measures. In such case, the Building Standards Commission or the Building Official may, with the consent and approval of the City Manager, order any of the following emergency measures to be taken: 
(a)  Immediate vacation of such building, structure and/or adjoining buildings or structures. 
(b)  Vacation of the danger area around such building or structure. 
(c)  Such emergency shoring-up and bracing of walls, roofs and supports as are required to render such building or structure safe. 
(d)  Destruction of such walls, roofs and supports or the entire structure or so much thereof as cannot be braced or made secure with safety. 
(e)  Posting of notices on or near such building or structure or buildings or structures, notifying the public of such order and ordering all persons to keep out of such building, buildings, structure or structures and the areas of danger surrounding it or them. 
(2)  When any of the above-mentioned measures are ordered to be taken, notice of such order shall be given as follows: 
(a)  Such order shall be directed to the owner of such substandard building or structure or his authorized representative, if the same be known. Where notification can be accomplished without increasing the danger to life or property, notice shall be given by personal service on the owner of the building or structure or his said representative. 
(b)  In the event that such notification would create such a delay as would materially increase the danger to life or property, then such notice need not be given. 
If the owner or his representative shall fail or refuse to carry out such order or shall fail to carry out such order satisfactorily, the Building Standards Commission or the Building Official may, upon approval of the City Manager, proceed to carry out such orders either by private contract or through an agency of the City, and the cost thus incurred shall constitute a valid lien against the property. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
I.  LIABILITY OF CITY 
Neither the City nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this section shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
J.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
K.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 12: - RESERVED 
SPECIALIZED BUILDING CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS  
SECTION 13: - HOUSES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES MOVED INTO OR WITHIN THE CITY 
A.  APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Should any provision contained in this section conflict with any other provisions of the Building Code adopted by reference herein or with any other provision contained in this Code of Ordinances, the most stringent requirement(s) shall prevail. 
(2)  Modular home or building as used in this section shall mean any building not erected on site except small storage sheds designed to be placed on the rear of residential lots behind an existing residential dwelling and used for storage of tools and other articles normally associated with residential occupancy. 
(3)  Modular as used in this section shall mean any building or structure of a module designation or units of standardized size design to be arranged or fitted together in a variety of ways. 
(4)  Shed as used in this section shall mean any small structure for storage or shelter. 
(5)  Structure as used in this section shall mean anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. 
(6)  Building as used in this section shall mean any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and designed or intended for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  NO BUILDING OR STRUCTURE TO BE MOVED INTO THE CITY WITHOUT A PERMIT OR PLACED UPON A LOT WITHIN THE CITY WITHOUT A PERMIT 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move into, or in any manner to bring into, the corporate limits of the City, any house, any building or structure, or any assembled portion of any house, building, structure or any modular home or building, whether new or used, from outside of the corporate limits of the City for the purpose of placing such house, building, or structure upon any lot or tract of ground for any use or occupancy of any nature whatsoever without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official of the City. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move or relocate any house, building or structure, or any assembled portion of such house, building or structure, or any modular home or building, whether new or used, from one location in the City to another location, lot or tract of land in the City, without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official of the City, Texas. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  APPLICATION FEE AND APPLICATION 
(1)  Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to move into the corporate limits of the City any house, building or structure, or any assembled portion of such house, building, or structure or relocate any house, building, or structure, or any assembled portion of such house, building, or structure from one location in the City to another location, lot, or tract of land in the City shall file an application with the Building Official requesting permission to move into the corporate limits or relocate a particular house, building, or structure from one location to another location, lot, or tract of land in the City. Upon filing of the application, the applicant shall pay the Building Official the required fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, to help pay the cost of processing the application. Such fee shall be in addition to permit fees required for construction within the City. 
(2)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant. 
(b)  Description and size of the house, building, or structure to be moved, together with a picture thereof. 
(c)  Legal description of the lot and the local address, upon which the house, building, or structure is to be moved or relocated if a permit is granted by the Building Official. 
(d)  A drawing or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot or tract of land upon which the house, building or structure is to be moved or relocated, and the location of existing buildings or structures upon the lot, if any together with the location of existing buildings or structures upon adjoining lots. 
(e)  A wood destroying insect inspection report issued by a Structural Pest Control Business Licensee indicating whether or not there is visible evidence of active wood destroying insect infestation or visible wood destroying insect damage to the house, building, or structure and whether treatment or repairs are necessary. 
(f)  Certification by the owner and documentation that the following criteria are met or exceeded or will be met or exceeded. No certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until these criteria are met. These criteria may be modified by the Building Official as required to conform to Manufactured Housing regulations, as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development: 
(i)  Provide new roofing, flashing and roof jacks, in conformity to city codes, or demonstrate that same have been installed within thirty-six (36) months prior to date of permit application. 
(ii)  Building shall be free of rot and all component lumber shall be sound and whole, including but not limited to soffits, fascias, rafters and rafter ends, joists, studs, sills and mud sills, siding and trim. Damaged components shall be replaced or, where approved, structural components may be sistered or otherwise augmented with sound and whole material. 
(iii)  All windows and doors, required by code, shall be operable, sound and functional. Light and ventilation shall be provided for all areas required by codes. 
(iv)  All required insect screens shall be installed. Screens shall be new or in excellent condition with frames tightly fitted to window openings. Ripped, torn or punctured screens shall be replaced. 
(v)  Determine that the building is not within the 100-year flood zone as defined by the most recent FIRM map published by the Federal Emergency Management Administration or, if within the 100-year flood zone, a bench mark indicating an identified elevation according to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum shall be provided by a Texas licensed land surveyor. 
(vi)  If the building is within the 100-year flood zone, a Certificate of Elevation, demonstrating that the lowest finished floor is elevated eighteen inches (18") above the Base Flood Elevation, shall be submitted to the Building Official. 
(vii)  The building shall be skirted continuously along its full exterior perimeter with skirting that extends from the bottom edge of the siding to the grade immediately below. Such skirt shall be of weather resistant materials and may be solid or open lattice of a regular pattern. The net open area of latticework shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%). Elevated structures with a clear unobstructed clearance of seven feet (7') or greater between the structure and the grade beneath the structure shall not be required to install skirting. 
(viii)  Buildings shall meet the criteria for windstorm resistant construction and a Certificate of Compliance shall be mandatory. 
(ix)  Unit shall be painted or weather sealed over all exposed exterior surfaces (except brick or stone masonry) within thirty-six (36) months prior to date of application. 
(x)  Site around the full perimeter of the house shall be sloped away from the building and graded for a distance of fifty feet (50') or to property line, whichever is less. 
(xi)  Site around the full perimeter of the house shall be sodded or seeded with grass or ground cover for a distance of fifty feet (50') or to property line, whichever is less. 
(xii)  Culverts shall be set and a driveway installed and paved with crushed stone, concrete, asphalt or other approved material. The driveway shall extend from a public street into the site and shall be of a width and length to permit the parking of no less than two (2) vehicles: parking space size shall conform to the minimum size established by the Santa Fe Zoning regulations. 
(xiii)  Dead trees, brush, junk, inoperative vehicles, inoperative farm equipment and vermin harborages shall be removed from the site. 
(xiv)  Well and septic tank or approved utilities connections shall be installed, shall be operational and are approved by the Health Department. 
(xv)  Proof that mandatory repairs and maintenance have been performed within the required times shall be in the form of receipts or invoices that clearly identify the date of the work and the building on which the work was performed. Lack of such documentation shall result in the work being performed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy unless in the opinion of the Building Official the condition of the materials indicate that the work was performed within the mandatory period. 
(3)  Upon the filing of the application, the Building Official shall investigate the application by inspecting the house, building, or structure to be moved or relocated upon the lot or tract of land and the lot or tract of land upon which the house is to be located. He shall then determine whether the house, building or structure meets the requirements of the Building Code, and other applicable ordinances of the City, and whether or not the lot and house, building, or structure, if allowed to be moved into the designated lot or tract of land, would meet all of the requirements of the Building Code and other applicable regulations of the City. In addition, the Building Official shall issue a written report to applicant stating requirements necessary to meet compliance with the Building Code and other applicable ordinances of the City. 
(4)  After receipt of the written report from the Building Official, the applicant shall furnish written plans specifications, and cost estimates from properly licensed building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or other contractors, as necessary, for any work which is required to bring the structure into compliance as described in the Building Official's report. Such plans, specifications, and cost estimates are a required part of the application and must be provided, even if the work is to be performed by the applicant. 
(5)  The City Manager shall either grant or deny the request taking into consideration the location and size of the lot upon which the house, building, or structure is to be located, the size and construction of the house, building, or structure to be moved, the population density in the area, the location and use of buildings, structures, and land in the area; provided, that no request shall be granted if the City Manager shall find: 
(a)  That the house, building, or structure to be moved does not meet all of the requirements of all applicable ordinances of the City. 
(b)  That the lot or tract of land with the house, building, or structure thereon would not meet all of the requirements of the applicable ordinances of the City. 
(c)  That the house, building, or structure to be moved has deteriorated more than 50% of its original value by virtue of fire and by virtue of age or normal wear and tear or other elements. 
(d)  That the moving of such house, building, or structure upon the lot or tract of land would cause injury to persons or property or damage to the streets or other public improvements. 
(e)  That the applicant cannot ensure that he has the financial resources to bring the building up to City standards within one hundred eighty (180) days after completion of the move. 
(6)  If the City Manager shall grant the request to move such house, building, or structure, the Building Official shall cause a building permit to be issued authorizing the moving of such house, building, or structure upon the lot or tract of land under such conditions, requirements, or restrictions as the City Manager shall determine. 
(7)  The Building Official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy and compliance for the use of such house, building, or structure until it complies with all requirements of all applicable ordinances of the City and all required wood destroying insect treatment and related repairs are completed. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 14-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
D.  SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
(1)  No person, firm, or corporation shall move any house, building, or structure over, across, or along any public street in the City, except in accordance with the regulations for moving structures along City streets which shall be established by the City Council. 
(2)  Every house, building, or other structure being moved over, across, or along any public street after dark shall be equipped with sufficient lights continuously burning for the protection of the public. There shall be a minimum of five (5) red lights placed on each side of the building in such manner as to indicate the extreme width, height, and size of such house, building, or structure. 
(3)  No house, building, or other structure shall be parked or left standing for any period of time upon any public street in the City, except when in continuous travel upon said public street. 
(4)  When more than fifty percent (50%) of the street is occupied at night by the house, building, or other structure, or when in the opinion of the Building Official, flagman are necessary to direct or caution traffic, the owner or person moving such house or building shall employ, at their expense, two (2) flagmen to remain continuously with such house or building while the same is upon the public streets of the City. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS NOT REQUIRED TO BE NEGATIVED 
In any complaint and in any action or proceedings brought for the enforcement of any provision of this section, it shall not be necessary to negative any exception, excuse, provision, or exemption contained in this section, and the burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 
Inspection costs. All costs attributable to inspections of any house, building or structure, as required by this chapter shall be borne by the owner. Fees shall be levied in amounts set by City Council resolution. Fees may include the following and such others as may be imposed by City Council: 
(1)  Time, including travel time, of inspection personnel, when inspections are made outside city limits. 
(2)  Travel expense including a mileage, meals and incidental costs attributable to the inspection administered in conformity with city policies, when inspections are made outside city limits. 
(3)  Cost of engineering or other consultants. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
(1)  Failure of the owner to complete the facility and secure a Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Official within the time specified by this chapter may result in an order to remove the structure from within the City. The owner shall be given thirty (30) days to remove the structure after written notice. An appeal of the order to remove the structure may be made to the Board of Adjustments, by giving written notice to the Building Official within ten (10) days of receipt of notification to remove the building. The Board of Adjustments may extend the period to obtain the Certificate of Occupancy for a specific additional period or deny the appeal. In the event that the appeal is denied, the owner shall remove the structure from the City within thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 14: - MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS (MANUFACTURED HOME REGULATION) 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases are defined and shall not be construed as herein set forth unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning. 
Mobile Home: A mobile home, manufactured housing, manufactured home or a HUD-Code manufactured home and collectively means and refers to all as they are defined by the Texas Manufacturing Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) and also means industrial housing or buildings as defined in Article 5221f-1, Revised Statutes. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  PERMITS 
(1)  Permit Required 
No mobile home shall be placed on any individual lot or plot and occupied until a permit has been issued. Mobile homes which are moved into an established park are exempt only in that their fee shall be as established by City Council Resolution. Section 28 MOBILE HOME PARKS of this Chapter shall apply to what constitutes a Mobile Home Park. A permit shall be issued by the Building Official or Building Inspector conditioned upon compliance with the terms of this section and the Standard Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Gas and National Electric Codes. The fees for such permit will be in accordance with the single-family dwelling permits approved for those Codes within the corporate city limits. 
(2)  Application for Permit Requirements 
All applications for permits shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of applicant. 
(b)  Telephone number of applicant. 
(c)  Location of mobile home within the City. 
(d)  Plot Plan. A drawing or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot or tract of land upon which mobile home is or will be located, and the location of existing buildings or structures upon the lot, if any, together with the location of existing buildings or structures upon adjoining lots. 
(e)  Copy of permit from Galveston County for water well and septic tank if located outside the water district. 
(f)  Specify whether mobile home is to be used for commercial or residential purposes. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  LOCATION OF MOBILE HOME 
(1)  Any mobile home located in a flood zone as determined by FEMA must meet all Flood Hazard Area Regulations as set forth in Section 19 of this Chapter. 
(2)  Any mobile home placed on a city lot shall be placed: 
(a)  A minimum of thirty feet (30') from the front of the lot; 
(b)  A minimum of ten feet (10') from the back of the lot; 
(c)  A minimum of six feet (6') from the side street property lines, except when on a corner, and then a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the side property lines; 
(d)  A minimum of twenty feet (20') from any dwelling on the lot; 
(e)  Elevated sixteen and one-half inches (16½") above the natural ground elevation, provided that it exceeds the crown of the center line of the lowest street next to the property by eight inches (8"). 
(3)  Any such mobile home shall meet all minimal requirements for plumbing, heating and electrical systems which are applicable to permanent residential structures as set forth by the Code of Ordinances, City of Santa Fe, Texas. Each such mobile home to be located within the boundaries of the Galveston County Water Control and Improvement District Number 8 shall comply with the regulations regarding water and sewer, as established by the Galveston County Water Control and Improvement District Number 8. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 14-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 2) 
D.  PARKING MOBILE HOMES ON STREET 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home on any street in the City in which such parking restricts the natural flow of traffic, blocks an entrance way to either public or private property, or creates a hazard, and under no circumstances shall any person park any mobile home on a street within the City for a period in excess of three (3) hours. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  INSPECTIONS TO ENFORCE THIS SECTION 
(1)  The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this section. Such officers shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times, upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this section. Inspections shall be made whenever any such official has reason to believe that any provision of this section is not being complied with. 
(2)  After the issuance of the initial permit for a mobile home, the Building Inspector's office may charge the owner of any mobile home a fee as established by Council resolution for each reinspection required to assure correction of previously noted deficiencies in compliance with the requirements of this section. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to waive such fee when, in his opinion, the recall inspection was required by circumstances beyond the control of the person responsible for correcting the deficiency. The deficiency must have been reported in writing to the owner for this fee to be applicable. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Development Officer shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-2018 states: 
"SUSPENSION AND MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES 
(a)  The following ordinances and regulations are hereby suspended or modified as indicated: 
All ordinances or regulations prohibiting or restricting manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, buses, vehicles with camper tops, motor homes, portable or temporary buildings, including but not limited to: City Code, Chapter 3, Section 14; the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.05, Section 5.08 and Section 5.09; are suspended or modified to allow the minimal use of same while the property owner is without electric power, or is making construction repairs related to Hurricane Harvey, provided the property owner is taking diligent steps to make said repairs. 
(b)  The suspension or modifications of the ordinances and regulations listed in Subsection (a) shall continue to remain in effect for an additional six (6) months, through February 25, 2019." 
Ordinance No. 08-2017 of September 14, 2017 and Ordinance No. 02-2018 of February 22, 2018 provided similar emergency measures which were superceded by Ordinance No. 11-2018.  
SECTION 15: - REGULATION OF SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING 
A.  REGULATION OF SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING 
(1)  Industrialized Housing is defined in Chapter 1202 of the Texas Occupation Code. 
(2)  Single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have all local permits and licenses that are applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, single-family or duplex industrialized housing is real property. 
(4)  Any industrialized housing shall: 
(a)  Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within five hundred feet (500') of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the County; 
(b)  Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within five hundred feet (500') of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located; 
(c)  Comply with City aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and 
(d)  Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation. 
(5)  For purposes of subsection (4), "value" means the taxable value of the industrialized housing and lot after installation of the housing. 
(6)  Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect, install, or move any industrialized housing into the City shall first make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permits. In addition to any other information otherwise required for said permits, the application shall: 
(a)  Identify each single-family dwelling located within five hundred feet (500') of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located and show the taxable value for each such dwelling as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county; 
(b)  Describe the exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration for each single-family dwelling located within five hundred feet (500') of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located; 
(c)  Describe the permanent foundation and method of attachment proposed for the industrialized housing; 
(d)  State the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing; and 
(e)  Indicate the deed restrictions otherwise applicable to the real property on which the industrialized housing is to be located. 
(7)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(a)  Fails to make an application for a permit as required by this section; or 
(b)  Constructs, erects, installs, or moves any industrialized housing into the City which does not comply with this section. 
(See generally Texas Occupation Code Chapter 1202, especially Section 1202.253.) 
B.  CONFLICT 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Development Officer shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 16: - RESERVED  
SECTION 17: - RESERVED 
CODE MODIFICATIONS AND STORMWATER REGULATION  
SECTION 18: - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS TO THE BUILDING CODES 
A.  SPECIFIC SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS TO THE BUILDING CODES ADOPTED 
The International Building Code, International Residential Code and Supplementary International Codes, herein adopted, are hereby supplemented by additional regulations as follow. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE 
The design professional in responsible charge shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
Exception: Farm buildings, not accessible to the public, and single-family residential buildings. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  FOUNDATION ELEVATION AND LOCATION 
Where curb and gutter streets are present, all new construction and substantial improvements of structures shall have the lowest floor elevated not less than eighteen inches (18") above any street or curb adjoining the property, whichever is higher. 
Where properties adjoin State Highways, new construction or substantial improvements of structures shall have the lowest floor elevated not less than eight inches (8") above State Highway 6, FM 646 or FM 1764. 
When the above conditions do not exist, all new construction and substantial improvements of structures shall have the lowest floor elevated not less than twelve inches (12") above the nearest public street or road adjoining the property. 
(1)  Footings shall be set no less than twelve inches (12") below natural grade nor less than twelve inches (12") below the surface of fill compacted to ninety percent (90%) Modified Proctor. 
(2)  Foundations shall extend from the footings to a minimum elevation as stated above, but not less than required by the provisions for flood hazard reduction of this chapter. Foundations shall be constructed of poured-in-place concrete, pre-cast concrete monolithic footing-foundation units or masonry units bedded in mortar with grout filled voids as applicable, reinforced as stated elsewhere in this section. 
(3)  Exposed primary anchorage components installed anywhere in the foundation zone shall be galvanized steel, protected by a finish approved by the Building Official, or of weather resistant structural materials approve by the Building Official. All such anchorage devices shall have no cross sectional dimension less than three-eighths inch ( 3/8 ") including but not limited to bolts, clip angles, strap anchors and other anchorage devices. This provision shall not restrict the use of code approved shear connectors installed for high wind resistance when fully encapsulated in the walls and foundation or when installed outside of the foundation zone. No building shall be anchored with earth anchors. (Exception: Portable Accessory structures and Manufactured Housing may use earth anchors in compliance with the International Codes and the provisions of Subsection D., WINDSTORM RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION herein). 
(4)  Foundation anchorage shall extend from footings continuously to sill or floor supporting beams and be composed of steel or approved metal anchorage components of no less than five-eighths inch ( 5/8 ") nominal diameter or of minimum cross section as required elsewhere herein. 
(5)  Exterior perimeter of all foundation zones shall be enclosed by a stem wall or rigid skirting material between footing and the wall above. Ventilation through the enclosing system shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) of the enclosing surface area excluding columns, pilasters, shear walls and similar structural elements. Openings shall be protected in accordance with the city building codes. Exception: Where the vertical distance between the grade elevation (surround and under the structure) and the top of the elevation zone is seven feet (7') or more, skirting may be deleted. Exposed perimeter of slab-on-grade foundations need not be skirted. 
(6)  Foundation zone, for purposes of this regulation, is a volume defined by a plane coincident with the bottom surface of the lowest floor joist or floor supporting beam, a plane coincident with the bottom surface of the lowest footing and the vertical projection of the outermost perimeter walls of the building. In concrete slab-on-grade construction the foundation zone lies between the uppermost surface of the floor slab and the plane of the bottom surface of the footings and bounded by the vertical projection of the building slab. 
(7)  Free-standing non-habitable structures less than four hundred (400) square feet in area may not be required to comply with requirements of this subsection when anchored against uplifting and overturning and in full compliance with Subsection 19(C) "Windstorm Resistant Construction", following. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 04-2011 of February 24, 2011, Sec. 2; Ordinance No. 14-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 3; Ordinance No. 01-2015 of January 8, 2015, Sec. 1) 
D.  WINDSTORM RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION 
All new structures or modifications to structures which require a building permit shall conform to wind resistant construction standards as promulgated by the State Board of Insurance under the Windstorm Inspection Program. A Certificate of Compliance (Form WPI-8) issued by the Texas Department of Insurance shall be filed by the contractor responsible for the construction or by the owner of such structure within sixty (60) days from completion of such construction. Site built Accessory buildings with a market value of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) are exempt from the requirements to file a Certificate of Compliance. Portable accessory structures of any size and market value are exempt from requirements to file a Certificate of Compliance if tied-downs and anchoring of the accessory structure are approved by the Building Official. Occupancy permits issued during the sixty-day period shall be temporary. Failure to provide the required Windstorm Certificate shall result in cancellation of the Occupancy Certificate. 
(1)  Portable Accessory Structures shall be defined as structures engineered and pre-fabricated offsite. Examples include metal or pressure treated wooden storage sheds, workshops, garages and barns. 
(2)  Tie-downs and anchoring systems will be reviewed using recommended information from the Manufactured Housing Research Alliance Guide to Foundation and Support Systems for Manufactured Homes. HUD Code, Section 3280.306 Windstorm protection may also be reviewed when approving Portable Accessory Structure Windstorm Certificate exemptions. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 04-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 04-2011 of February 24, 2011, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 04-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 1) 
E.  SITE WORK AND STRUCTURE LOCATION 
All new structures on a lot must meet the setback or minimum yard requirements as set forth in the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance with the following additional provisions: 
(1)  Detached structures must be at least twenty feet (20') from any other structure on a lot unless otherwise provided herein; 
(2)  Detached structures associated with the residential use of the property, such as garages, well houses, storage sheds, etc., must be at least five feet (5') from any other structure on the lot; 
(3)  Structures are considered detached unless joined by a common wall; 
(4)  A water well house no larger than fifty (50) square feet may be placed closer to the property line than the setback requirement stipulated herein, only to the extent necessary to meet the established requirements for the installation of water wells and septic systems in Galveston County. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Development Officer shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
STORM WATER  
SECTION 19: - FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS 
NOTE: Appendix G, "Flood Resistant Construction' is adopted under Section 2 (A) INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE. The provisions therein are intended to supplement the provisions contained in this section. Attention is directed to Section 1, "General", D. CONFLICT, herein. 
A.  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 
(1)  Statutory Authorization 
The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of Santa Fe, Texas does ordain as follows: 
(2)  Findings of Fact 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Santa Fe are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(3)  Statement of Purpose 
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Protect human life and health; 
(b)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(c)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(d)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(e)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(f)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(g)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(4)  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this section uses the following methods: 
(a)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(d)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(e)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
B.  DEFINITIONS 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial Fan Flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant Structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure 
Area of Future Conditions Flood Hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base Flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the Base Flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway Wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical Feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated Building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing Construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Elevation Study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) see Flood Elevation Study. 
Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain Management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain Management Regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood Protection System means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood Proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway see Regulatory Floodway. 
Functionally Dependent Use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic Structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee System means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured Home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean Sea Level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New Construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special Flood Hazard Area see Area of Special Flood Hazard 
Start of Construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water Surface Elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
C.  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(1)  Lands to Which These Provisions Apply 
The section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(2)  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Galveston County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated August 15, 2019, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated August 15, 2019 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2019 of July 25, 2019, Sec. 1) 
(3)  Establishment of Development Permit 
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Compliance 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
(5)  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 
This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another section, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(6)  Interpretation 
In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be; (a) considered as minimum requirements; (b) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(7)  Warning and Disclaimer or Liability 
The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
D.  ADMINISTRATION 
(1)  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator 
The City Manager is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this section and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(2)  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator 
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(c)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this section. 
(d)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(e)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(f)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(g)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(h)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection C. (2), the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of subsection E. 
(i)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(j)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(3)  Permit Procedures 
(a)  Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(i)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(ii)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(iii)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection E. (2) (b); 
(iv)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(v)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection B. (2) (a); 
(b)  Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the Flooplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this section and the following relevant factors: 
(i)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(ii)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(iii)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(iv)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(v)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(vi)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(vii)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(viii)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(ix)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(4)  Variance Procedures 
(a)  The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this section. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection D. (3) (b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this section, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this section (subsection A. (3)). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(i)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(ii)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 1) showing a good and sufficient cause; 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(iii)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in subsection D. (4) (a-i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
E.  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
(1)  General Standards 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(a)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(b)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(d)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(e)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(f)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(g)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(2)  Specific Standards 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) subsection C. (2); (ii) subsection D. (2) (h); or (iii) subsection E. (3) (c), the following provisions are required: 
(a)  (a) Residential Construction - new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to twelve inches (12") above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection D. (3) (a), is satisfied. 
(b)  Nonresidential Construction - new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to twelve inches (12") above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(c)  Enclosures - new construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(d)  Manufactured Homes - 
(i)  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(ii)  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to twelve inches (12") or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(iii)  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (d) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(e)  Recreational Vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection D. (3) (a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (d) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(3)  Standards for Subdivision Proposals 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsection A. (2), (3) and (4), of this section. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain Development Permit requirements of subsection C. (3); subsection D. (3); and the provisions of subsection E. of this section. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to subsection C. (2) or subsection D. (2) (h) of this section. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(4)  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones) 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection C. (2), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified). 
(b)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
(i)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified), or 
(ii)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the Base Flood Elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(c)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in subsection D. (3) are satisfied. 
(d)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(5)  Floodways 
Floodways - located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection C. (2), are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(b)  If subsection E. (5) (a) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection E. 
(c)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 19-2012 of September 13, 2012, Secs. 1—3) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 13-2012, § 1, adopted May 10, 2012, amended the Code by amending in its entirety the former Chapter 3, § 19, and adding a new § 19. The former Chapter 3, § 19 pertained to flood hazard area regulations, and derived from Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004.  
SECTION 20: - CULVERTS, DRAINAGE, DETENTION, RIGHT-OF-WAY DRAINAGE AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS 
A.  CULVERTS, DRAINAGE, DETENTION, RIGHTS-OF-WAY DRAINAGE AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS REGULATIONS ADOPTED 
Regulations are herein adopted to govern the construction, maintenance and modification of drainage structures in public rights-of-way, within dedicated private easements and any construction activities affecting the function, restriction or modification of any public drainage system. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to install, alter, remove, replace, or change in any manner any drainage pipe or other drainage structure on any right-of-way for street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, drainage, or any other public place within the City, without having first obtained a permit, as required herein, or without complying with the provisions of this section. 
C.  PERMIT PROCEDURES 
(1)  Applications for such permits shall be made to the city's director of public works, and shall describe the location of the proposed drainage pipe or structure to be installed, altered, removed, replaced, or changed, the name of the person, firm, or corporation requesting that the work be done, the name of the person, firm, or corporation responsible for covering the drainage pipe and restoring the ground to its former condition and shall contain an agreement that applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. A permit fee in the appropriate amount payable to the City shall accompany each application. Upon receipt of each application, an inspection shall be performed by the appropriate city officials and/or employees to determine the advisability of the issuance of such permit, the proper size pipe to use, the proper grade at which such pipe should be installed, the proper location for said pipe, and any other specifications appropriate to the improvement of drainage in the area. Upon the determination of specifications, the City shall notify the applicant by issuance of permit and applicant shall then purchase and furnish the City the proper size, quality, and amount of drainage pipe specified in such permit, at which time the City shall install said pipe. Applicant shall be responsible for purchasing and spreading fill material to cover pipe in a manner approved by the City and shall complete the covering of said pipe to City satisfaction within thirty (30) days from date pipe is completely installed. 
(2)  The City may install culverts for entrances for a fee at the rate, as established by resolution of City Council, payable to the City upon approval of the application. Entrances shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  WITHIN APPROVED SUBDIVISIONS 
It shall not be necessary to obtain a permit, as required herein, for the original installation of any drainage pipe or structures which have been denoted on a subdivision plat which has been approved by the City. All costs of such installation shall be at the expense of the subdivision developer. The installation of such pipes and structures after acceptance by the City shall require a permit. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE AFFECTING OPERATION OF PUBLIC DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
The following standards shall apply to all construction and maintenance activities affecting the operation of public drainage systems, and shall apply equally to new construction and post-construction activities impacting same. The Streets and Drainage Superintendent or City Engineer shall approve all grades, new construction, maintenance, armoring, or sodding and shall establish standards of quality for construction and maintenance of public drainage systems including roadside ditches. 
(1)  General 
The addition of fill to any lot or tract of ground shall be accomplished in compliance with these regulations. No such fill material shall be placed in a manner that will allow such fill materials to enter into or otherwise compromise any roadside or public drainage system. Silting and storm water or wastewater runoff pollution shall be retained on the property in an approved manner. 
(2)  Construction Activities 
Upon the issuance of a building permit the builder and owner shall become responsible for re-construction and maintenance of roadside and other public drainage systems affected by the builder's construction activities until such time as the construction is completed and occupancy approved. 
(a)  Prior to construction and occupancy of any building, for which a permit shall be issued, the builder shall first obtain and establish approved grades and profiles defined by benchmarks placed at intervals along the ditch flow line. This mandate applies to drainage systems adjacent to and across such construction site. Such drainage system shall be maintained at all times, unobstructed, and in a fully functional working condition during the course of construction activities. 
(b)  The builder and property owner shall be responsible for the establishment of a fully-sodded drainage system or yard between the road berm and private property line across the full lot frontage or affected length of frontage as determined by the Streets and Drainage Superintendent. Sod placement shall result in a final grade as specified by the pre-construction approved benchmarks. 
(c)  Prior to completion and occupancy of any permitted construction activity the builder or owner shall notify the Streets and Drainage Department, and therefrom, obtain a final inspection and approval of the drainage systems. 
(3)  Post Construct 
Property owners, tenants, and their contractors shall not diminish or obstruct public drainage systems adjacent to or across private property as result of land filling, topographical re-profiling, construction or landscaping activities. 
(4)  Closing of roadside bar ditches prohibited 
(a)  Open bar ditches of city streets shall not be closed in an amount greater than forty percent (40%) of the lot or tract frontage width along any given street or fifty-six feet (56'), whichever is less, to preserve existing storm water detention capacity throughout the community. Culvert sizes and configurations shall be approved by the Santa Fe Streets and Drainage Superintendent or City Engineer. Approved inlets shall be installed at no less than thirty-two-foot intervals. 
(b)  State highway and farm-to-market roads shall be permitted to have closed bar ditches according to the following standards: From zero (0) to one hundred fifteen feet (115') of frontage width, forty-five feet (45') of culvert may be installed. Lot frontages greater than one hundred fifteen feet (115') in width may have culverts installed up to forty percent (40%) of the frontage width. Maximum culvert length measurements need not include the length of tapered ends. 
(c)  Exception: A ditch may be converted to a closed system if the closed volume equals or exceeds the volume of the existing approved and correctly graded ditch. Ditch volume is measured downward from a plane parallel to and at the grade elevation of the land fronting on the ditch. The invert of the enclosing structure shall not be lower than the flow line of the correctly graded open ditch. Calculations and design shall be performed by a qualified civil engineer and installation may be required to be performed by an approved contractor under a permit. Permit fees shall be specified in Subsection B. PERMIT PROCEDURES, paragraph (2), of this section. 
(5)  Drainage and detentions structures in drainage easements located on private property 
Drainage and detention structures in drainage easements located on private property shall be maintained by the property owner until such time as an alternative approved system is authorized by the City. The standard of maintenance required of the owner shall be that established by the original engineering documents giving rise to the structures. Lacking documentary proof of such engineering, the level of maintenance shall be established by the City Engineer applying engineering principals consistent with the engineering art available at or near the time of the original design. In no case shall the capacity of a detention structure be reduce or compromised by alteration, fill, storm water diversion or modification to configuration, structures, flow control structures, weirs, profiles or capacities without written approval of the City based on a design by a qualified design professional. 
(6)  Penalty 
Any activity in violation of this section may be corrected by the City at the property owner's, tenant's or contractor's expense in addition to such penalties as shall otherwise be levied by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Drainage Superintendent and Development Officer shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein.  
SECTION 21: - RESERVED  
SECTION 22: - STORM WATER POLLUTION CONTROL REGULATIONS 
A.  GENERALLY 
(1)  Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Accelerated erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit. 
Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this [section]. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Clean Water Act (CWA) means The Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover. 
Commencement of construction means the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating activities, or other similar activities. 
Construction activity means activities subject to TPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Construction site operator means the MS4 operator associated with a construction project that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The operator has operational control over construction plans and specifications to the extent necessary to meet the requirements and conditions of this general permit; and 
(2)  The operator has day-to-day operational control of those activities at a project which are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions (e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan or comply with other permit conditions). 
Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of streamflow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Drainageway means any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
Erosion control means measures that prevent erosion. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
Facility or activity means any TPDES "point source" or any other facility or activity (including land or appurtenances thereto) that is subject to regulation under the TPDES program. 
Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from [A] soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Illicit connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to the stormwater system, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the stormwater system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater system, except as exempted in Subsection B(5) of this section. 
Impervious cover means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.). 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES or TPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
Industrial stormwater permit means a Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
Infiltration facility means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land disturbance activity or land disturbing activity means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a separate storm sewer system owned or operated by a state, city, town, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over the disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization. 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Redevelopment means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding one acre in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential. 
Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
Site means a parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Site development permit means a permit issued by the city for which the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading. 
Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater management means the use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat. 
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP or SWP 3) means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
Stormwater system means the system or network of stormwater and surface water management facilities managed and maintained by the city including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities and other components as well as all natural waterways. 
Stormwater Treatment Practices (STPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
TPDES means the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
Watercourse means any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water which are delineated by the city. 
Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to the public storm drain system. 
(Ordinance No. 12-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
B.  ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION 
(1)  Purpose/intent 
The purpose of this Subsection B is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the stormwater system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This Subsection B establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Subsection B are: 
(a)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(c)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Subsection B. 
(2)  Applicability 
This Subsection B shall apply to all water entering the stormwater system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(3)  Responsibility for administration 
The city manager or his/her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Subsection B. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the city manager to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(4)  Ultimate responsibility 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Subsection B are minimum standards; therefore, this Subsection B does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(5)  Discharge prohibitions 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal stormwater system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
(i)  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the storm water system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this Subsection B: 
1.  Flushing of waterlines or other potable water sources; 
2.  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted streamflows; 
3.  Rising groundwater and springs; 
4.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration; 
5.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
6.  Foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems); 
7.  Crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensate; 
8.  Individual residential vehicle washing; 
9.  Vehicle washing fundraising events by not-for-profit organizations; 
10.  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
11.  Pavement and exterior building wash water conducted without the use of detergents or other chemicals; and 
12.  Swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one parts per million (PPM) chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing, as long as a verbal notification is provided to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
d.  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES or TPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that further written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to construct, use, maintain or continue the existence of illicit connections to the City of Santa Fe, Galveston County Consolidated Drainage District #1 or the Texas Department of Transportation's storm drain systems. 
(ii)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(iii)  A person is considered to be in violation of this Subsection B if the person connects a line conveying sanitary sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(6)  Suspension of MS4 access 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city manager or his/her designee may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, the health or welfare of persons, the MS4, or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging into the MS4 in violation of this Subsection B may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
(c)  Reinstatement without permission. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(7)  Industrial or construction activity discharges 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES or TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager or his/her designee prior to allowing discharges to the MS4. 
(8)  Submission of notice of intent to city 
(a)  The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the city manager or his/her designee at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the EPA or the TCEQ as applicable. The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the city manager or his/her designee either in person or by mail. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the city manager or his/her designee. 
(9)  Monitoring of discharges 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(i)  The city manager or his/her designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Subsection B as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Subsection B. If a facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(ii)  Facility operators shall allow the city manager or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(iii)  The city manager or his/her designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(iv)  The city manager or his/her designee has the right to require the facility to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(v)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city manager or his/her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(vi)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager or his/her designee access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this Subsection B. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this Subsection B. 
(vii)  If the city manager or his/her designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Subsection B, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Subsection B or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(10)  Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices 
The city will adopt policies identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the stormwater system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES or TPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES and/or TPDES permit. 
(11)  Watercourse protection 
Every landowner who owns property, or is responsible for maintaining an easement through which a watercourse passes, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the landowner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(12)  Notification of spills 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or other person responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the stormwater system, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials said person shall notify the Galveston County Health District, who is the authorized enforcement agency of the City of Santa Fe, no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city manager or his/her designee within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(13)  Enforcement 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city manager or his/her designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation: 
(i)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(ii)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(iii)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(iv)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(v)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(vi)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  Notice for remediation and deadline. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(14)  Appeal of notice of violation 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency to the city manager or his/her designee. The notice of appeal must be received within two (2) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city manager or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city manager or their designee shall be final. 
(15)  Enforcement measures after appeal 
If any violation of which a person has received notice as required by Subsection B (13) of this section has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the city manager or his/her designee upholding the decision, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(16)  Cost of abatement of the violation 
In the event of action by the authorized enforcement agency as described in [Subsection B (15)] above, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs, within thirty (30) days after the abatement of the violation. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the city manager or his/her designee or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ordinance No. 12-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
C.  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
(1)  Introduction/Purpose 
(a)  During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality, and causes the silting of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches, and the dredging of waterways. In addition, clearing grading during construction causes the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and to provide a healthy living environment for citizens of the city. 
(b)  The purpose of this Subsection C is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 
(2)  Permits 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any land disturbing activity without a permit issued by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(i)  No person shall be granted a permit for land disturbing activity which would require the uncovering of one (1) acre or more, without the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(ii)  An erosion and sediment control plan is not required for the following activities: 
a.  Any emergency activity immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources; or 
b.  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(iii)  Each application for a permit to allow land disturbing activities shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan, and that a site operator shall be on site on all days where construction or grading activity takes place. 
(3)  Review and approval 
The city manager or his/her designee will review each erosion and sediment control plan to determine its conformance with the provisions of this local regulation. The city manager or his/her designee shall, in writing: 
(i)  Approve the plan; 
(ii)  Approve the plan subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the approval subject to these conditions; or 
(iii)  Disapprove the plan, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
(4)  Design requirements 
Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(5)  Modifications to the plan 
Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee and shall be processed and approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the city manager or his/her designee by written authorization to the permittee. 
(6)  Clearing and grading 
Clearing and grading activities shall not be permitted, except when in compliance all other chapters of this Code. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns shall be used to the satisfaction of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(7)  Inspection 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee that the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the city manager or his/her designee shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. 
(b)  The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved erosion and sediment control plans. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan, and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the city manager or his/her designee at the time interval specified in the approved permit. 
(c)  The city manager or his/her designee shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under the above mentioned section. 
(8)  Stop work order; revocation of permit 
In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this Subsection C violates the terms of the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city manager or his/her designee may suspend or revoke the site development permit, in addition to any other penalty provisions contained in this Subsection C. 
(Ordinance No. 12-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1) 
D.  POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF 
(1)  General provisions 
(a)  Findings of fact. It is hereby determined that: 
(i)  Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(ii)  This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants; and 
(iii)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. 
Therefore, the city establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection D is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This Subsection D seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(i)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, silting, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels; 
(ii)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(iii)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(iv)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(c)  Applicability. This Subsection D shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption by the city manager or his/her designee under the specifications of this Subsection D. The Subsection D also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans must also ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans. 
(i)  To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the city has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing one or more acres of land. The following activities may be exempt from these storm water performance criteria: 
a.  Additions or modifications to existing single family structures; 
b.  Developments that do not disturb more than one (1) acre of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan; or 
c.  Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(ii)  When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in this Subsection D, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current engineering design specifications manual. This criterion is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(d)  Engineering Design Specifications manual. The design specifications manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the city, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria shall meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(2)  Permit procedures and requirements 
(a)  Permit required. No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this Subsection D prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Application requirements. Unless specifically excluded by this Subsection D, any landowner or land operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the city manager or his/her designee a permit application on a form provided for that purpose. 
(3)  Exemptions to stormwater management requirements 
Exemptions for providing stormwater management are as follows: 
(a)  Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this Subsection D, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee for approval. 
(b)  The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(i)  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this Subsection D; 
(ii)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city manager or his/her designee and the implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance; 
(iii)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for longterm operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice; or 
(iv)  Nonstructural practices will be used on the site to reduce: a) the generation of stormwater from the site, b) the size and cost of stormwater storage and c) the pollutants generated at the site. These nonstructural practices will be explained in detail in the stormwater design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the city manager or his/her designee may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager or his/her designee that the variance will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways: 
(i)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, and other structures; 
(ii)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(iii)  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or silting; or 
(iv)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property. 
(Ordinance No. 12-2012 of May 10, 2012, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 23: - RESERVED 
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE REGULATION  
SECTION 24: - EXCAVATION IN CITY STREETS 
A.  EXCAVATION PERMIT 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any excavation or embankment in any street, alley, or public easement in the City without first obtaining a permit from the City. The permit shall specify the date and time of day of proposed excavation. Public utility companies holding a valid franchise with the City may perform emergency work, but it shall be necessary for any such utility company to obtain a permit within twenty-four (24) hours following such work or the next day the city hall is open for business. Utility companies holding a valid franchise shall not be required to pay a fee. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  STREET REPLACEMENT 
The person or firm responsible for such excavation referred to in Subsection A. above, shall immediately, as soon as practical, replace the street in as good a condition as existed prior to the excavation or deposit monies with the City in an amount sufficient to accomplish the work. Such repair work shall be in accordance with standard city specifications for street cut repairs. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  SAFETY EQUIPMENT 
The person responsible for excavations referred to in Subsection A. above, shall place proper guardrails and signal lights around the excavation or embankment to warn the public. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Development Officer shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 25: - OBSTRUCTIONS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
The following are hereby declared to be a nuisance and/or a traffic hazard and the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to remove same or cause to be moved without notice: 
A.  OBSTRUCTIONS 
Obstructions of any kind, maintained, constructed, placed, planted, or grown in the right-of-way of any public street, except single tree trunks pruned and trimmed to a height of seven feet (7') above the walk grade and spaced at least ten feet (10') apart; and other plantings trimmed and pruned, so as not to encroach over and into public right-of-way, and so as not to exceed two and one-half feet (2½') in height above the walk grade and except further, all utility poles, street signs, traffic signs, and other devices placed in such areas under lawful authority of the City. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  SIGNS AND AWNINGS 
Any sign, awning, or other protrusion which hangs over or protrudes over any sidewalk in the City at a height of less than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  TREES, PLANTS AND SHRUBS 
Any tree, plant, or shrub which hangs over the sidewalk and which is not trimmed to a height of seven feet (7') above said sidewalk, or any tree, plant, or shrub which hangs over any street or alley and which is not trimmed to a height of twelve feet (12') above said alley or street. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 26: - RESERVED 
CONSTRUCTION/DEVELOPMENT PROJECT REGULATIONS  
SECTION 27: - MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS 
NOTE: The development of high density housing requires that such projects comply with both the provisions herein and with the provisions of the Santa Fe Subdivision/Development regulations. The Development Officer shall initially interpret the sections of the Development Regulations applicable to high-density housing development. Such decisions shall be with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission which shall exercise final authority over interpretation thereof. All such projects shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval. 
A.  INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE 
(1)  Intent of Section 
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this section, it is the intention of the City Council that the principles, standards, and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the planning and developing of multi-family dwellings in the City; and where other provisions or ordinances shall control. 
Multi-family dwellings shall be defined as follows: a building or portion thereof designed for or occupied as a home of three (3) or more families or households living independently of each other, including apartment houses, row houses, tenements, apartment hotels, condominiums, and townhouses. 
(2)  Variances 
The Planning and Zoning Commission, as established by the City, shall hear requests for variances from the requirements of this section and make recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall have final authority in granting variances. Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in undue hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. Pecuniary hardship to the developer, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
B.  DEVELOPMENT PLAN; REQUIRED INFORMATION 
The developer will submit two (2) copies of a site development plan showing all buildings and structures, setback and property lines, parking, and other major improvements, and will also include the following information as applicable: 
(a)  A topography and drainage map of plan and incoming drainage rational formula showing frequency concentration time and runoff factor and quantity. 
(b)  The exact location, dimensions, description, and name of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements, or other right-of-ways, blocks, lots, and other sites within the developed area with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles with radii area, central angles, degree of curvature, tangent distance, and length of all curves where appropriate. 
(c)  Two (2) copies of final plan showing a plan and profile of proposed sanitary and storm sewers, with grades and pipe sizes indicated. Plan shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer. 
(d)  Two (2) sets of plans and specifications for paving and drainage, which have been prepared by an engineer. 
(e)  A certification by the surveyor or engineer, responsible for the preparation of the plan and supporting data, attesting to its accuracy. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
(1)  All street improvements shall be in accordance with any one (1) of the following methods of street construction as detailed and depicted in the Subdivision Ordinance, Article 6, REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND DESIGN AND THE CURRENT Public Utilities Specification as adopted by Resolution. 
(2)  An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes, and other underground and aboveground drainage structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where the runoff of storm water and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. The developer shall submit data and plans for drainage facilities as directed by the City and under policies for storm drainage installation for the City. All drainage installations shall be at the expense of the developer. 
(3)  Underground storm drains shall be utilized in every condition where outfall conveyance systems permit. Storm water conveyance systems shall be designed to accommodate a five-year frequency storm with adequate overload relief for a twenty-five-year storm. Design of all bridges, culverts, and open channels are to be based on a twenty-five-year frequency. However, all drainage improvements shall be designed and constructed to pass a one-hundred-year frequency storm, based on one hundred percent (100%) development of the watershed without flooding and ground floor of existing or proposed habitable structures and to the standards of the Santa Fe Subdivision Development Ordinance, to the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance, and such other ordinances prescribing construction and development. The more restrictive provisions shall prevail. 
(4)  Additional Requirements for Multi-Family Dwellings. Multi-family dwellings shall comply with all applicable City building requirements, including the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  FINAL PLAN APPROVAL 
(1)  The development plan and all required information are to be submitted to the Development Officer for Planning Commission review. 
(2)  The development plan must be approved by the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any building permits. Any variances will require Planning Commission review and City Council approval, as herein provided. 
(3)  Lack of action by the Planning Commission at or before the Commission meeting after the expiration of thirty (30) days following official receipt of the development plan, or disapproval, will allow the developer to proceed to City Council for action or reversal of Planning Commission action. 
(4)  Approval of the development plan is good for a period of six (6) months, after which the developer must submit a new plan or request an extension from the Planning Commission. 
(5)  The developer shall furnish the City with one (1) set of reproducible "as built" plans for any public improvements, such as street paving, drainage structures, water mains, and sewer mains within thirty (30) days after completion of construction. 
(6)  Any required public improvements must be completed and a maintenance bond filed as provided in the Subdivision Ordinance, Chapter 8, Section 7, prior to the issuance of building permits for the construction of the multi-family dwelling. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
E.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Development Officer and Building Official shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 28: - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
NOTE: The development of a mobile home park requires that such project comply with both the provisions herein and with the provisions of the Santa Fe Subdivision/Development regulations. The Development Officer shall initially interpret the sections of the Development Regulations applicable to mobile home park development. Such decisions shall be with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission which shall exercise final authority over interpretation thereof. All such projects shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval. 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as herein set forth unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning: 
(1)  Natural or artificial barrier: Any river, pond, canal, railroad, levee, embankment, fence or hedge, shrub fence or hedge, to be at least six feet (6') in height and obstructing view to the extent of one hundred percent (100%). 
(2)  Park: Mobile home park. 
(3)  Person: Any person, firm, trust, partnership, association, or corporation. 
(4)  Mobile home : A mobile home, manufactured housing, manufactured home or a HUD-Code manufactured home and collectively means and refers to all as they are defined by the Texas Manufacturing Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) and also means industrial housing or buildings as defined in Article 5221f-1, Revised Statutes. The term "mobile home" as used in this section shall include travel trailer unless otherwise stated. 
(5)  Mobile home park : Any plot of ground upon which three (3) or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. The term "mobile home park" as used in this section of the Construction Regulations shall include RV park unless otherwise stated. 
(6)  Skirt: Concealment from view of the under carriage on all sides of a mobile home. 
(7)  Mobile home stand: The space within the mobile home park on which a mobile home is to be located and is the space designed for accommodation of one (1) mobile home, together with such open space as is required by this section. 
(8)  Tie downs: Securing of the mobile home with anchors into the ground to prevent movement caused by wind. 
(9)  Dwelling: Residential trailer/manufactured home occupied by any person or persons as their usual place of residence. 
(10)  Travel trailer/motor home : A portable recreational vehicle built on a chassis and designed for travel or as defined by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(11)  Hard surface: Concrete, asphalt with acceptable base or approved equal. 
(12)  RV park : A recreational vehicle park shall be any plot of ground upon which three (3) or more travel trailer, motor home or recreational vehicles, occupied for temporary, dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 18-2007 of July 12, 2007, Secs. 1, 2, 4) 
B.  PERMITS 
(1)  Construction, Occupancy of Permanent Residential Structures 
No permit shall be issued for the construction or occupancy of a permanent residential structure in any mobile home park, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  One (1) existing residential structure may be retained or one (1) new residential structure may be constructed for the occupancy of the owner or operator of the park. 
(b)  An existing residence may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building for use by the residents of the mobile home park. 
(c)  A separate permanent structure may be constructed for use as a clubhouse, community center, or service building. 
(2)  Permit Required 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the City unless he holds a valid permit issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration, or extension proposed. 
(3)  Application Requirements 
All applications for permits shall contain the following: 
(a)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  Location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(c)  Location of boundary or property lines; width and location of platted streets, alleys, and easements within or adjacent to the proposed mobile home park; present physical features on the land including natural and artificial water courses, ditches, ravines, culverts, bridges, present structures and any other features directly pertinent to the proposed mobile home park; location of any existing above or underground utilities, or other pipelines, showing pipe sizes of sewer, gas, water mains, and drainage facilities, outline of any existing wooded areas, and the location. A topographic map of the property with contour intervals of one foot (1') with all grades shown thereon tied to National Geodetic Vertical Datum. The description of the property shall include the acreage. Plats shall be located with respect to an original corner of the survey of which the land is a part, with lengths and bearings on all property and easement lines shown. 
The plat shall show the property street system design, location, and width of the proposed streets within the mobile home park, lots and other features and their relationship to streets, alleys, and easements in adjacent subdivisions. If there are not adjacent subdivisions thereto, a vicinity or location map, drawn at a smaller scale, shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat, this map to show the boundaries and ownership of adjacent properties; the location and distance to the nearest subdivisions; and the manner in which the streets, alleys, easements, and highways of the proposed mobile home park may eventually connect with those of the nearest existing subdivision. Plat shall also show proposed buildings, driveways, parking areas and the lot sizes, mobile home locations, streets, walkways, alleys, and the proposed connections to city rights-of-way. 
(d)  Classification and designation of the intended uses of land within the mobile home park proposed. 
(e)  Date, north arrow, and scale of the drawing. 
(f)  Utilities: 
(i)  Preliminary plan of proposed water distribution system along with approval of governing body. 
(ii)  Preliminary plan of proposed sewage collection system including flow line elevations along with approval of governing body. 
(iii)  Preliminary plan for on-site and off-site drainage including flow line elevations and detention structures. 
(iv)  Preliminary plan of electrical distribution system, preliminary plan of gas distribution system, and preliminary plan of telephone distribution system along with approval of the appropriate utility companies. All utilities shall be distributed under ground. 
(v)  Preliminary plan of sidewalks resident parking, visitor parking, traffic flow, traffic control devices. 
(vi)  Preliminary plan of recreational features, location, and access. 
(vii)  Preliminary plan of street and pedestrian access into and out of the project traffic control systems. 
(g)  Where the preliminary plat submitted for approval covers only a part, a unit or increment of the owner's entire holding or ultimate mobile home or travel trailer park, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the street portion submitted for approval will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
(h)  Five (5) copies or prints of the preliminary plat and proposed improvements shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission no less than twenty five (25) days prior to the regular meeting of that body at which approval is requested. Upon completion of review by the Planning Commission, within thirty (30) days, the Planning Commission will notify the developer that the city Planning and Zoning Commission, either denies the application for cause, conditionally approves it or approves it unconditionally. At the Planning Commission meeting, the Development Officer will outline in detail the sections of the proposed mobile home development plot plan that do not meet the city minimum requirements and feasibility of city services. The city Planning and Zoning Commission will review and recommend changes if required and grant preliminary approval if satisfactory. 
It is to be understood that the approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission does not constitute acceptance of the proposed mobile home park by the City, but does constitute an authorization to begin and proceed with the preparation of the final mobile home park plat. There shall be no work in the field on the proposed mobile home park until the final plat has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. Approval of the preliminary plat expires at the expiration of a period of six (6) months unless the final plat has been submitted for approval prior to that time. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
C.  FINAL PLAT 
(1)  Preparation 
After the approval by the city Planning and Zoning Commission of the preliminary plat, a final plat shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its approval. Final engineering documents shall also be submitted in triplicate. Five (5) prints of this final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the regular meeting of that body at which approval is requested. 
(2)  Preparation of Plat 
The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals sixty feet (1" = 60') on sheet twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" × 36") size. 
(3)  Contents 
The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(a)  The mobile home park name or identifying title; the name and address of the owner. 
(b)  The names of adjacent subdivisions. 
(c)  The names of streets; the numbers of lots and blocks; the same to be in accordance with a systematic, consecutive numbering arrangement. Names of new streets should wherever possible, follow or be extensions of existing street names. The local light company shall be contacted for street numbering and name assignment. 
(d)  An accurate boundary survey of the property of the proposed mobile home park noting the bearings and distances of each property line, same being referenced to an original corner of the survey of which the land is a part, and established subdivisions, showing the lines of all adjacent lands and properties; lines of adjacent streets, alleys, and easements noting width and names of each. Streets, alleys, and easements of adjacent subdivisions shall be shown in a different manner than those of the proposed mobile home park, preferably dotted or dashed. A metes and bounds description shall also appear on the plat. 
(e)  The final plat shall indicate the location of all lots, streets, highways, alleys, easements, parks, playgrounds, and such other features, with accurate dimensions given in feet and decimals of a foot. Showing the length of radii, deflection angles, and of the arcs of all curves; tangent distances and tangent bearings shall be given for each street, all such data being complete and sufficiently precise to permit accurate locations upon the ground. 
(f)  The building lines of front and side streets shall be shown dotted or dashed. 
(g)  Proper certification shall be made upon the plat, by a registered land surveyor, ascertaining that the plan represents a survey made by him and that all necessary monuments are accurately and correctly shown upon the plat. All construction plans shall bear the seal of a professional engineer. 
(h)  Proper blanks for certificate of approval to be filled out by the Planning Commission and City Council. 
(i)  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
(j)  Final plans for all street, drainage, and utilities construction, including lighting as follows: 
(i)  Complete engineering drawings and other construction documents as needed to fully describe the improvements. These documents shall include but not be limited to: 
(ii)  Final water distribution system including taps, fire hydrants or other fire-fighting systems, blow-off valves, depths, street and drive crossings and other pertinent data; 
(iii)  Final sanitary sewer collection system including taps, grades, depths manholes, street and drive crossings, lift stations, line sizes and equipment sizes; 
(iv)  Final street cross sections and details, paving thicknesses, reinforcing, control joints, slopes and drainage patterns, inlet details; 
(v)  Storm sewer and drainage systems, manholes, detention structures and outfalls, sizes, cross sections, restrictor details; 
(vi)  Hydrological and topographical data pertaining to up-stream and downstream effects of the development and hydrologic calculations; and 
(vii)  Other information and data as may be required by the Santa Fe Development Regulations. 
(4)  Approval by Planning Commission 
After approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission and the City Council, five (5) prints and one (1) reproducible print shall be furnished of all drawings to the City Building Inspector. All figures, letters, and symbols shown upon the drawings shall be plain, distinct and of sufficient size as may be easily read and of such density as will remain a permanent and lasting record. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
D.  GENERAL PLANNING PROVISIONS 
(1)  General Planning; Minimum Number of Spaces 
A mobile home park or RV park shall have no less than three (3) spaces and shall not be located in areas restricted against use and occupancy of mobile homes and/or recreational vehicles. 
(2)  Mobile Home Stand; Travel Trailer/Motor Home Stand 
The minimum size of a mobile home stand shall be forty feet (40') in width by one hundred fifteen feet (115') in depth, with a twenty-foot setback, fronting on a forty-foot wide roadway. Variations for lot shapes on curved roadway, cul-de-sacs, etc. shall conform to the basic square foot of the above or larger. The minimum size of a travel trailer/motor home stand shall be twenty feet (20') in width by sixty-five feet (65') in depth, with a twenty-foot setback, in fronting on a forty-foot wide roadway. On each stand there shall be provided a concrete parking area for the mobile home or travel trailer/motor home. (See Exhibit A on file in the Office of the City Secretary for dimension) 
(3)  Automobile Parking 
There shall be provided for each mobile home stand a minimum of two (2) nine-foot wide and twenty feet (20') in length hard surfaced parking spaces for off-street automobile parking outside and off the roadway. 
(4)  Mobile Home Access 
The mobile home stand shall be designed for practical placement on and removal of the mobile home from the stand. Design shall include stand elevation, distances and angles in relation to the access street. 
(5)  Mobile Home Drainage 
The stand shall be designed for adequate crown and cross-gradient for surface drainage to the roadway. 
(6)  Mobile Home Clearance 
In order to insure privacy, adequate natural light and air, and convenient access to the mobile home, the minimum distance between mobile homes, (including additional construction and extension permitted in Subsection E.) shall be ten feet (10'). Distance from mobile home to common area or common walkways or to a street right-of-way or other common area shall be twenty feet (20') minimum. 
(7)  Patio Areas 
A patio or landing area shall be provided on each mobile home stand, which shall be a hard surface area with a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet and adequate drainage shall be provided for surface drainage. 
(8)  Street Planning 
Streets shall be designed to furnish traffic flow to the mobile home stand parking areas and to the entrance street. Minimum road right-of-way width shall be forty feet (40') of right-of-way on streets fronting lots on both sides and thirty-two feet (32') on streets fronting lots on one (1) side only. Pavement shall be twenty-two feet (22') wide. Streets shall be adapted to the topography, have satisfactory surface and ground water drainage and a storm sewer system with inlets as required to adequately drain the adjoining mobile home stands. Intersection offsets shall be avoided. Flexible pavements shall be protected at the edges to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the base. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the city specifications, as provided in the City of Santa Fe Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Section 9.B. Streets within the mobile home park shall not be considered as dedicated to the public use and acceptance of the mobile home park application for issuance of a license hereunder shall not be taken as acceptance of such streets for dedication to the public use. Drainage shall be within the street right-of-way. 
(9)  Parking Area Planning 
Parking areas for automobiles and mobile homes shall have proper alignment and gradient for proper drainage to the completed street section. Flexible pavement shall be protected at the edge to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the base. Parking area outside the street right-of-way shall be twenty feet (20') deep. 
(10)  Walkway Planning 
Individual walks shall be provided to each mobile home from the paved street or parking area, a minimum width of two feet (2'). Walkways shall not be used as drainage ways, but shall be designed to drain to the roadway area or parking area. 
(11)  Utility Planning 
Utility services for each mobile home shall be designed in conformance to the applicable City of Santa Fe building requirements with dual water service to two (2) outlets, one (1) for the patio, and the other for the private area, sewer service under the rear quarter of the mobile home, gas service under the rear quarter of the mobile home, electrical and telephone service along the side of the mobile home. All stand services shall be underground. 
(12)  Water Distribution System 
The water distribution system shall be designed to provide normal Galveston County Water Control and Improvement District No. 8, (WCID #8) water service to each stand, and shall be constructed in accordance with the WCID #8 specifications and requirements relating to water distribution system in newly constructed subdivisions or meet standard health requirements for outside of WCID #8. 
Fire hydrants shall be placed on at least six-inch lines and all mobile home stands must be within five hundred feet (500') of the nearest fire hydrant. A bypass with shut-off valves in case of fire to protect meters shall be provided for. 
(13)  Sewage Collection System 
The sewage collection system shall be designed to provide normal WCID #8 sewer service to each stand, and shall be constructed in accordance with the WCID #8 specifications and requirements relating to sewer distribution system in newly constructed subdivisions or meet standard health department requirements for outside of WCID #8. 
(14)  Gas Distribution System 
The gas distribution system shall be designed to give normal gas service to each stand. A City of Santa Fe franchised gas company meter loop connection shall be installed for each stand when a private distribution system is not installed. A private distribution system shall include necessary valves, pressure regulators, etc. to meet the minimum requirements of a City franchise gas company installed system. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
(15)  Electrical Distribution System 
The electrical distribution system shall be designed to furnish a minimum of one hundred-amp service to each stand. All services shall be underground from meter loop to stand service with a minimum of No. 2 wire size. The developer shall provide the City franchise electric service company with adequate easements. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
(16)  Perimeter Barrier 
Each boundary of the park must be separated from adjoining property by a natural or artificial barrier at least six feet (6') high. 
(17)  Lighting 
Street lighting within the mobile home park shall be provided along all internal streets. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to insure an illumination level of not less than 0.2 foot-candles. All other areas of the park shall be illuminated to a level of not less than 0.1 foot-candles. The lighting system proposed for compliance with the requirements of this section shall be described in the application for a mobile home park permit. Any one (1) of the following four (4) methods will be considered acceptable: (Spacings shown are for areas to be illuminated with a minimum level of 0.2 foot-candle; other areas may have light standard spacings up to 1.5 times the spacing included in the description): 
(a)  Illumination Engineering Society (IES) standard dome or shallow dome reflectors, porcelain enameled, with three hundred-watt incandescent lamps, located not more than fifteen feet (15') above the ground and spaced not more than eighty feet (80') apart horizontally. 
(b)  IES type V fixtures located not more than twenty-five feet (25') above the ground and containing one (1) 250-watt mercury vapor lamp. The maximum horizontal spacing shall be one hundred sixty feet (160'). 
(c)  IES type V fixtures located not more than twenty-five feet (25') above the ground and containing one (1) three hundred-watt incandescent lamp. The maximum horizontal spacing shall be eighty feet (80'). 
(d)  Any other system, prequalified with the City Building Inspector or documented with fixture manufacturer's catalog sheets or with a certificate of compliance signed by either a responsible officer of the fixture manufacturing company or by a registered professional engineer qualified in electrical engineering. Approval of the proposed system shall be conditional pending approval after construction by the City Building Inspector. 
(18)  Lot Marking 
The limits of each mobile home stand shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes and should be the same location as on the accepted plans. 
(19)  Tenant Storage 
Unless provided in current mobile home models, storage facilities with a minimum capacity of two hundred (200) cubic feet per mobile home space, may be provided on the space, or in compounds located within one hundred feet (100') of each space. Where provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the park and shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized steel, baked enamel steel, or material equal in fire resistance, durability, and appearance. Storage outside the perimeter walls of the mobile home shall be permitted only if in such facilities. 
(20)  Walks 
A three-foot walk on one (1) side of the street paving is required. A walkway shall be provided, as required in subsection (10) hereof, to each patio from the street or parking paving. Common walks shall be provided to playgrounds, offices, etc., and shall have a minimum width of three feet (3'). Walks shall be constructed to alignment and grade to drain to the street paving. 
(21)  Recreation Area 
All mobile home parks are encouraged to have at least one (1) recreational area. 
(a)  Extent. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools, and community buildings which in the judgment of the park licensee, or agent, will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele, which the park is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult and tot lot recreation areas is encouraged. 
(b)  Playground Location. Playground space shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares, and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
(22)  Office 
A mobile home park shall have a designated office on the site or sign on the property providing information as to office location. 
(23)  Central Mail Delivery 
Provisions shall be made for central mail delivery that meets the minimum requirements of the local Postmaster. 
(24)  Refuse Collection 
Provision shall be made for sanitation service either central or individual. 
(25)  Edge Protection 
Edge protection to prevent raveling of flexible pavement shall be rigid and permanent and shall be as approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004; Ordinance No. 18-2007 of July 12, 2007, Sec. 3) 
E.  ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION AND EXTENSIONS TO MOBILE HOMES 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a mobile home park to construct or permit to be constructed in such park, or in connection with such mobile home any additional structure, building, or shelter in connection with or attached to a mobile home, except, however, awnings of canvas or metal, suitably constructed, may be attached to said mobile homes, which meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Strength of materials and structure to meet minimum standards of the City of Santa Fe Building Code; 
(2)  Capable of being dismantled or moved; 
(3)  Such additions shall be completely dismantled or removed from the site at the time the mobile home, to which it is accessory, is moved; 
(4)  Finish and appearance to be as near the same as possible to the mobile home to which it is accessory; 
(5)  The length and width must not exceed the length and width of the mobile home to which it is accessory; and 
(6)  Only one (1) addition per mobile home shall be permitted. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
F.  TIE DOWNS 
(1)  All mobile homes, must have tie downs sufficient to comply with the mobile home tie down standards issued by the Texas Department of Labor and Standards, regardless of when mobile home was manufactured. 
(2)  Mobile homes without internal construction conforming to the strength requirements described in the standards shall have over-the-top tie downs as strong as the total of internal and over-the-top ties described in the standards of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
G.  RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE HOME PARK TO BE ADOPTED BY OWNER 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, representative, or manager to prescribe rules and regulations for the management of the park; to make adequate provisions for the enforcement of such rules; and to subscribe to any and all subsequent rules and regulations which may be adopted for the management of such park. Copies of all such rules and regulations shall be furnished to the City Secretary on request. In addition thereto, it shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, representative, or manager to comply strictly with the following: 
(a)  All sewer traps not in use shall be capped. 
(b)  Provide for regular inspection of all public and private utilities. 
(c)  Provide location for the collection and removal of garbage and other waste material. 
(d)  Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of any kind. 
(e)  Provide and maintain safe and sanitary public and private utility connections to each mobile home lot. 
(f)  Maintain a neat, clean, and safe park. 
(g)  City of Santa Fe furnished form describing the mobile home and its ownership and location shall then be completed, signed by the park owner, or his agent, representative, or manager, signed by the mobile home owner, and delivered to the Building Inspector, all within thirty (30) days from date of tenancy. 
(h)  Furnish continuing guidance and information to the owners and occupants of the mobile homes in the park, concerning all provisions of the City Ordinances that are applicable to a mobile home. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home owners. The register shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home. 
(b)  The make, model, year, and size of each mobile home. 
(c)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home. 
(d)  The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, the Building Inspector, and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisitions of the information contained in the register. The register record shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3) years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(3)  Provide for the regular cleaning, painting, repairing, and disinfecting of all buildings. 
(4)  Take such other measures as may be deemed to be necessary by the health department to preserve the health, comfort, and safety of all persons residing in the park, and the general public. 
(5)  Take proper measures to prevent and suppress lewd or disorderly conduct within the park and report immediately to the police department all lewd acts or acts or disorderly character committed by any person or persons inside the mobile home park. 
(6)  Take proper measures to see that each mobile home be skirted on all four (4) sides. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
H.  USE OF BOTTLED GAS 
Bottled gas shall not be used in an individual mobile home unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place. No cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located within a mobile home or outside within five feet (5') of a door thereof. State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil must be followed. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
I.  LICENSES 
(1)  License Required 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the city limits, unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the City Secretary in the name of such person for the specific park in the amount in an amount as specified by Council resolution per space per year. All applications for licenses shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the City Secretary, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this section. The City Secretary shall not issue a license unless the applicant is a valid holder of a mobile home park permit issued by the City Building Inspector indicating compliance by such applicant with the provisions hereof. 
(2)  Hearing Granted Applicants 
Any person whose application for a license under this section has been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the city Planning Commission under the procedure provided herein. 
(3)  Application for License Renewal 
Application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the licensee on forms furnished by the City Secretary on or before December 31 of each year. Such application shall contain any change in the information occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. 
Before the renewal license is issued, the City Secretary shall obtain the approval of the fire marshal on the fire-fighting appliance, water supply, accessways, or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. 
(4)  Transfer of License 
Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the City Secretary within ten (10) days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park. Application for transfer of license shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days after notification of change covered in the first sentence of this paragraph. Within ten (10) calendar days thereafter, the City Council shall act on the application for license transfer. The transfer shall be approved if the park is in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Transfer of License Fee 
All applications for license transfer shall be accompanied by a fee as specified by Council resolution. 
(6)  Violations; Notice; Suspension of License 
Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the City Building Inspector, after consultation with the fire marshal and health officer, if deemed necessary by the inspector, finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this section applicable to such park, shall give notice in writing in accordance with Subsection K., to the licensee, or his agent, that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in such notice, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the City Building Inspector shall reinspect such park, requesting assistance from other city departments as may be required. Upon this reinspection, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the licensee, or his agent. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, licensee shall cease operation of such park, except as provided in Subsection K. hereof. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
J.  INSPECTION 
(1)  Inspections Required 
The City of Santa Fe Building Inspector, the designated health officer, fire marshal, law enforcement officer, and tax assessor-collector are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this section. 
(2)  Entry On Premises 
The City Building Inspector, the designated health officer, fire marshal, law enforcement officer, and tax assessor-collector shall have the authority to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property within the City for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this section. 
(3)  Inspection of Register 
The City Building Inspector, designated health officer, fire marshal, law enforcement officer, and tax assessor-collector shall have the authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park. 
(4)  Duty of Occupants 
It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the licensee, his agent, or authorized employee access to any part of such park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this section. 
(5)  Time for Inspection 
Inspections shall be made whenever any of the above named officials has reason to believe that one (1) or more provisions of this section are not being complied with, usually 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday thru Friday and in compliance with state law. 
(6)  Recall Inspection Fee after the Issuance of the Initial Permit 
After the issuance of the initial permit for a mobile home park, the Building Inspector's office shall charge the owner of any mobile home park a fee, as specified by Council resolution, for each inspection required to assure correction of previously noted deficiencies in compliance with the requirements of this section. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to waive such fee when, in his opinion, the recall inspection was required by circumstances beyond the control of the person responsible for correcting the deficiency. The reason for the recall inspection must have been reported in writing to the owner for this fee to be applicable. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
K.  NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS 
(1)  Notice of Violations; Requirements of Notice 
Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this section, the City Building Inspector shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
(a)  Be in writing; 
(b)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(c)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires; 
(d)  Be served upon the license or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his last known business address, or when he has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of the state; and 
(e)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken will effect compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Appeal from Denial of Permit of the City of Santa Fe Building Inspector 
Any person affected by the refusal of the City Building Inspector to issue a permit under the provisions of this section, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Planning Commission provided that such person shall file within ten (10) days after the day the permit was refused, in the office of the Building Inspector, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefore. Upon receipt of such petition, the Building Inspector shall forward it to the City Secretary, who shall request the Planning Commission to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such refusal should be modified or withdrawn. 
(3)  Appeal from Notice Issued by the City Secretary 
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this section applicable to such park, by the Building Inspector may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council; provided that such person shall file within ten (10) days after the day of notice was served, in the office of Building Inspector, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under subsection (5) hereof. Upon receipt of such petition, the Building Inspector shall forward such petition to the City Secretary, who shall request the City Council to set a time and place of such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(4)  Hearing; Order 
After such hearing, the Building Inspector shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the refusal, which order shall be served as provided in subsection K(1)(d) hereof. Upon failure to comply with an order by the Building Inspector sustaining or modifying a decision thereof, the occupancy permit and the license of the park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(5)  Order Without Notice 
Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written petition to the Building Inspector shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsection K(4) above shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
L.  FEES 
All fees reference herein shall be paid to the City. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
M.  EXEMPTION 
Subsections B(3), C., and D., of this section, shall have application only to mobile home parks constructed and established from and after the effective date of this section, and shall not apply to existing mobile home parks, except as to additions and extensions thereof, and then only to such additions and extensions. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
N.  CONFLICTS 
Where the provisions of other Sections of these Building Regulations shall conflict with this section, the Development Officer shall resolve the conflict. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
O.  FEES 
Fees shall be as determined by resolution of the Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004) 
P.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this section shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to Section 1 GENERAL (G) PENALTY, herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
SECTION 29: - MULTI-TENANT COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
The development of multi-tenant commercial property requires that such projects comply with the provisions of the Santa Fe Subdivision/Development regulations. The Development Officer shall initially interpret the sections of the Development Regulations applicable to multi-tenant commercial development. Such decisions shall be with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission which shall exercise final authority over interpretation thereof. Multi-tenant commercial development shall be interpreted as any development that anticipates or incorporates three (3) or more tenants. All such projects shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval. 
(Ordinance No. 09-2004 of May 13, 2004)  
CHAPTER 4 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
 
SECTION 1: - PEDDLERS 
A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.  Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(a.)  Noncommercial purpose or cause means a purpose or cause not created, existing or espoused for the generation of profit or the remuneration of individuals, including, but not limited to, the religious or charitable solicitation of contributions, seeking political support or contributions, the promotion of civic causes, the promotion of conservation of resources or animals, advocating a philosophy or religion, or minors conducting fundraising activities, who represent an organization for the benefit of youths, including but not limited to Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, little league groups and school groups. 
(b.)  Peddler means any person, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling from house to house or from street to street, for the purpose of selling or soliciting for sale, goods, wares, merchandise or services, other than agricultural products produced or processed in this state; and shall also mean and include any person soliciting funds for the generation of profit or transacting a temporary business within the city. The word "peddler" shall include the terms "solicitor," "transient, itinerant merchant or vendor," "food vendor" or "transient or itinerant photographer." 
(c.)  Special event means an activity which makes a significant contribution to the cultural, economic, or social welfare of the city, is sponsored or organized by the City, an individual, corporation, or organization, is held at a particular time and location, and is for the purpose of the sale or distribution of services or goods on public property. 
(d.)  Temporary business means selling or soliciting for sale, goods, wares, merchandise or services, other than agricultural products produced or processed in this state from a structure or vehicle that is not required to receive a certificate of occupancy that operates from one (1) or more locations for less than six (6) months including, but not limited to a, fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other similar gathering. 
(e.)  Mobile Vending Unit means a mobile food preparation van, cart, or other conveyance, or any facility that is not on a permanent foundation that complies with the International Building Code, and which is used for the sale or delivery of food or goods. 
(Ordinance No. 19-2019 of December 12, 2019, Sec. 1) 
2.  Exceptions 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(a.)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business; 
(b.)  Sheriff's constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law; 
(c.)  Bona fide residents of the city selling fruits, vegetables, or farm products which were produced on land within the city, owned or controlled by such vendor; and 
(d.)  Ordinary commercial travelers or salesmen, transacting business only at wholesale dealers or with dealers in such goods or in goods or services for use in manufacturing or commercial purposes; 
(e.)  Events, solicitations, sales or distributions made for noncommercial purposes by local government, charitable, educational, or religious non-profit organizations shall not be required to obtain a permit. 
3.  Refusing to leave 
Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises, after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such remises, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
4.  Use of public and private places 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to sell or solicit or take orders for or offer to sell or take orders for or display any prepared foods, drinks, goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, animals, newspapers or magazines on or along any public square, park, street, road, highway, right-of-way, or alley within the limits of the city without having first obtained a permit as provided under section B. Permit or a special events permit as provided under section C. Special Events. 
Peddlers utilizing private property are not required to obtain a permit but must obtain the permission of the property owner, tenant or lessee in writing prior to conducting business. The person granting such permission, along with the peddler, will be collectively and individually responsible for compliance with the adopted zoning codes as well as all other regulatory provisions of the City of Santa Fe or State of Texas. 
5.  Entrance to premises restricted 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "no peddlers allowed" or "no solicitations allowed" or other words to such effect. 
6.  Hours of operation 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer or by first obtaining a special events permit. 
7.  Soliciting at intersections 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to solicit funds, to advertise, or to distribute any item, either on foot or in automobiles, for any cause whatsoever, at or near any intersection or crossing of streets within the city limits. 
8.  Misrepresentation 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false, misleading or fraudulent statements concerning the quality or nature of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
9.  Penalty 
Any person who violates this ordinance or part thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
10.  Food Handlers 
In addition to securing a City of Santa Fe Permit all prepared food vendors shall comply with the state and county food handler's regulations. All Mobile Food Vending Units shall apply for permits from the Fire Marshall or Building Official using provided forms. As it is related to this ordinance, flavored ice and drink vendors are considered food vendors. 
(Ordinance No. 19-2019 of December 12, 2019, Sec. 2) 
11.  Collection of Sales Tax 
All peddlers requiring a permit or special event permit, are required under this ordinance to produce a current and valid sales tax certificate upon request. 
B.  PERMIT 
1.  Required; information needed prior to issuance 
It shall be unlawful to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so. Such permit shall be obtained by registering with the City Secretary and providing information under oath. Prior to the issuance of the permit to the peddler, the City Secretary shall obtain all of the following application information and any other information deemed pertinent and necessary. The information to be obtained shall be as follows: 
(a.)  The name, local and permanent address of the applicant and the number of the driver's license or other state identification of the applicant; in the absence of such identification, the date of birth and social security number. 
(b.)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any state or federal law or municipal ordinance or code; the date of the offense; the nature of the offense; the punishment or penalty assessed therefore; if previously convicted; and the place of conviction. 
(c.)  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(d.)  The exact dates the applicant wishes to engage in business within this city. 
(e.)  The local and permanent address and the name of the person, company or corporation, if any, that the applicant represents; the applicant's tax identification number, if any. 
(f.)  The kind of goods, wares, merchandise or services in which the applicant wishes to engage in such business within the city. 
(g.)  Vehicle license plate number along with proof of vehicle insurance for any vehicle or mobile food vending truck used for traveling from house to house or from street to street, for the purpose of selling or soliciting for sale, goods, wares, merchandise or services. 
(h.)  The last five (5) cities or towns wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this city. 
2.  False information 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a permit required by this article. 
3.  Fingerprints; photographs 
At the time of making application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and photographing as determined by the Police Department. 
4.  Bond required 
The application for a permit required by the provisions of this article by a vendor who can not provide satisfactory proof of reputable dealings with the public, has a history of prior complainants, civil or criminal charges and arrests shall be accompanied by a bond for the penal sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or services in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of such bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within thirty (30) days after delivery, and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on such bond, or to an agent or employee of such principal. 
5.  Fee 
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefore shall pay a non-refundable application fee to be collected by the city secretary and accounted for as in the case of other fees collected for the city. Fees shall be determined by resolution of the City of Santa Fe City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2019 of August 22, 2019, Sec. 1) 
6.  Process of application 
Upon filing of an application and the payment of the required application fee, the City Secretary shall forward the application documents to the Chief of Police for a background security check. The Chief of Police shall approve or disapprove the permit based upon the suitability of the peddler. 
7.  Issuance 
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article until the applicant shall have complied with all the provisions and requirements of this article. 
8.  Issuance to individuals only 
No peddler's permit shall be issued to a corporation, partnership or other impersonal legal entity, but each individual person engaging in the business of peddling within the city shall be required to have a permit, whether acting for himself or as an agent or representative of another. All persons engaged in the activity of peddling, whether assisting or observing shall be considered a peddler and require a permit. 
9.  Contents 
Each permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be signed by a representative of the police department; shall be dated as of the date of its issuance; and shall state the duration or term of such permit on the face thereof. Any permit not dated and signed as provided in this section, or which was issued in violation of this section, shall be void. 
10.  Display 
Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall display his valid permit in full view at all times while engaged in peddling activities. Failure to do so shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
11.  Duration 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of six (6) months. 
12.  Revocation 
(a.)  Any permit or special events permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the Chief of Police for the violation by the permittee of any provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance that directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the permitted occupation, drunkenness or disorderly conduct. Upon such revocation, such permit shall immediately be surrendered to the Chief of Police, and failure to do so shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Any person aggrieved by the revocation may appeal the Chief of Police's revocation within five (5) business days of surrender of the permit by written appeal tendered to the City Secretary. A timely filed appeal shall suspend the revocation pending administrative reconsideration by the City Manager. The City Manager may uphold, revise or overturn the Chief of Police's revocation. If the City Manager upholds the revocation, the permittee may appeal to the City Council within five (5) business days of the City Managers upholding the revocation by filing a written appeal with the City Secretary. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(b.)  A previous revocation may constitute grounds for not authorizing subsequent permit applications from the same individual. 
(c.)  Revocation will not result in reimbursement of fees paid. 
13.  Denial 
Any person denied a permit or special events permit may appeal the denial within five (5) business days of the denial by filing with the City Secretary a written notice of appeal. The City Manager may uphold, revise or overturn the denial. If the City Manager upholds the denial, the applicant may appeal to the City Council within five (5) business days of the City Managers upholding the denial by filing a written appeal with the City Secretary. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
C.  SPECIAL EVENTS 
1.  Special event permit 
(a)  For sale or distribution of services or goods on public property. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, the Police Department representative may issue a special event permit to enable the holder and assisting persons to sell or distribute services or goods on public property during special events. 
(b)  Issued for specific time and location. A special event permit shall be issued for each event. The time and location for which the permit is in effect shall be transcribed on the permit. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a special event permit shall file with the City Secretary, a written application upon a form provided for that purpose. Where an event hosts space for vendors, organizers may apply for and receive a single special event permit in the event's name for a sponsored event providing the applicant accepts responsibility for and oversees the activities of participating vendors. Organizer must have a list of participating vendors available for examination during the event. 
(d)  Fee. An applicant for, or the holder of, a special event permit shall pay as a fee for the permit, the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per event, except when a special event is held at a City owned facility and a fee has been paid for use of the facility, the special event permit fee shall be waived. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Inspection or investigation; approval or denial. After inspection or investigation, the Police Department shall approve or deny an application for a special event permit. If such application is approved, a special event permit will be issued which shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted and the expiration date. It shall be designated on such permit, the location in which the special event permit holder is allowed to do business. 
(g)  Compliance of permit holder with article provisions. Except for the permitting requirements, fingerprinting and photograph requirement, hours of operation, bonding requirement and fee requirement under B, 6. Permit Issuance, the applicant for a special event permit and/or the holder of a special event permit shall comply with all of the sections of this article. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2011 of July 14, 2011, Sec. 2) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 07-2011, § 2, adopted July 14, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former Chapter 4, § 1, and adding a new § 1. Former Chapter 4, § 1 pertained to peddlers, itinerant vendors, and charitable solicitations, and derived from Ordinance No. 12-81 of August 13, 1981, and Ordinance No. 06-2011 of May 12, 2011.  
SECTION 2: - CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, AND SHOWS 
A.  PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONDUCT CERTAIN ENTERTAINMENTS 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or any other entity or organization to conduct, operate, or assist in conducting or operating any medicine show, carnival, tent show, or circus without first having obtained a permit as herein provided. 
B.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
Any person desiring to hold, conduct, or maintain any medicine show, carnival, tent show, or circus within the city shall make application in writing to the city secretary for a permit to hold such medicine show, carnival, tent show, or circus within the city, at least ten (10) days prior to the date said show is to be given. 
(Ordinance No. 02-90 of January 11, 1990) 
C.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO CONTAIN SPECIFIC INFORMATION 
The application for permit shall be made under oath by the person who either owns or shall be responsible for such presentation within the city and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and permanent address of the person making such application. 
(2)  The names and permanent addresses of the owners of the show sought to be presented. 
(3)  The name, sex, age, and permanent address of all participants therein. 
(4)  A list by name and description of all shows, rides, booths, and other attractions operated in connection therewith. 
(5)  A statement of any admission charges to be made. 
(6)  A description of the property where such proposed show is to be located. 
(7)  The dates and numbers of performances to be given, including the hours during which such show is to be opened. 
(8)  A statement that the operator agrees to conduct the presentation and all attractions and exhibits therein in a decent, orderly, and law-abiding way. 
D.  PERMIT FEES 
No permit shall be granted until the fees therefor have been paid. Such fees shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first day and ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional day. 
E.  CHIEF OF POLICE TO INVESTIGATE APPLICATIONS 
The chief of police shall make an investigation after the filing of such application to determine whether or not the proposed performance is in conflict with any of the provisions of this section, or the laws of this state and submit a recommendation for approval or denial to the city secretary. 
The city secretary shall submit the application and recommendation to the city council for consideration. 
F.  PERMITS SUBJECT TO REVOCATION 
All permits granted under this section shall be subject to revocation by the city council should it be ascertained that there was a mistake made in issuing such permit or that it is being given in violation of this section, or the laws of the state, or that there has been a misrepresentation or concealment of any material fact concerning the character or quality of the medicine show, carnival, tent show, circus, or theatrical performance. 
G.  CHARITABLE AND CIVIC AFFAIRS EXCLUDED FROM PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION 
This section shall not be applicable to charitable or civic affairs given for purely charitable or civic purposes. 
(Ordinance adopting Code)  
SECTION 3: - PARADES 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
As used in this section: 
(1)  Applicant means a person who has filed a written application for a parade permit. 
(2)  City means the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(3)  Commercial Parade means a parade sponsored by other than a nonprofit organization, the purpose of which is to advertise a tangible or intangible product for sale or to promote an exposition or theatrical performance. For purposes of this section, "commercial parade" shall include a parade conducted by a political organization or party and a parade conducted by or on behalf of a candidate for political office. 
(4)  Parade/March means the assembly of ten (10) or more units or persons for the common design and purpose of traversing in public streets from one location to any other location, including, but not limited to, parades, motorcades, and "fun runs." 
(5)  Parade Permit means written approval from the city or its designated representative for a parade, march or procession. 
(6)  Permittee means the person to whom a parade permit is granted pursuant to this section. 
(7)  Person means any individual, assumed named entity, partnership, association, corporation or organization. 
(8)  Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(9)  Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(10)  Unit means any motorized vehicle, (or group of vehicles) individual (or group of individuals), or animals participating in a parade. City will have discretion in determining whether more than one vehicle, individual or animal may be grouped so as to constitute a unit for purpose of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. A) 
B.  PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS 
(1)  Required 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, march or procession unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city. 
(2)  Exceptions 
This section shall not apply to fees or permits for: 
(a)  Funeral processions. 
(b)  A government agency acting within the scope of its function. 
(c)  Picketing or other orderly processions on sidewalks that observe and comply with traffic regulations and do not violate any other city, state or federal laws. 
(d)  Car caravans going to or from athletic or other civic activities or events. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. B) 
C.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
(1)  Application Form 
An application for a parade permit shall be made to the city manager or his/her designee on forms provided by the city. 
(2)  Filing Period 
Applications shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the planned date of the parade. 
(3)  Contents of Application 
The application for parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and telephone number of the individual or organization seeking to conduct a parade. 
(b)  The assembly area, the proposed route, the initial starting point and disbanding area. If the starting point and the disbanding area are located on private property, the applicant shall submit written permission for the holding of the activity from the owner of the property or authorized representative. (If the city designates a standard parade route, this item is not necessary.) 
(c)  Date and times to start and terminate. 
(d)  Times at which units of the parade will arrive at the assembly area. 
(e)  The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles that will constitute the parade. 
(f)  The purpose of the parade. 
(g)  Alternate date. 
(h)  Any other information that the city deems necessary. 
(4)  Established Routing 
The city requires parades to follow a safe route. The city, at its discretion, may require parades to follow an alternate route designated by the city, state, or other public entity. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. C) 
D.  STANDARDS FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE AND CONDUCT OF PARADE 
Failure to comply with the following is a violation of this section and may result in immediate removal of the unit(s) or individual(s) from the parade or in denial of future parade permits: 
(1)  The parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic near its route. 
(2)  The parade will not divert, impede, or interfere with emergency vehicles or personnel to the extent that normal emergency service is jeopardized. 
(3)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination without unreasonable delays enroute. The movement of the parade shall be subject to the control of the chief of police or his/her designee. All units shall be required to maintain a forward progress. 
(4)  The parade shall be accompanied by designated and identifiable persons serving as parade monitors, one for every ten (10) parade units, who will walk alongside the parade and ensure that spectators keep a safe distance from parade traffic. 
(5)  No alcohol will be allowed in the staging, or on a unit, or by participants on the parade route. 
(6)  No motorized parade vehicles will be allowed to pass other parade units during the course of the parade. 
(7)  Units containing any flammable materials or fabrics shall be equipped with a minimum of a 2-¾ lb. A, B, C fire extinguisher. Additional requirements and spot inspections may be conducted by the city fire marshal's office. 
(8)  The parade is of sufficient interest to the citizens of Santa Fe as to justify the temporary closing of the public roadway to vehicles and pedestrians. 
(9)  The commercial parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product or goods and is not designed to be purely for private profit. 
(10)  Consideration shall be given by the permittee to limiting the level of noise caused by sirens, vehicles, etc. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. D) 
E.  NOTIFICATION; APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL 
The city manager will grant or deny the parade permit and notify the applicant in writing within five (5) working days after the complete application was received. If the permit is denied, the notice shall state the reasons for denial. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The council shall hear such appeal as soon as practical. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. E) 
F.  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT 
The city, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the action of the city, file a written notice of acceptance with the city. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. F) 
G.  CONTENTS OF PERMIT 
Each parade permit shall contain such information (date, starting time, route, etc.) as the city may find necessary to the enforcement of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. G) 
H.  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE 
A permittee shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The permittee is responsible for informing parade participants of the parade rules and regulations set forth herein. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. H) 
I.  STREET CLOSURES AND PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE 
The city shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The city shall have the authority to close city streets, if necessary, to assure the safety of those watching and participating in a parade. The city will coordinate such closures with other affected public entities. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. I) 
J.  CITY TO BE HELD HARMLESS 
The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms, and corporations on whose behalf the application is made shall contract and agree that they will, in an individual and official capacity, indemnify and hold the City of Santa Fe, Texas, harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the parade or its participants. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. J) 
K.  FEE 
At the discretion of the city council, a permit fee may be set as needed to defray expenses of services provided by the city. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. K) 
L.  UNLAWFUL TO PARADE WITHOUT PERMIT; COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT AND APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any parade/march, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained as herein provided, and it shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade, for which a permit hereunder has been issued, to fail to comply with all directions and conditions of such permit and all applicable laws and ordinances. Violations will result in a Class "C" Misdemeanor. 
(Ordinance No. 09-92 of December 10, 1992, Sec. L)  
SECTION 4: - SALE OF BEER, WINE, AND OTHER INTOXICANTS 
A.  PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell or to possess for the purpose of sale within the City of Santa Fe, Texas, beer, wine, or distilled spirits, without first having obtained a permit therefor, authorizing such sale. 
B.  PERMIT FEES 
The following schedule of permit fees shall apply for the permits required by this section: 
(1)  Retail Dealer's Beer On-premises Permit ..... ½ state fee 
(2)  Retail Dealer's Beer Off-premises Permit ..... ½ state fee 
(3)  Wine and Beer Retailer's Permit ..... ½ state fee 
(4)  Package Store Permit ..... ½ state fee 
(5)  Wine Only, Package Store Permit ..... ½ state fee 
(6)  Other ..... ½ state fee 
C.  ENTITLEMENTS OF PERMITTEE 
The above and foregoing listed permit fees upon payment shall entitle the permittee to a permit to be issued by the city secretary designating the type permit issued, and shall authorize the permittee to sell the same intoxicants as are authorized for sale by the holders of a similar permit from the State of Texas. 
D.  TERMS OF PERMIT 
The permits issued hereunder shall be issued by the city secretary upon payment of the permit fee and upon presentation by the applicant or permittee of a valid state permit issued for a period or part of the period for which the city permit is issued. The permits issued hereunder shall expire on December 31st of the year issued, and an annual permit shall be required. The permit fee for any permit issued hereunder for less than a year shall be prorated for that portion of the year extending from the date of issuance to December 31st of the year issued. 
E.  PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the terms hereof shall upon conviction, be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and each day of violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ordinance 1-79 of January 11, 1979)  
SECTION 5: - SALVAGE YARDS 
A.  SHORT TITLE 
This section may be cited as the "Salvage Yard Ordinance" of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
B.  DEFINITION 
The term "salvage yard," as used in the provisions of this section, shall include any building, lot, land, or area, or combination thereof within the city where old scrap material or metals, rags, scrap automobiles, or junked, scrapped, or inoperable automobiles are kept or stored incident to the commercial purchase or sale of such items. 
In addition, the term "salvage yard" shall include the keeping, maintenance, or storage of two (2) or more inoperable or junk motor vehicles on any lot or other area within the city. 
C.  SALVAGE YARDS TO BE FENCED 
No person shall keep or maintain any salvage yard within the city unless the same shall be entirely enclosed by a gate, fence, or buildings or combination thereof, so that such yard shall not be accessible to children or stray animals. Such fence shall be at least six feet (6') in height and shall be composed of opaque materials which obscure the outside view and in accordance with specifications provided by the city council as to the type of material and the type of construction. Such person keeping or maintaining such salvage yard shall maintain such fence in good repair. 
D.  SANITATION TO BE MAINTAINED 
Every salvage yard within the city shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, so that it will not attract rodents or insects injurious to the public health. No scrap or junk automobiles or other scrap or junk materials shall be stacked, stored, or piled to a height in excess of six feet (6'), except when such stacking, storing, or piling is necessary incident to the hauling and removal of the same, and then only during the time necessary for such hauling and removing, nor in any manner protrude above the fence or enclosure, herein required. 
E.  SALVAGE DEALER'S PERMIT 
Any person wishing to commence the operation of a salvage dealer on property located within the city, and not heretofore used for such purpose, shall first apply to and obtain from the city, a permit for the purpose of operating such yard. The fee for such permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
F.  DISPLAY OF PERMIT 
Each holder of a permit issued under the provisions of this section shall at all times cause the same to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises described therein for such period of time as such permit may remain in full force and effect. No person shall post such permit upon any property or premises other than those described in the application therefor. 
G.  REMOVAL OF LOCATION OF BUSINESS 
No permittee under the provisions of this section shall remove his place of business from the designated place in his permit until a written permit authorizing such removal has been secured from the city secretary. 
H.  EXPIRATION 
Every permit issued under this section shall expire one (1) year after its issuance. 
I.  CANCELLATION 
Conviction of any person licensed under the provisions of this section for violating any of its provisions, state law, or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall be sufficient cause for the cancellation of the permit, within the discretion of the city. 
(Ordinance No. 9-79 of July 12, 1979 as amended by Ordinance No. 11-85 of July 11, 1985)  
SECTION 6: - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
A.  APPLICABLE TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH REGULATIONS 
The definitions; the inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink; and the enforcement of this section shall be regulated in accordance with the Texas Department of Health, Division of Food and Drugs "Rules on Food Service Sanitation 301.73.11.001-.011," three (3) certified copies of which shall be on file in the office of the Galveston County Health District; provided, that the words "regulatory authority" shall be understood to refer to the Galveston County Health District Director or his authorized representative; and the word "establishment" shall mean food service establishment; and the words "food service establishment" shall include "food service establishment," "commissary," "food processing establishment," "mobile food unit," and "temporary food service establishment" as defined in the Texas Department of Health, Division of Food and Drugs "Rules on Food Service Sanitation 301.73.11.011. 
B.  VIOLATIONS 
Violations of the "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" are subject to the penalties and remedies listed herein. 
C.  COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES 
(1)  Permits 
(a)  General 
No person shall operate a food service establishment who does not have a valid permit issued to him by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of these rules shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. Permits are not transferable. A valid permit shall be posted in every establishment. 
(b)  Issuance of Permit 
(i)  Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed establishment, and the signature of each applicant. 
(ii)  Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed said establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of these rules. 
(iii)  The regulatory authority shall issue a permit to the applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed said establishment complies with the requirements of these rules. Each permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months after the date of issuance thereof. 
(c)  Suspension of Permit 
(i)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the permit does not comply with the requirements of these rules, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of these rules, or if the operation of the establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to the public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice in accordance with paragraph (1) (c) (ii) of this subsection C. When a permit is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(ii)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(d)  Revocation of Permit 
The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten (10) day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten (10) day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(e)  Service of Notice 
A notice provided for in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(f)  Hearings 
The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(g)  Application after Revocation 
Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit. The holder of the revoked permit must meet all the rules and requirements as stated in paragraph (1)(b) of this subsection C before a new permit will be issued. 
(2)  Inspections 
(a)  Inspection Frequency 
An inspection of a food service establishment shall be performed at least once every six (6) months. Additional inspections of the food service establishment shall be performed as often as are necessary for the enforcement of these rules. 
(b)  Access 
Agents of the regulatory authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service establishment at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules. The agents shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used, or to persons employed. 
(c)  Correction of Violations 
The inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified in the Texas Department of Health, Division of Food and Drugs "Rules on Food Service Sanitation 301.73.11.011". 
(d)  Inspection Report Form 
An inspection report form based on the requirements of these rules is appended. A copy of each inspection report shall be delivered by the regulatory authority to the city hall of the City of Santa Fe, Texas immediately following such inspection. 
(3)  Examination and Condemnation of Food 
Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for enforcement of these rules. The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specifying with particularity the reasons therefore, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of subsection (a) of rule .003, of the "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" or any other provision of these rules. The regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food, subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed with the regulatory authority within ten (10) days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested, and on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Review of Plans 
(a)  Submission of Plans 
Whenever a food service establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of these rules. No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Preoperational Inspection 
Whenever plans and specifications are required by subparagraph (a) above to be submitted to the regulatory authority, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of these rules. 
(5)  Fees 
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall pay to the Galveston County Health District a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) to help defray the cost of the enforcement of this rule. 
(6)  Procedure When Infection is Suspected 
When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment employee, it may secure morbidity history of the suspected employees or make any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The regulatory authority may require any or all of the measures as specified in the Texas Department of Health, Division of Food and Drugs "Rules on Food Service Sanitation 301.73.11.011(e)." 
(7)  Remedies 
(a)  Penalties 
Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any reasonable officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Injunctions 
The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ordinance No. 9-82 of May 25, 1982)  
SECTION 7: - AMBULANCE SERVICE REGULATIONS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Ambulance means any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed and equipped, and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the emergency transportation of patients. 
(2)  Attendant means a trained or qualified individual responsible for the operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients whether or not the attendant also serves as driver. 
(3)  Attendant-Driver means a person who is qualified as an attendant and a driver. 
(4)  Driver means an individual who drives an ambulance. 
(5)  Health Officer means the director of the Galveston County Health District, or other designated official. 
(6)  License Officer means the director of public safety of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(7)  Patient means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless and in need of emergency ambulance service. 
(8)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose or organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than the United States. 
B.  LICENSE REQUIRED 
(1)  In addition to the licensing requirements of the State of Texas through the Texas State Board of Health, no person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise, or otherwise be engaged in the business or service of the emergency transportation of patients upon the streets, alleys, or any public way or place in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, unless he holds a currently valid license for an ambulance issued pursuant to this section. An ambulance operated by an agency of the United States shall not be required to be licensed hereunder, nor shall any license be required for the transportation of patients on a nonemergency basis. 
(2)  Provided, however, that no licenses shall be required for an ambulance which is rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the ambulances licensed hereunder are insufficient or unable to cope; or is operated from a location or headquarters outside of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the limits of the City of Santa Fe, to locations within the City of Santa Fe, or operated from a location outside the City of Santa Fe but traveling through the city. 
C.  APPLICATION FOR AMBULANCE LICENSE 
Applications for ambulance licenses hereunder shall be made upon such forms as may be prepared or prescribed by the license officer and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the ambulance. 
(2)  The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant does business and proposes to do business. 
(3)  The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and care of patients. 
(4)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, motor and chassis number, current state license number; the length of time the ambulance has been in use; and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate applicant's ambulance. 
(5)  The location and description of the place or places from which it is intended to operate. 
(6)  Such other information as the license officer shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this section. 
(7)  An accompanying license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), unless organized as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the State of Texas. 
D.  STANDARDS FOR AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT 
Each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such, comply with each of the following standards: 
(1)  Shall be equipped with special warning devices as outlined in U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Specification KKK-A-1822 Standards and Texas State Statute requirements regarding emergency vehicle operation. 
(2)  The minimum medical equipment and supplies on-board the ambulance and available for use at all times will be as recommended by the American College of Surgeons. 
(3)  A communications system able to communicate directly with all the permittee's ambulances licensed hereunder reliably by radio throughout the city. Such radio must transmit and receive on inter-city frequencies which provide direct radio contact with the City of Santa Fe police dispatcher, must transmit and receive on the inter-hospital coordination frequency of 155.340 Mhz., and must be capable of communicating directly with permittee's dispatch base station reliably. 
(4)  The ambulance and all on-board equipment must be in reliable mechanical condition and operating order and must be on a documented schedule of regular maintenance consistent with all the manufacturer's recommended maintenance specifications. 
(5)  The interior of the ambulance and the equipment within the ambulance shall be sanitary and maintained in good working order at all times. 
(6)  The equipment shall be of smooth and easily cleanable construction. 
(7)  Freshly laundered linen or disposable sheets and pillow cases shall be used in transporting of patients. Linen will be changed after one (1) use. 
(8)  Adequate and clean enclosed storage for linen, disposable sheets, pillow cases, etc., shall be provided on each vehicle. 
(9)  Adequate supplies will be stored in a clean container free from dust, insects, and rodents. A separate portable first aid kit with adequate supplies for outside use is required. 
(10)  Pillows and mattresses shall be kept clean and in good repair. Protective covers shall be provided. 
(11)  Covered containers and compartments shall be provided for soiled supplies. 
(12)  Ambulance interior shall be cleaned after each use as necessary and as approved by the health officer. 
(13)  Exterior surfaces of the ambulance shall be cleaned routinely, and as needed. 
(14)  Blankets used in any ambulance shall be washed at reasonable intervals, and as needed. 
(15)  Implements inserted into the patient's nose or mouth should be single-service, wrapped, and properly stored and handled. When multiple-use items are used, they shall be sanitized in a manner approved by the health officer. 
(16)  When an ambulance has been utilized to transport a patient known, by the owner of the ambulance service or his agents to have a communicable disease other than a common cold, the vehicle shall be cleansed thoroughly and disinfected as approved by the health officer. The ambulance service must provide each ambulance crew with written instructions for disinfecting the ambulance and disposing of contaminated linen. 
(17)  All storage spaces used for storage of linen, disposable sheets, pillow cases, or their equivalent; also equipment, first aid supplies, and other supplies, at base stations or in ambulances shall be kept clean. These storage spaces shall be so constructed to permit thorough cleaning. 
(18)  Emergency audible warning devices must function in the way which they were designed to function. 
(19)  Body must be free from dents and rust, to the extent that there is no interference with or question of safety in operation. 
(20)  All equipment in the patient compartment must be adequately secured. 
(21)  Oxygen tanks must bear a correct static pressure date and must be refilled after use as soon as possible. 
(22)  Ambulances must, at all times, meet state motor vehicle standards, including sufficient tire tread, braking adequacy, and other safety requirements. 
(23)  Patient compartment must be free of safety hazards. 
(24)  Vehicle must carry spare tire and equipment to change flats or unserviceable tires; spare tire must be serviceable. 
(25)  Stored in the vehicle must be spare fan belts, appropriate tools to change it, acceptable tow chain, and battery jumper cables. An acceptable alternative to this requirement will be a plan for provision of an immediately available ambulance to respond. 
(26)  All doors leading into passenger compartment must open properly, and close securely with all handles working. 
(27)  Windows and windshields must be clean and free of cracks that would impair driver vision. 
(28)  Rear view mirrors must be free of cracks and blemishes. 
(29)  Seat belts must be in place and in useable condition. 
(30)  No firearms are permitted aboard vehicles unless carried by authorized law enforcement personnel. 
E.  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP; TRANSFER OF LICENSE 
(1)  Any change of ownership of a licensed ambulance shall terminate the license and shall require a new application and a new license and conformance with all the requirements of this section as upon original licensing. 
(2)  Application for transfer of any ambulance license to another or substitute vehicle shall require conformance with all the requirements of this section as upon original licensing. No ambulance license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without the approval of the license officer and a finding of conformance with all the requirements of this section as upon original licensing. 
(3)  Each licensed ambulance, its equipment, and the premises designated in the application, and all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such, shall be open to inspection by the health officer or his designated representatives during usual hours of operation. 
(4)  No official entry made upon a license may be defaced, removed, or obliterated. 
F.  LIABILITY INSURANCE 
(1)  No ambulance license shall be issued under this section, nor shall such license be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, for each and every ambulance owned or operated by or for the applicant or licensee, providing for the payment of damages. 
(a)  For injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the owner of said vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his agent, and in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per person and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) per accident. 
(b)  For the loss of or damage to the property of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in an amount not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(2)  Said insurance policies shall be submitted to the license officer for approval prior to the issuance of each ambulance license. Satisfactory evidence that such insurance is at all times in force and effect shall be furnished to the license officer, in such forms as he may specify, by all licensees required to provide such insurance under the provisions of this section. 
G.  DUTIES OF A LICENSE OFFICER 
(1)  The license officer shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for an ambulance license as provided for herein, cause such investigation as he deems necessary to be made of the applicant and of his proposed operations. 
(2)  The license officer shall issue a license hereunder for a specified ambulance, to be valid for a period of one (1) year unless earlier suspended, revoked, or terminated, when he finds that all the requirements of this section and all other applicable laws and ordinances have been met. 
H.  PERSONNEL 
(1)  Minimum Number 
Each ambulance shall be manned on every run by at least two (2) persons, one (1) of whom must be a state certified medical person. 
(2)  Qualifications 
All ambulance personnel shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, shall be high school graduates, shall have adequate physical strength and ability to lift and carry loaded stretchers down at least one (1) flight of stairs, shall have a Texas operators license, and shall have no more than four (4) moving traffic violations within a twelve (12) month period. 
(3)  Screening Required 
All ambulance personnel shall be screened by the licensee prior to selection and evaluated periodically after selection to insure ability to deal courteously and effectively with patients and make mature and accurate judgments regarding aid to be rendered. 
(4)  Supervision 
One (1) full-time manager is required to provide supervision, resupply, and scheduling. Said manager shall reside within the city limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, and shall designate a substitute to act in the event of his unavailability or absence. The license officer shall be notified of the name of the person serving as manager. 
I.  RENEWAL OF LICENSE 
Renewal of any license hereunder, upon expiration for any reason, or after revocation, shall require conformance with all the requirements of this section as upon original licensing. 
J.  REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
(1)  The license officer may, and is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder for failure of a licensee to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of, any applicable provisions, standards, or requirements of this section, or of regulations promulgated hereunder, or of any other applicable laws or ordinances or regulations promulgated thereunder, but only after warning and such reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the license officer. Within ten (10) days after a suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing, after reasonable notice. The license officer shall, within five (5) days after conclusion of such hearing, issue a written decision (which shall include written findings) as to the supervision of said license. Such written decision shall be promptly transmitted to the licensee to whom it refers. 
(2)  Upon suspension, revocation, or termination of an ambulance license hereunder, such ambulance shall cease operations as such and no person shall permit such ambulance to continue operations as such. 
K.  AMBULANCE STATION; RESPONSE TIME 
(1)  An emergency ambulance station shall be kept and maintained by the licensee within the city at all times. 
(2)  The licensee must maintain a maximum response time on emergency calls within the city not to exceed seven (7) minutes to any location within the city. 
L.  SECURITY FOR ADVANCE PAYMENTS 
(1)  Any licensee that shall buy subscriptions, or otherwise receive payments for emergency ambulance service in advance of providing such service, shall provide a bond with a good and sufficient corporate surety payable to the City of Santa Fe for the benefit of such subscribers on the condition that the licensee shall refund any advance payments made for which service is not available or provided. Such bond shall be approved by the city council. 
(2)  In lieu of such bond, the licensee receiving such advance payments may pledge such advance payments with a bank of its choice, such pledge to provide that the payments are to be paid over to and delivered to the licensee as the service is provided on a month-to-month basis with the balance of such fund being pledged as security for providing such service. Such pledge shall be in favor of all parties who have paid such advance subscriptions or advance fees to the licensee. Such pledge agreement shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ordinance 13-78 of December 14, 1978, as amended by ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances.)  
SECTION 8: - VEHICLE WRECKER AND WRECKER COMPANY REGULATIONS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
1.  Application means the written application form approved by the department and all required documentation and all applicable fees. 
2.  Auxiliary tow lights means a set of red lamps, connected to the wrecker, which are attached to the rear of the towed vehicle, and when lit, will signal stops and turn movements of the towed vehicle. 
3.  Consent tow means any tow conducted with the permission of, or at the direction of, the vehicle's legal or registered owner, or such owner's authorized representative who is physically present at the law enforcement scene. A person subject to custodial arrest may not give consent. 
4.  Conviction means a finding of guilt by a judge or jury, or any plea of guilty or nolo contendere, unless such conviction has been held invalid by the courts or the proceedings against the defendant have been dismissed and the defendant discharged by the court. 
5.  Department means the City of Santa Fe Police Department. 
6.  Emergency lights means flashing, rotating or strobe lights that are mounted above the roof of the wrecker. The lights shall be mounted as high and as wide as possible and visible in all directions when activated. A rearward facing directional arrow panel, mounted contiguous with the emergency lights, is permitted. Grill lights, side warning lights, and such are also permitted. 
7.  Evidentiary crime scene means a crime scene in incorporated Santa Fe that requires the response of a law enforcement agency's specialized investigative unit(s). Examples include, but are not limited to, a homicide scene or an auto theft "chop shop." 
8.  Heavy duty wrecker is a tow truck with a manufacturer's carrying capacity certificate of not less than twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds and capable of supplying air for brakes and electrical power for lights to the towed vehicle. Except where a distinction is made, the term "wrecker" includes "heavy duty wrecker." 
9.  Law enforcement officer means a Santa Fe Police Officer, or a peace officer for a law enforcement agency located in Galveston County, Texas (See Tex. Code of Crim. Proc. Chapter 2, Art. 2.12). 
10.  Law enforcement scene means, but is not limited to, the scene of a crime, collision, or custodial arrest, or the location of a vehicle that is a traffic hazard, a recovered stolen vehicle, or an abandoned vehicle. 
11.  Motor vehicle means a vehicle subject to the Texas Transportation Code §501.002 et. seq., and as hereafter amended, or any other device designed to be self-propelled or transported on any public highway, road or street. 
12.  Non-consent tow means any tow conducted at a law enforcement scene or evidentiary crime scene without the permission of, or not at the direction of, the motor vehicle's legal or registered owner, or such owner's authorized representative, and includes a tow incident to arrest and situations where a vehicle is a traffic hazard. 
13.  Non-consent tow list means the department shall maintain a master list of all wrecker companies to be utilized in the event of a tow conducted not at the permission or direction of the motor vehicle's legal or registered owner, or such owner's authorized representative. 
14.  Operate means to drive or otherwise use a wrecker. 
15.  Operator means any person operating a wrecker, regardless of whether the person owns the truck. 
16.  Owner means any person who holds the legal title of the motor vehicle or who has the legal right of possession thereof. 
17.  Person means a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation or LLC. An assumed name or DBA shall not be considered a "person" for the purposes of this article. 
18.  Public road means a road, street, or a highway that has not been discontinued and that has been established by law and includes each publicly maintained road or highway opened to and used by the public. 
19.  Storage company means an individual, partnership, corporation, or any other association that is engaged in the business of storing motor vehicles for compensation or the expectation of compensation. The term includes the owner, operator, employee, and/or agent of the storage company. 
20.  Tow means the movement of a motor vehicle by a wrecker. 
21.  Towing company means a "person" that is engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles on a public road, for compensation or with the expectation of compensation, or who owns or operates a wrecker for which a permit has been issued under this article. This term includes the owner, operator, employee, and/or agent of the towing company. 
22.  Vehicle owner means the motor vehicle's legal or registered owner, or such owner's authorized representative who is physically present at the law enforcement scene. 
23.  Vehicle storage facility means a state-licensed facility to store motor vehicles subject to non-consent tows under this article. 
24.  Vehicle storage facility owner means an individual, partnership, corporation, or any other association (other than a governmental entity) that is engaged in the business of operating a garage, parking lot, storage lot or any type of facility to store motor vehicles subject to non-consent tows under this article. 
25.  Working day means any day that the department conducts normal business, excluding holidays and weekends. 
26.  Wrecker means a commercial motor vehicle equipped with, or used in combination with, a mechanical device which is adapted or used to tow, winch, or otherwise move a motor vehicle, which together with the towed vehicle has a gross vehicular weight, or actual weight, of 26,000 pounds or less. For purposes of convenience, the term "wrecker" as used throughout this article shall be deemed to include both the defined terms "heavy-duty wrecker" and "wrecker" unless a specific reference to the term "heavy-duty wrecker" is made. 
27.  Wrecker permit means a tag issued by the department authorizing a specific wrecker to perform non-consent tows. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
B.  PERMIT REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN NON-CONSENT TOWS; REQUIRED FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE 
1.  No person shall engage in non-consent tows within the boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city. Non-consent tows shall include, but are not limited to, tows without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
2.  To obtain a permit to engage in non-consent tows, the following items must be complied with: 
(a)  Wrecker company location must meet the requirements of the City of Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Payment of a permit fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per company. 
(c)  Maintenance of a storage yard in the minimum dimensions of eight thousand (8,000) square feet per company permitted. The storage yard must be composed of an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt, black-top, stone, macadam, limestone, iron ore, gravel, shell, or caliche, that enables the safe and effective movement of stored vehicles upon all portions of the lot, both under their own power and under tow, at all times regardless of prevailing weather conditions. The surface shall also be free from overgrown vegetation. If not enclosed by a five (5) feet high fence on or before September 1, 1985, all storage yards shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least six (6) feet high composed of opaque materials so as to obscure outside viewing of the storage yard. The storage yard shall have a gate which is locked at all times when the licensee or employee is not at the storage lot. No two (2) vehicle storage facilities may operate at the same location. 
(d)  Each tow truck must carry proper safety equipment. Proper equipment includes, but is not limited to the following: 
1.  At least one 10 pound, or two 5 pound, multiple purpose fire extinguisher in good, working condition; 
2.  Magnetic tow lights, and unless wireless, with appropriate cable and cushions to protect a vehicle's finish; 
3.  Tow dollies as appropriate; 
4.  Straps and tie downs as specified by the tow truck manufacturer; 
5.  Gloves; 
6.  Wheel chocks; 
7.  Five gallon trash receptacle; 
8.  Broom and shovel; 
9.  Thirty-six inch crow bar; and 
10.  Triangle reflectors, flares, cones, safety lights or other appropriate safety signals. 
11.  Each tow truck shall have a legible manufacturer's data plate indicating the capacity of the boom, the winch, or the carry mechanism, or have a document in the truck from the manufacturer stating the capacity of the boom, the winch, or the carry mechanism. 
12.  Every hydraulic line on each tow truck must be free of leaks and be in good working condition and free of defects. 
13.  The winch must not exceed the capacity of the boom or leak oil. 
14.  The cables must be as specified by the manufacturer and be in good condition, within manufacturer guidelines. 
15.  Each tow truck must have a copy of the annual state inspection. 
16.  Tow trucks placed in service after May 1, 2008, must contain the original manufacturer's warning labels on the truck, truck bed, winches, and all other accessories. 
(e)  Maintenance of insurance coverage, including but not limited to garage keeper's legal liability insurance as required by the Texas Department of Transportation. Such insurance shall also include five hundred thousand dollar ($500,000.00) liability for each tow truck so as to protect pedestrians and motorists from negligent tow truck drivers. Each policy shall contain an endorsement providing for ten (10) days notice to the city in the event of change thereof or cancellation. 
(f)  Maintenance of a 24-hour dispatch service, and vehicle storage facilities must allow vehicle owners to recover their vehicles on a 24-hour, 7-day basis with a minimum of one hour notice. 
(g)  Completion of an application as delineated by the wrecker official, which shall contain the following: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of person making application. 
2.  Year and make of tow trucks. 
3.  Vehicle identification numbers. 
4.  Vehicle certificate of title numbers. 
5.  Empty weight of each tow truck and gross weight of each tow truck. 
6.  Carrying capacity of each tow truck. 
7.  Current state license plate number with month and year of expiration of each tow truck. 
8.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the tow trucks. 
9.  Two (2) color photographs of the tow trucks, one (1) of each side, showing the name, address and telephone number of the towing company operating the tow truck permanently inscribed or affixed on each side in letters of no less than two (2) inches in height. The lettering should be of a color sufficiently different from the color of the tow truck as to make it clearly and readily visible. Where the application is a renewal, these photographs do not have to be resubmitted unless physical changes have been made to the tow truck in question. 
10.  Color photograph of all drivers or operators who will be operating a permitted tow truck, together with a copy of the driver's current driver's license. Photographs do not have to be submitted if the application is a renewal and there have been no changes in operators. New operators must submit photographs and a copy of current driver's license at the time of hire. 
11.  Copy of the permits or licenses issued by Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. 
12.  Certificate of insurance. 
13.  Address of storage yard, with a description of the fence, amount of land to be used and the physical condition of the land. 
14.  Color photograph of the storage yard with a description of the fence. 
15.  Address of the dispatch office. 
(h)  Towing operators, as a condition of their license must comply with the protective clothing policy Towing operators must wear at all times when using or assisting in the use or operation of a licensed tow truck on the road or road-related areas: 
1.  A uniform clearly marked with the tow company's name as it appears on department records; and 
2.  A reflective vest or reflective jacket at all times while working outside the [tow] truck. A reflective vest or reflective jacket must meet the ANSI/ISEA 207-2006 requirements for high visibility safety apparel. 
(i)  Execution of the following hold harmless agreement on behalf of the city: 'The towing company covenants and agrees to, and by these presents does hereby fully indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City of Santa Fe, Texas its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, suits, or causes of action of any nature whatsoever, whether real or asserted, brought for or on account of any injuries or damages to persons or property, including death, arising out of or incident to the operation of its towing service and all other of its operations arising under or otherwise incident to the towing or storage of motor vehicles.' 
(j)  Permits issued shall expire on December 31 of the year issued. Permits may be renewed upon expiration for an additional year upon payment of a two hundred-dollar permit fee and submission of current insurance and operational information. 
(k)  If there is a vacancy in the wrecker rotation list, applications for the vacancy will be accepted beginning on November 1st of the year following the vacancy. 
(l)  Permits are issued by the police chief, or his designee, after receiving the permit fee and after a showing of compliance by the applicant with all the prerequisites under the law. 
(m)  The sale, assignment, or transfer of a permit issued under this section is prohibited. 
(n)  Hold a valid Vehicle Storage Facility (VSF) license issued by Texas Department of Transportation. 
(o)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a tow truck within the city unless such person holds a valid towing operator license issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. 
(p)  Owner/operators have not been convicted of a crime of the grade of Felony in the last five (5) years. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
C.  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED A PLACE ON THE CITY ROTATION LIST 
The four (4) permitted towing companies holding a vehicle tow service rotation license on September 1, 2009, may apply for renewal as long as they remain qualified under the terms of this section. The city will issue no other vehicle tow service licenses until and unless the number of licensed towing companies on the city non-consent towing rotation list is three (3) or less. If at any time there are three (3) or fewer licensed towing companies on the city's non-consent towing list, the police chief or his designee will consider applications from other qualified companies. Those applications will be considered in the order in which they were filed, and the police chief or his designee shall issue a license to any qualified towing company based on their application until such time as there are four (4) qualified licensed tow truck companies on the city's vehicle tow service rotation list. The maximum number of companies licensed and on the city's rotation list will be limited to a total of four (4) companies. Final approval of any wrecker company wishing to be on the rotation list will be given by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police reserves the right to disqualify any wrecker company that he determines does not meet the City of Santa Fe's standards. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
D.  NON-CONSENT TOWS 
1.  A tow truck or towing company performing non-consent tows within the city must have and display a valid tow tag issued by the State of Texas Commission of Licensing and Regulation as required by Chapter 2308 of the Texas Occupations Code. 
2.  Whenever a person other than the registered owner or person in possession of a motor vehicle, including a registered lien holder of the motor vehicle, authorizes the tow of a vehicle, that person or his agent shall make an oral report to the police department within one (1) hour of the time the vehicle was towed which shall include the following information: 
a.  The license plate of the towed vehicle; 
b.  The vehicle identification number of the towed vehicle; 
c.  The year, make, model, and color of the towed vehicle; 
d.  The name, address, and telephone number of the person authorizing the tow or the lien holder requesting the vehicle to be repossessed; and 
e.  The location from which the vehicle was towed, the date and time of the tow, and the name, street address, and telephone number where the vehicle was taken for storage. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
E.  PRICE LIST FOR NON-CONSENT TOWS AND POLICE AUTHORIZED TOWS 
1.  Towing companies may charge the following maximum fees for non-consent tows: 
(a)  Fees for non-consent tows: 
(1) 	Standard non-consent tow ..... 	$150.00 
(2) 	Motorcycle non-consent tow ..... 	175.00 
(3) 	Heavy-Duty non-consent tow ..... 	150.00 (Standard) + Heavy Duty Tow 
(4) 	Submerged Vehicle non-consent tow ..... 	150.00 + Standard Tow 
(5) 	Boat w/trailer non-consent ..... 	150.00 
(6) 	Boat w/o trailer (flat-bed tow) ..... 	150.00 
(7) 	Impound Fee ..... 	20.00 (protective measures) 
(8) 	Notification Fee ..... 	50.00 (per statute) 
(9) 	Dolly Fee ..... 	45.00 + Standard Tow 
(10) 	Ditch/Sand Pull ..... 	65.00 + Standard Tow (if towed) 
(11) 	Rollover ..... 	85.00 + Standard Tow (if towed) 
(12) 	Shift transmission under car ..... 	15.00 + Standard Tow (if towed) 
(13) 	Remove Drive Shaft ..... 	20.00 + Standard Tow (if towed) 
(14) 	Change Tire ..... 	15.00 + Standard Tow (if towed) 
(15) 	Services Not Listed ..... 	65.00 per hour (including not available status/standby, winch, offroad, extra man power) 
(16) 	Fuel surcharge ..... 	20.00 (when fuel exceeds $3.00/gallon in our city.) 
(17) 	No Key ..... 	35.00 
(18) 	Clean-up ..... 	35.00 (maximum) 
 
(b)  Daily storage fee: A VSF operator may not charge less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day or part of a day for storage of a vehicle that is twenty-five (25) feet in length. A VSF operator shall charge a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each day or part of a day for storage of a vehicle that exceeds twenty-five (25) feet in length. 
1.  A daily storage fee may be charged for any part of the day, except that a daily storage fee may not be charged for more than one (1) day if the vehicle remains at the vehicle storage facility less than twelve (12) hours. In this paragraph, a day is considered to begin and end at midnight. 
2.  A VSF that has accepted into storage a vehicle registered in this state shall not charge for more than five (5) days of storage fees until a notice is mailed or published. 
3.  A VSF operator that has accepted into storage a vehicle not registered in Texas shall not charge for more than five (5) days before the date the request for owner information is sent to the appropriate governmental entity. Such request shall be correctly addressed, with sufficient postage and sent by certified mail, or electronic certified mail, return receipt requested, to the governmental entity with which the vehicle is registered requesting information relating to the identity of the last known registered owner and lienholder of record. 
4.  A VSF operator shall charge a daily storage fee, after notice is mailed or published, for each day or portion of a day the vehicle is in storage until the vehicle is removed and all accrued charges paid. 
(c)  Police evidence tow: Any police supervisor on duty, in the exercise of his discretion, may direct that any vehicle being removed by a wrecker on the wrecker rotation list be taken by the driver of the wrecker directly to the police station, at the City's expense, and held there by the City for any lawful purpose. 
(d)  Heavy duty tows to be contracted by next out wrecker. 
(e)  All charges shall be listed on the towing invoice and the permit holder shall maintain a separate file for invoice copies pertaining to non-consent and police-authorized towing services for a period of two (2) years from the invoice date. Any officer of the police department may inspect such invoice(s) during regular business hours. Every invoice required to be kept under this section shall contain the towed vehicle's description by make, model, year, license number, and name of the tow truck driver in addition to charges incurred. Every invoice on non-consent tows shall include the above information along with the name, address, and phone number of the person authorizing the tow, accompanied by the reason the vehicle was towed, and the name, street address, and telephone number where the vehicle was taken for storage. Every invoice for police-authorized tows shall also include the name and badge number of the police officer who authorized the tow. 
(f)  Impoundment fee: A VSF operator may charge a vehicle owner an impoundment fee if impoundment is performed in accordance with these rules. The impoundment fee may not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00). If the VSF operator charges a fee for impoundment, the written bill for services must specify the exact services performed for that fee and the dates those services were performed. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
F.  UNCLAIMED VEHICLES 
Vehicle Storage Facilities will operate under the Texas Transportation Code Chapter 683—Abandoned Motor Vehicles. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
G.  TOW TICKETS 
1.  A towing company must prepare and issue a tow ticket for each non-consent tow. 
2.  A copy of the tow ticket must be given to the vehicle owner, if the owner or operator is present and available at the time of the tow, and a copy delivered to the vehicle storage facility or place agreed upon by the towing operator and the vehicle owner. 
3.  The tow ticket shall only authorize charges directly related to towing the vehicle to a designated location authorized by subsection 2 above. 
4.  The tow ticket shall itemize each charge and must characterize the fees using the identical fee structure stated in the towing company's non-consent towing fee schedule on file with the department. 
5.  The tow ticket must contain the registered name of the towing company, publicly listed telephone number, towing company certificate of registration number, and the full printed name and TDLR license number of the towing operator on file with the department. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
H.  PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE 
1.  Membership. There is hereby established a public safety committee, which shall be comprised of three (3) persons to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. One (1) member of the committee shall be from a wrecker company who has obtained a city permit and is currently on the rotation list. Committee members shall serve for period of two (2) years, or until their successors are appointed. Members may be removed from the committee by the City Council with or without cause. 
2.  Revocation or suspension of permits. To revoke or suspend a permit issued under this article, the chief of police, or his designee, shall apply to the public safety committee and prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the permittee has violated the terms of this article, including the standards of conduct. A permit issued under the provisions of this section may be denied, suspended, canceled, or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  The permit holder has not been in compliance with the requirements of this section at any time since the permit has been issued; 
(b)  The permit holder has committed any violation of state law regulating tow trucks; 
(c)  The permit holder has committed any violation of the municipal ordinances regulating tow trucks; 
(d)  The permit holder has violated any rules or regulations issued by the authority of the chief of police; 
(e)  There have been three (3) or more violations of the municipal ordinances regulating tow trucks within any one (1) year period by any driver operating a tow truck of the permit holder or by any other agents or employees of the permit holder; 
(f)  There have been four (4) or more moving violation convictions under the motor vehicle laws of the State of Texas within any one (1) year by any one driver while operating a tow truck of the permit holder; 
(g)  The permit holder knowingly supplies false or incomplete information to obtain or maintain a permit; 
(h)  The permit holder has been convicted of a felony within the last five (5) years, placed on probation, or convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years; or 
(i)  The permit holder, his agent, or employee fails to respond to tow truck calls from the police department in such a manner as to create unnecessary delays in the removal of wrecked or disabled vehicles from the roadway. 
3.  Appeal of decisions of board. Upon the filing of a written appeal stating the permittee's grounds, the permittee may appeal a suspension or revocation to the City Manager and then to the City Council. The City Council has the discretion to reinstate the license. 
4.  Hearing of complaints by permittee. The public safety committee shall also hear complaints, if any, by permittees in regards to the procedures of maintaining the rotation list, as well as hear complaints that the police department has failed to properly use the rotation list for non-consent tows. 
5.  Hearing of complaints by customers. The public safety committee shall also hear written and notarized complaints by any customer of a Santa Fe Police Department law enforcement scene tow regarding the alleged failure of tow truck companies to comply with the standards of conduct. Any complaints other than from a customer of a Santa Fe Police Department law enforcement scene tow will be referred to the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. 
6.  Citizens right to hearing. As provided for in Section 685.003 of the Texas Transportation Code, if a motor vehicle has been removed from a parking facility and placed in a vehicle storage facility without the consent of the owner or operator, or by a non consent police tow, the owner or operator is entitled to a hearing to determine whether or not just cause existed for the removal and placement of the vehicle. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
I.  WRECKER OFFICIAL 
The chief of police shall designate a wrecker official, who shall review applications, inspect tow trucks, and assist the public safety committee with staff support. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
J.  STANDARDS OF CONDUCT FOR PERMITTEES 
A permittee under this article shall adhere to the following standards of conduct: 
1.  Abide by all reasonable instructions of police officers and EMS personnel and other city officials at the law enforcement scene. 
2.  Shall not engage in price gouging. Price gouging shall consist of charging a fee that is in excess of the prices listed with the police department. 
3.  Respond to scenes within twenty-five (25) minutes (unless the safety of the public or police officer requires a more prompt response time due to the circumstances) if the call is accepted. 
4.  Promptly notify the police department if the permittee cannot respond within twenty-five (25) minutes. 
5.  Allow tow trucks, yards and business premises to be inspected by the city. 
6.  Carry a city permit and proof of insurance on each truck. 
7.  Use due care in the towing of vehicles. 
8.  Use due care in the maintenance of vehicles that are stored. 
9.  Use due care to maintain the tow trucks in optimum operating condition. 
10.  Use due care not to unreasonably interfere with the personnel at a law enforcement scene. 
11.  Use due care in the orderly arrival at a law enforcement scene. 
12.  Use due care to clean the site at a law enforcement scene. 
13.  The fact that a police officer is not present at the scene of an accident when a tow truck arrives shall not constitute an exception to this section nor any other section, and it shall be the duty of the owner or driver desiring to tow or haul any wrecked or disabled vehicles from the scene of an accident to cause the police to be notified of the occurrence of the accident and to await the arrival of a police officer. A tow truck driver shall not remove any wrecked or disabled vehicle from the place where the accident or collision has occurred or attach his tow truck to the wrecked or disabled vehicle until the driver of the vehicle has given permission and until the police officers of the city investigating the accident or collision have completed their investigation. 
14.  Abide by all the terms as denoted in this article. 
15.  All licensees under this article shall comply with all applicable state laws, inclusive of policies, procedures, rules and regulations. 
16.  Any police officer may confiscate the driver's license of the driver of a city tow truck if the tow truck driver interferes with the officer while at the scene. If the driver license is confiscated, it shall be accompanied by a written memo indicating the reason for the confiscation and given to the on-duty supervisor. The supervisor shall then forward the confiscated item, along with a memo, to the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police shall investigate or cause an investigation to be conducted to determine whether further disciplinary action is warranted, including revoking or suspending the tow truck driver's license to drive or termination of the police-authorized tow agreement if there is one, or both. 
17.  No tow truck driver shall, nor allow any person under his control to, ignite a match, lighter, or other flammable object within a distance of fifty (50) feet in any direction from the location of the law enforcement scene. The tow truck driver and any person under his control shall not enter into such area with a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or other burning material. 
18.  It shall be the duty of the tow truck driver of each tow truck that picks up a wrecked or disabled vehicle for the purpose of towing to clear the street of any and all debris, parts, or glass. In the event two (2) or more tow trucks pick up vehicles for towing, it shall be the duty of each tow truck driver to clear the street of debris, parts, or glass. 
19.  Operators shall maintain proper conduct at all times when performing a law enforcement scene tow from the initial call for service until the towed vehicle is delivered to the VSF. Inappropriate conduct includes, but is not limited to, fighting, assault, threatening the use of force, use of profanity, or any exhibition of disorderly conduct. Towing companies shall be responsible for the conduct of their operators. Improper conduct of an operator shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a towing company's permit. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
K.  QUALIFICATIONS OF TOW TRUCK DRIVERS 
All tow truck drivers shall be over twenty-one (21) years of age, possess a current valid Texas Driver's License, and not been convicted of a crime of the grade of Felony in the last five (5) years. All tow truck drivers shall maintain a valid Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation license to operate a tow truck. Towing companies shall have an affirmative duty to disclose to the city if any of their operators have been convicted as stated above, subsequent to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
L.  TOW TRUCK OPERATORS TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Unless directed otherwise by a police officer, a tow truck operator shall adhere to all traffic regulations. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
M.  INFLUENCE BY POLICE OFFICERS IN CHOICE OF WRECKER SERVICE 
1.  No police officer investigating or present at the scene or site of any wreck, accident, collision, or other law enforcement scene on a public street shall, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, recommend to any person the name of any particular person engaged in a wrecker service or repair business; nor shall any such police officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a wrecker or repair service; provided that any police officer, in the exercise of his discretion as a police officer, may direct that any vehicle, whether towed by a wrecker selected by the owner or towed by a wrecker selected from the wrecker rotation list, be taken by the driver of the wrecker towing the vehicle directly to the city police station and there held by the city for any lawful purpose. The police officer shall have the discretion in an emergency involving serious injuries to select any wrecker service that is available at the scene to remove vehicles so as to remove impediments in the streets or rights-of-way. 
2.  Upon arrival at the scene of a wrecked or disabled vehicle, the police officer shall determine if a police-authorized tow is necessary. If a police-authorized tow is necessary, the police officer shall advise dispatch and the rotation list shall be utilized to dispatch the required number of tow trucks to the scene. 
3.  If the owner or driver of the motor vehicle that is wrecked or disabled has a tow truck preference, that request will be honored if it will not cause undue delay and immediate towing is unnecessary. Any towing company may tow the vehicle at the owner's or driver's request as long as the towing company has a valid license issued by the State of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations as required by Chapter 2308 of the Texas Occupations Code. If the wrecked or disabled vehicle has any part or portion thereof upon the roadway, the tow truck responding at the owner's or driver's request, shall have twenty-five (25) minutes to arrive at the scene and remove the vehicle from the roadway. The police officer on the scene has the discretion to determine if a shorter period of time to arrive at the scene is necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public and the vehicle may then be towed pursuant to a police-authorized tow. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
N.  PENALTY 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provision of this section. Any violation of any portion of this section during all or any portion of any day shall be considered a separate offense and punishable in accordance with Chapter 1, Code of Ordinances, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code. If the City Council determines that a violation of this [section] creates a threat to the public safety, the City of Santa Fe may bring suit in district court to enjoin the person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association from engaging in the prohibited activity. The City of Santa Fe is not required to give bond as a condition to the issuance of injunctive relief. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2013 of April 11, 2013, Sec. 1) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 07-2013, § 1, adopted April 11, 2013, amended the Code by amending in its entirety the former Chapter 4, § 8, and adding a new § 8. The former Chapter 4, § 8 pertained to vehicle wrecker and wrecker company regulations, and derived from Ordinance 22-2009 adopted October 8, 2009; Ordinance No. 10-2012 of March 8, 2012; Ordinance No. 11-2012 of April 12, 2012.  
SECTION 9: - DRILLING OF OIL AND GAS WELLS REGULATED 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, and for all purposes under this section, the following words and terms wherever and whenever used or appearing in this section shall have the scope and meaning hereinafter defined and set out in connection with each. All technical or oil and gas industry words and phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(1)  Person shall include both the singular and the plural; and shall mean and include any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, club, society, cooperative, trust, municipal corporation, or political subdivision whatsoever. 
(2)  Well shall include and mean any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, any formation, strata or depth of the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon, or any of them. 
(Ordinance No. 3-79 of April 9, 1979) 
(3)  New Well Permittee shall mean the person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling and operation of a new well under this section, and his or its administrators, executors, heirs, successors, and assigns. 
(4)  Old Well Permittee shall mean the person to whom is issued a permit for the redrilling, working-over, recompletion, and reoperation of an old or existing well under this section, and his or its administrators, executors, heirs, successors, and assigns. 
(5)  Permittee shall include both an "old well permittee" and a "new well permittee". 
(Ordinance No. 08-82 of May 13, 1982) 
(6)  Lease as the term is used herein shall mean any tract of land subject to an oil, gas, and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or any unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one (1) lease, and any tract of land in which the minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership is developed and operated as a separate tract. 
(7)  Block as that term is used herein shall not be misconstrued to mean drilling block, but block of land only. 
(Ordinance No. 3-79 of April 9, 1979) 
B.  PERMITS 
(1)  New Well Permit 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to drill, to drill or to operate, any new well within the city limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such new well, without a new well permit for the drilling and operation of such new well having first been issued by the authority of the city council of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 08-82 of May 13, 1982) 
(2)  Old Well Permit 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to redrill, workover or to recomplete or reoperate any well, old or existing, within the city limits of the City of Santa Fe, or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such well, without an old well permit for the redrilling and reoperation of such well having first been issued by the authority of the city manager of the City of Santa Fe in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 11-90 of June 26, 1990) 
C.  STREETS AND ALLEYS 
No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the City of Santa Fe; and no street or alley shall be blocked or incumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation except by special permit by order of the city council of the City of Santa Fe, and then only temporarily. 
(Ordinance No. 3-79 of April 9, 1979) 
D.  WELL LOCATION 
(1)  Well Location—Subdivisions 
All drilling for gas and oil wells in recorded subdivisions shall be restricted to the location of existing oil and gas wells, or within a radius of not more than fifty (50) feet of such existing wells. This subsection shall apply only to acreage which has been subdivided into home sites the size of which are one (1) acre or less. Whenever acreage has been so subdivided, the provisions of this subsection shall apply when the plat thereof has been filed for record in the Office of the County Clerk of Galveston County, Texas. 
(2)  Well Location-Dwellings, Schools, Buildings, Etc. 
No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any residence, commercial building or water well without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the owner or owners thereof. No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any school without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the person or persons in control of any such school or schools. No drilling and no permit shall be issued to any well nearer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet to city-owned buildings or water wells without written permission from the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(Ordinance No. 01-85 of January 3, 1985) 
E.  APPLICATION AND FILING FEE 
(1)  New Well: Every application for a permit to drill and operate a new well shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, or by some person duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the city secretary and be accompanied with a non-refundable filing fee of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) in cash. No application shall request a permit to drill and operate but one (1) well, the said application shall include full information including the following: 
(a)  The date of said application. 
(b)  Name of applicant. 
(c)  Address of the applicant. 
(d)  Proposed site of the well, including: 
(i)  Name of the fee owner. 
(ii)  Name of the lease owner. 
(iii)  Brief description of the land. 
(e)  Type of derrick to be used. 
(f)  The proposed depth of the well. 
(g)  A statement that it is understood and agreed that for any legal action or undertaking, venue for all suits shall lie in Galveston County under any provision of this section. 
(2)  Old Well: Every application for a permit to redrill or workover or to recomplete any well within the City of Santa Fe shall be in writing signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the city secretary and be accompanied with a non-refundable filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) cash. No application shall request a permit to redrill, or workover or to recomplete but one (1) well and said application shall include full information including the following: 
(a)  The date of said application. 
(b)  Name of the applicant. 
(c)  Address of the applicant. 
(d)  Location of well site. 
(e)  Type of work and equipment to be used. 
(f)  Length of work anticipated. 
(g)  A statement that is understood and agreed that for any legal action or undertaking, venue for all suites shall lie in Galveston County under any provision of this section. 
The term of this permit shall be for a period of six (6) months from the date of issue. Subsection H shall apply to such applicant. 
(Ordinance No. 02-89 of February 9, 1989) 
F.  ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT 
The city council, within twenty (20) days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill and operate a well, shall determine whether or not said application complies in all respects with the provisions of this section, and if it does, the city council shall then fix the amount of the principal of the bond and insurance provided for in subsection H herein, and after such determination shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well applied for. Each permit issued under this section shall: 
(1)  By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this section with the same force and effect as if this section were copied verbatim in said permit. 
(2)  Specify the well location with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, or other available correct legal description. 
(3)  Contain and specify that the term of such permit shall be for a period of six (6) months from the date of the permit and as long thereafter as the permittee is engaged in drilling operations with no cessations of such operation for more than ninety (90) days, or oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from the well drilled pursuant to such permit, provided that if at any time after discovery of oil or gas the production thereof in commercial quantities shall cease, the term shall not terminate if the permittee commences additional reworking operations within ninety (90) days thereafter, and if they result in the production of oil or gas, so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from said well. 
(4)  Contain and specify such conditions as are by this section authorized. 
(5)  Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled not exceeding the projected depth. 
(6)  Contain and specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as so determined by the city council and conditioned as specified in subsection H hereof. 
Said permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the mayor of the City of Santa Fe, and prior to delivery to the permittee shall be signed by the permittee (with one (1) original to be retained by the city and one (1) by the permittee); and when so signed shall constitute the permittee's drilling and operating license and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, and such bond, and this section. 
If the permit for the well be refused, or if the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bond of the applicant be not approved and the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he wishes to withdraw his application, then upon the happening of said events the cash deposit provided for to be filed with the application shall be returned to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the City of Santa Fe, one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a processing fee. 
G.  TERMINATION OF PERMIT 
When a permit shall have been issued, the same shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city unless within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance actual drilling of the well shall have commenced. The cessation for a like period of the drilling operations or the cessation of the production of oil or gas from the well after production shall have commenced, shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this section, and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit. 
H.  PERMITTEE'S INSURANCE AND BOND 
In the event a permit be issued by the city council under the terms of this section for the drilling and operation of a well, no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city secretary of the City of Santa Fe, a bond and a certificate of insurance as follows: 
(Ordinance 02-84 of 2/9/84) 
(1)  The bond shall be a cash bond in the principal sum of such number of dollars as has been determined by the city council of the City of Santa Fe, but not to be less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Said cash bond shall be for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this section in the drilling and operation of the well. Said bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city secretary and remain in force and effect and on deposit for at least a period of six (6) months subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued, and in addition the bond will be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay off fines, penalties, and other assessments imposed upon permittee by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions, and conditions of this section, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city, which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations, to their former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the drilling or producing operations, and will, after abandonment, grade, level, and restore said property to the same surface condition, as nearly as possible, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well or wells were first commenced; and that the permittee will indemnify and hold the City of Santa Fe harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit, including the payment of any expenses incurred by the city for reasonable attorney's fees for representation of the city for any legal action which may be filed by either party hereto by reason of seeking or recovery of damages to the city as aforesaid. If at any time, the city council shall deem any permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee to make an additional cash bond. 
The cash bond is a condition of the permit, and as such, will remain in effect in accordance with these regulations. If at any time the permittee transfers or assigns ownership of a well, the bond posted for that well will also transfer to the new owner, permittee, administrator, executor, heir, successor, or assign. The city will not honor any reservation of bonds between the transferring parties. The transferring parties shall notify the city within thirty (30) days of the transaction. 
If after completion of the well, permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this section, such as to removing derrick, clearing premises, etc., permittee may apply to have said cash bond reduced to a sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the remainder of the time said well produces without reworking, and be given a refund of the amount of the reduction. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. Once the well ceases to produce and operate and is plugged and abandoned, permittee may apply for a full refund of said bond. 
(Ordinance No. 34-98 of November 12, 1998) 
(2)  In addition to the bond required in paragraph (1) of this subsection, the permittee shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the City of Santa Fe, in an insurance company authorized to do business within the State of Texas, said policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverages: 
(a)  Bodily injuries: $1,000,000.00-one person $3,000,000.00-one accident 
(b)  Property damage: $1,000,000.00 
(3)  Permittee shall file with the city secretary of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, certificates of said insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof by the city secretary of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, who shall act thereon within ten (10) days from the date of such filing. Said insurance policy or policies shall not be canceled without written notice to the city secretary of the City of Santa Fe at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event that said insurance policy or policies are canceled, the permit granted shall terminate, and permittee's rights to operate under said permit shall cease until permittee files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(4)  If, after completion of a well, permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this section, such as to removing derrick, clearing premises, etc., he may apply to the city council to have said insurance policies reduced as follows: 
(a)  Bodily injuries, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) one (1) person; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) one (1) accident. 
(b)  Property damage, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), for the remainder of the time said well produces without reworking. During reworking operations the amount of the insurance policy or policies shall be increased to the original amount. 
(Ordinance No. 02-84 of February 9, 1984) 
I.  APPOINTMENT OF OIL AND GAS INSPECTION COMMITTEE 
The city council may appoint an oil and gas inspection committee and said committee may be removed at the will of said city council. It shall be the duty of the oil and gas committee to enforce the provisions of this section. 
J.  DEEPER DRILLING 
(1)  Once any well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill such well to a deeper depth than that reached in the prior drilling operations without the permittee as to such well obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a supplemental application with the city secretary specifying: 
(a)  The then condition of the well and the casing therein; 
(b)  The depth to which it is proposed such well be deepened; 
(c)  The proposed casing program to be used in connection with proposed deepening operations; 
(d)  And evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings in said well currently pass the same tests as are in this section provided for in case of the drilling of the original well. 
(2)  In the event the city council is satisfied that said well may be deepened with the same degree of safety as existed in the original well, a supplemental permit may be issued without additional filing fee to the permittee, authorizing the deepening and operation of the well to such specified depth as applied for. In any deeper drilling or any deeper completion or any deeper production operations, the permittee shall comply with all other provisions contained in this section and applicable to the drilling, completion, and operation of a well or wells. 
K.  DERRICK AND RIG 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well within the city limits of Santa Fe, any wooden derrick, and all engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the city council; or to permit any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than sixty (60) days after completion or abandonment of the well. At all times from the start of erection of a derrick, mast, or a gin-pole, until the well is abandoned and plugged or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as herein provided, the permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises at all times; provided, however, it shall not be necessary to keep an extra watchman on duty on the premises when other workmen of permittee are on said premises. 
(1)  No electric lighting generator shall be placed or remain nearer than one hundred fifty feet (150') to any producing well or oil tank. 
(Ordinance No. 3-79 of April 9, 1979) 
(2)  Any rubbish or debris which may constitute a fire hazard shall be removed to a distance of at least one hundred feet (100') from the vicinity of the wells, tanks and pump stations. All waste shall be burned or disposed of in such manner as to avoid creating a fire hazard or polluting streams of fresh water strata. All waste disposal plans shall be approved by the city council. Failure to obtain such approval prior to disposal shall result in a penalty as defined in chapter 4, section 9, paragraph CC-PENALTY. 
(Ordinance No. 08-84 of June 4, 1984) 
(3)  No forge or open light shall be placed inside the derrick of a well showing oil or gas. 
(4)  All oil and gas pipe lines laid upon or across a public road or highway must be buried to a reasonably safe depth. 
(5)  Wherever available and practicable, electric light and power shall be installed in congested drilling areas. 
L.  PITS 
Either earthen or steel slush pits shall be permitted in connection with the drilling operation. In the event a steel pit is used, said pit and its contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within thirty (30) days after completion of the well. In the event an earthen slush pit is used, same shall be filled and leveled within one hundred twenty (120) days after completion of the well. 
M.  CASING 
All casing, including surface protection and production strings, shall be either seamless steel, or equivalent quality oil well casing. Each production string of casing must comply with at least the following minimum internal pressure yield strength, computed in accordance with A.P.I. Standards, to wit: 
Depth of String 
in Feet 	Internal Pressure 
Rating (psi) 
7" Casing 
0'- 3,400' 	2,720 lbs. 
3,400'- 4,400' 	3,740 
4,400'- 5,850' 	4,360 
5,850'- 7,650' 	6,340 
7,650'- 9,450' 	7,240 
9,450'-11,300' 	8,160 
5½" Casing 
0'- 4,400' 	3,110 lbs. 
4,400'- 5,600' 	4,270 
5,600'- 6,900' 	4,810 
6,900'- 8,000' 	5,320 
8,000'-10,005' 	7,740 
 
Each joint and length of each particular casting string shall have, prior to setting, unconditionally passed a complete cold water test. 
N.  SETTING AND CEMENTING CASING 
No well shall be drilled within the city limits of Santa Fe without properly setting surface casing to a minimum depth of fifteen hundred feet (1,500'). No well shall be drilled within the city limits of Santa Fe without cementing the surface casing by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground; and without cementing the production string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the production string to at least six hundred feet (600') above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon; and in the event a protection string of casing be required under the terms of this section, without cementing the protection string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the protection string to at least six hundred feet (600') above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. 
O.  VALVES AND BLOW-OUT PREVENTERS 
No well shall be drilled within the city limits of Santa Fe without properly equipping the surface casing when set with at least one (1) master valve, and without properly equipping the protection casing when set with at least one (1) master valve and one (1) fluid-operated ram type blowout preventer; and without properly equipping the production casing during completion operations and workover operations with at least one (1) master valve and at least one (1) fluid-operated ram type blow-out preventer. On each well drilled, a valve cock or kelly cock shall be installed on the kelly used. Each blow-out preventer shall test five thousand (5,000) pounds and its mechanical operation shall be tested at least once every eight (8) hour period and all control equipment shall be in good working condition and order at all times. 
P.  DRILLING FLUID 
No well shall be drilled within the city limits of Santa Fe without using mud as the drilling fluid after the setting of surface casing as provided in subsection N hereof. Prior to the time the well reaches a total depth of five thousand feet (5,000') or the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at not less than ten (10) pounds per gallon. After the well reaches a total depth of five thousand feet (5,000') or the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. In reworking a well, a drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. 
Q.  DRILL STEM TESTS 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person in connection with the drilling or reworking operations of any well within the city limits of Santa Fe to take and to complete any drill stem test or tests except during daylight hours and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks, and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
R.  TUBING 
All tubing used in any well within the city limits of Santa Fe shall be seamless steel tubing having not less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth not exceeding seven thousand feet (7,000'), or less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of seven thousand two hundred sixty (7,260) pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth in excess of seven thousand feet (7,000'). 
S.  BRADENHEAD 
Each well drilled within the city limits of Santa Fe shall be equipped with a bradenhead with a working pressure of not less than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall not be welded. The bradenhead installed on the surface casing shall be set above ground level and shall be equipped with fitting having a working pressure rating of not less than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch. The bradenhead pressure shall be checked at least once each calendar month and if pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures shall be taken immediately to eliminate the source and the existence of the pressure. 
T.  CHRISTMAS TREE AND WELL HEAD CONNECTIONS 
The christmas tree and all well head connections on each well drilled within the city limits of Santa Fe shall be as follows: on all flowing wells completed at a depth of above four thousand feet (4,000'), the christmas tree and well head connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of two thousand (2,000) pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least four thousand (4,000) pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed to a depth of from four thousand one feet (4,001') to seven thousand feet (7,000'), the christmas tree and well head connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least six thousand (6,000) pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed below a depth of seven thousand feet (7,000'), the christmas tree and well head connections shall be at least a minimum working pressure of five thousand (5,000) pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least ten thousand (10,000) pounds per square inch. All piping and fittings connecting the well head to an oil gas separator shall have at least the same minimum working pressure and minimum test pressure as hereinabove specified for christmas tree and well head connections. In the event the surface shut-in pressure of any well in the city limits of Santa Fe exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds per square inch, the flowing of the christmas tree shall be equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valves. 
U.  PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND SANITARY 
The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character, to the satisfaction of the City of Santa Fe, at all times drilling operations or reworking operations are being conducted, and as long thereafter as oil and/or gas is being produced therefrom. 
V.  MUFFLERS REQUIRED 
Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations shall be electricity or properly muffled gas, gasoline, or diesel engines. Such mufflers are to be approved by the oil and gas committee or the city council prior to their use. 
W.  STORAGE TANKS AND SEPARATORS 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, construct, or operate in connection with any producing well within the city limits of Santa Fe, any crude oil storage tanks except to the extent of two (2) steel tanks for oil storage, not exceeding five hundred (500) barrels capacity each and so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight and each surrounded with an earthen fire wall at such distance from the tank as will under any circumstances hold and retain at least one and one-half (1½) times the maximum capacity of such tank. A permittee may use, construct, and operate a steel conventional separator, and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil, with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight. Each oil gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. 
X.  FENCE 
Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to enclose said well, together with its surface facilities and storage tanks, by a substantial smooth net wire fence sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within the enclosure. It is provided, however, that in noncongested areas the city council or inspection committee, in its discretion, may waive the requirement of any fence or may designate the type of fence to be erected. 
Y.  VENTING AND FLARING OF GAS 
No person engaged in drilling or operating any well shall permit gas to escape or be vented into the air unless said gas be flared and burned. All gas flared or burned from a torch, pipe, or any other burning device within the city limits of Santa Fe must be done in such manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard to any property; and the location of the torch, pipe, or other burning device, the construction thereof, the maintenance thereof, and the operation thereof, shall at all times be in full compliance with such regulations as may from time to time be issued by the oil and gas committee or the city council of the City of Santa Fe. 
Z.  ABANDONMENT AND PLUGGING 
Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a two hundred foot (200') cement plug in the bottom of the surface casing with the bottom of the plug one hundred feet (100') above the surface casing section; and to set a fifty foot (50') cement plug in the top of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of casing may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations it will be the obligation of the permittee or the operator of the well to flood the well with mud-laden fluid weighing not less than ten (10) pounds per gallon or sufficient mud weight to yield a hydrostatus pressure five hundred (500) pounds above maximum formation pressure; and the well will be kept filled to the top with said mud-laden fluid at all times; mud-laden fluid of the above specifications will be left in the well bore below and between cement plugs. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the State of Texas or the Railroad Commission of the State of Texas in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee. 
(Ordinance No. 3-79 of April 9, 1979) 
AA.  DISPOSAL OF SALT WATER 
Permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities which he may bring to the surface, and disposal to be made in such manner as to not contaminate the water supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation. The disposal process shall be approved by the city council or the oil and gas committee prior to disposal. 
(Ordinance No. 08-84 of June 4, 1984) 
BB.  VIOLATION OF LAWS OR REGULATIONS 
Any violation of the laws of the State of Texas or any rules, regulations, or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining, or abandoning an oil or gas well or related appurtenances, equipment, or facilities, or in reference to fire walls, fire protection, blow-out protection, safety protection, or convenience of persons or property, shall also be a violation of this section and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
CC.  PENALTY 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provision hereof irrespective of whether or not the verbage of each subsection hereof contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this section, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00); and the violation of each separate provision of this section, and of said permit, and of said bond, shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the city council of the City of Santa Fe at any regular or special session or meeting thereof, may, provided ten (10) days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this section and under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted in the event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of said permit, said bond, or this section. In the event the permit be revoked, the permittee may make application to the city council of the City of Santa Fe for a reissuance of such permit, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final. 
(Ordinance 3-79 of April 9, 1979)  
SECTION 10: - PUBLIC UTILITIES 
A.  FRANCHISE REQUIRED 
No utility company operating within the city limits without a specific franchise granted by the Santa Fe City Council shall extend its pipes, lines, wires, and facilities for the purpose of serving customers not theretofore served by it. 
B.  SWORN REPORT OF GROSS RECEIPTS REQUIRED 
All persons, associations, organizations, and corporations, excepting suppliers of public utility service pursuant to a franchise granted by the City of Santa Fe, Texas, using or maintaining any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, gas pipe lines, water pipe lines, pipes and other fixtures in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks, or other places within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, shall on the first day of March of each and every year, file with the city secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts from the business conducted by such persons, associations, organizations, and corporations within the corporate limits of the said city and such other information as is provided by Article 1121, 1925 Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, for the preceding year ending December thirty-first. 
C.  BOOKS AND RECORDS MAY BE EXAMINED 
The city council may, when it sees fit, have the books and records of such person, association, organization, or corporation rendering the statement required in subsection B of this section, examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether such statement is accurate, but nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other method. 
D.  STREET RENTALS 
On or before the first day of April of each and every year, every person, association, organization, or corporation occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks, or other public places in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, with poles, pipes, and for other fixtures shall, as a condition to such further occupancy, pay to the city annually for such privileges a rental equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts received by such person, association, organization, or corporation from its business conducted in the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for the preceding year, which sums shall be paid to the City of Santa Fe, Texas. This subsection shall not be construed to limit the amount of franchise fees paid by utility companies operating under franchise agreements with the city. 
E.  CITY SECRETARY TO DELIVER RECEIPT 
Upon receipt of the above rental by the city, the city secretary shall deliver to the person, association, organization, or corporation paying the same a receipt of such rental, which said receipt shall authorize such person, association, organization, or corporation to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks, and other public ways of the city in carrying on its business for twelve (12) months from January first of such year. 
F.  PURPOSE OF RENTAL 
The rental for the privilege of using the streets, alleys, highways, easements, parks, or other public places of the City of Santa Fe provided for in this section is not charged as a tax, but is made for the privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed by such persons, associations, organizations, and corporations of using the streets, easements, alleys, and other public ways of the city in the conduct of their respective businesses; and such charges are additional to all ad valorem, franchise taxes, and all other taxes of every nature whatsoever against the persons, associations, organizations, or corporations mentioned herein. 
G.  SECTION NOT TO RELIEVE UTILITIES OF OTHER REQUIREMENTS IMPOSED BY LAW 
Nothing herein is intended to relieve any person, association, organization, or corporation of any condition, restriction, or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of said City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
H.  SECTION DOES NOT GRANT FRANCHISE 
This section does not grant a franchise to any utility, or person, association, organization, or corporation to use the streets, easements, alleys, and other public ways and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise, and the city reserves the right to cancel the privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals for the year in which such cancellation becomes effective paid to the city. 
I.  OTHER RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS 
The City of Santa Fe hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the erection and maintenance of poles, wires, pipes, and other appurtenances in the streets, easements, alleys, and other public ways of the said city and from time to time to require such poles, pipes, wires, and other property, equipment, and fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed and to require wires to be run in conduits on such terms as the city may deem proper. 
J.  ADDITIONAL PENALTIES 
Every person, association, organization, and corporation who shall operate any business without filing the report as provided in subsection B hereof, and the payment of the rentals provided for herein shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day that such person, association, organization, or corporation shall conduct such business using and occupying the streets, easements, alleys, parks, or other public ways of the City of Santa Fe without the payment of said rentals, which said sum may be recovered by the City of Santa Fe in a court of competent jurisdiction by a suit filed herein. 
K.  GENERAL PENALTIES 
Every person, association, organization, or corporation, and the local manager or agent of every such person, organization, or corporation failing or refusing to allow the examination provided for in subsection C hereof shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, be fined in accordance with chapter 1, section 5 of this Code of Ordinances. 
L.  CITY INSPECTIONS 
The fire marshal, public works director, city police officers, and such other persons designated by the city, shall have power and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect from time to time all telegraph, telephone, electric light, or other poles, gas pipe lines, water pipe lines, pipes, and other fixtures in the public places within the city for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing, or maintaining same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition. 
(Provision for inclusion of section 10 above provided for in ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances.) 
Editor's note— See also Article 11 of Home Rule Charter.  
SECTION 11: - MASS GATHERINGS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
(1)  Mass gathering means any meeting or gathering held inside the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe on city property or private property which attracts or can be expected to attract more than one hundred fifty (150) persons during any day or portion of any day of the meeting or gathering. 
(2)  Issuing officer means the chief of police. 
(3)  Promoter means any person, group of persons, firm, corporation, partnership, or association that organizes, promotes, manages, finances, or holds a mass gathering. 
B.  PROHIBITIONS 
No person may act as a promoter of a mass gathering in the City of Santa Fe unless he obtains a permit from the issuing officer under the provisions of this section. 
C.  EXCEPTIONS 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any mass gathering that is held at or in an established and permanent facility that is designed for and capable of handling more than one hundred fifty (150) persons during any day such as, but not limited to, churches, sports, stadiums, arenas, centers, coliseums, and auditoriums, and shall not apply to parades conducted in accordance with a valid city parade permit, nor to any event for which prior approval must be obtained from the city under any other ordinance, policy, or contract. 
D.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
(1)  At any time prior to the mass gathering, but in no event less than fourteen (14) days prior to the mass gathering, the promoter of the mass gathering shall file with the chief of police an application for a permit. No fee shall be charged for issuance of a permit. 
(2)  The city manager where good cause is shown therefore, shall have the authority to cause the chief of police to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than fourteen (14) days before the date such gathering is proposed to be conducted. 
(3)  The application shall include the following: 
(a)  The name and address of the promoter. 
(b)  The location and a description of the property on which the mass gathering is to be held. 
(c)  The date and the time that the mass gathering will be held. 
(d)  The number of persons the promoter estimates will attend the mass gathering. 
(e)  A description of the type of event planned. 
(f)  Permittee shall reimburse the city for expenditures for the services of the policemen, firemen, E.M.S., hospital, cleaning of the grounds, damages, and such other costs as the city may incur as a consequence of the gathering other than normal customary services provided by the city. Either bond or cash at the promoter's option shall be posted in an amount not less than the number of persons estimated to attend the mass gathering multiplied by twenty cents ($0.20) to insure the reimbursement to the city for such expenditures. The city shall refund to the promoter the amount of cash posted less any amount expended by the city for said services or other costs. 
(g)  A certificate of insurance stating that the promoter has public liability insurance providing for protection of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) against liability for damages to property and protection of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to or death of one (1) person and of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for protection against injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in a single accident or occurrence. 
E.  INVESTIGATION 
After an application is filed with the chief of police, the chief of police shall inquire into preparations for the mass gathering and provide a statement as to whether or not he believes that the minimum standards of health, sanitation, and buildings will be maintained. 
F.  FINDINGS OF CHIEF OF POLICE 
(1)  Within seven (7) days after the initial application, the chief of police shall grant or deny the permit. 
(2)  The chief of police may deny the permit if they find that: 
(a)  the preparations for the mass gathering do not assure that minimum standards of sanitation, health, and buildings will be maintained; or that the mass gatherings will be conducted in an orderly fashion and the physical safety of property and persons in attendance and in the surrounding area will be adequately protected; and 
(b)  no insurance or bond or cash deposit have been posted to insure reimbursement to the city for its services or for damages; or no waiver has been granted. 
(3)  The decision to deny a permit shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the denial. After a denial, the promoter may reapply for a permit hereunder or appeal the decision of the chief of police directly to the city council. 
(4)  If an applicant does not agree with the conditions of the permit, a direct appeal of the conditions of the permit may be made to council for modification. 
(Ordinance No. 03-81 of February 4, 1981)  
SECTION 12: - TAXICABS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Taxicab , as used herein, shall mean and include any vehicle used in the City of Santa Fe to carry passengers for hire; excepting, however, motor buses operating on a fixed route. 
(2)  Person , as used herein, shall include any person, firm, or corporation. 
(3)  Driver shall mean the chauffeur of a taxicab. 
(4)  Operation , as used herein, shall include receiving any passenger for transport, but shall not include solely taking a passenger to a destination and leaving him. 
B.  PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall operate a taxicab within the City of Santa Fe or cause the same to be operated, without first obtaining a permit therefor. Applications for taxicab permits shall be made to the city secretary and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of person or corporation making application; if corporation, give name of officers. 
(2)  Place of residence of applicant, if individual; home office if corporation. 
(3)  Trade name identifying taxicab. 
(4)  Location where taxicab to be stationed. 
(5)  Type vehicles to be used as taxicab. 
(6)  Give motor number, model, make, latest Texas license number of vehicle. 
(7)  Name of record title holder of vehicle. 
(8)  State whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony offense. 
(9)  Attach original Certificate of Title of vehicle or copy thereof. 
(10)  Attach inspection report of competent mechanic giving date of inspection, license number of vehicle inspected, mechanical condition of car, including condition of lights, brakes, steering apparatus. 
Upon receipt of such application, the city secretary shall present the same to the city council. Upon consideration, the city council may grant or refuse such application for a permit, as in their discretion may seem to the best interest of the public. 
C.  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; INSURANCE 
If the city council shall approve any application filed hereunder, the city secretary shall thereupon issue a taxicab permit for the operation of the vehicle made the subject of such application to the applicant, subject however, to the following: 
(1)  That the applicant shall pay a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or a pro rate portion thereof if the license is issued for less than a year. 
(2)  (a)  That the applicant shall deposit with the city secretary a policy of public liability insurance satisfactory to the city secretary, executed by an agent of an insurance company duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas, performable in Galveston County, Texas, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such vehicle which shall be described in the policy in like manner as in the permit covering the same, the minimum amount of recovery under such policy of insurance to be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the injury or death of any one (1) person, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the injury or death of more than one (1) person in a single accident; and not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for damage or destruction of property in one (1) accident. 
(b)  The owner of such taxicab may file, in lieu of an insurance policy, a surety bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), approved by the city secretary of the City of Santa Fe, executed by the owner as principal and a solvent corporation authorized to do a bond business under the laws of the State of Texas as surety, which bond shall be conditioned for the payment of all final judgments which may be rendered against the principal in the bond for damages on account of death or injury to persons, or damage to property; including both passengers and members of the public generally, occasioned by the operation of such vehicle, which shall be described in like manner in the bond as in the permit covering the same. 
(c)  All insurance policies shall contain a provision for continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any previous recovery thereon. All bonds shall provide for successive recoveries to the full extent of the amount of the bond, but not exceeding such amount. 
(d)  Each policy or bond, anything therein to the contrary notwithstanding, shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Such insurance policy or bond shall not be cancelled without giving ten (10) days notice in writing of such cancellation to the insured and to the city secretary. 
(f)  Suit may be brought to recover under such insurance policy or bond without joinder of the City of Santa Fe or any official of said city. Neither the city of Santa Fe nor any officer thereof shall be liable for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any insurer on any policy or surety on any bond given to meet the requirements of this section, or on account of any claims or act or omission relating to any vehicle licensed hereunder. 
(g)  The insurance policy or bond deposited hereunder shall remain in continuing force and effect so long as any permit shall be in effect on any vehicle licensed hereunder. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide the city secretary with a good and sufficient surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) payable to the mayor of the City of Santa Fe and his successors in office, conditioned that the applicant will abide by all the rules, regulations, and ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. 
D.  PERMITS 
The permits issued hereunder shall be signed by the city secretary and sealed with the Seal of the City. It shall be dated on the day of its issuance, shall show the name and address of the permittee, bear a serial number, show motor number and model of taxicab, and bear date of expiration. 
(1)  Renewal of Permits 
All permits issued hereunder shall expire on the thirty-first (31st) day of December of the year issued and shall be renewed upon payment of an annual permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or pro rata portion thereof if issued for less than a year. 
(2)  Display of Permit 
The permit issued hereunder shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the vehicle for which issued. 
(3)  Nonassignable 
Permits issued under the provisions of this section shall not be assignable. 
(4)  Number of Permits 
No more than two (2) permits shall be granted. 
E.  REVOCATION OF PERMIT 
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the city council of the City of Santa Fe at any time it shall be made evident to the city council that the permittee has violated any provision of this section, or if it shall be made evident to the city council that the operator or operators of the vehicle licensed hereunder shall repeatedly violate any traffic laws, statute, or ordinance. Upon notice of such revocation, the permittee shall surrender his permit to the city secretary. 
F.  INDEMNITY 
The permittee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability, cost, damage, and expense of whatever character arising out of or in any manner resulting from the operation of any taxicab by permittee, under the terms of this section. 
G.  MARKING OF TAXICABS 
Each taxicab shall have on each side, and in the rear thereof, the name of the permittee, or his trade name in visible contrasting lettering at least two inches (2") in height, and shall have painted on at least one (1) side the number of the permit issued for it. All taxicabs operating under the same trade name shall be of identical color. 
H.  DRIVER 
No person shall drive a taxicab unless he is duly licensed as a chauffeur by the Department of Public Safety of the State of Texas. Such driver shall register with the chief of police giving his name, age, residence, ownership of taxicab to be operated by him, and fingerprints and photograph. The chief of police shall thereupon cause a registration receipt to issue; provided, however, that no such receipt shall issue to any person found not of good character, and not familiar with traffic laws and ordinances, or who has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude. 
The photograph, fingerprints, and description of the driver of any taxicab licensed hereunder, shall appear in a conspicuous place inside such taxicab. No driver or any permittee hereunder shall knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration of a crime. 
I.  INSPECTION 
Every vehicle for which a permit shall be issued hereunder shall be inspected by a competent mechanic every sixty (60) days and a statement evidencing such inspection, giving the date and motor number of the vehicle, shall upon demand be presented to the chief of police. Such inspection shall be at the expense of the owner of such taxicab. 
J.  PASSENGERS 
No more than four (4) passengers shall be transported in a taxicab at one and the same time. No more than one (1) passenger shall be seated in the front seat of any taxicab. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the original passenger. 
The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the taxicab. 
(Ordinance No. 04-81 of February 12, 1981)  
SECTION 13: - PAWNBROKERS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section the following items are defined to have the following meanings: 
(1)  Pawnbrokers shall mean any person whose business is to take or receive by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange any goods, wares, or merchandise, or articles of personal property of any kind as security for money loaned thereon. 
(2)  Secondhand dealer shall mean any person engaged in the business of purchasing or selling goods of any kind or description, having once been used or transferred from the manufacturer to the dealer and then received into the possession of third parties, whether same consists of clothes, rags, iron or other metal, furniture, articles or household utensils, articles of personal use or wearing apparel, or jewelry of any kind or description, or old gold or silver, plumbing fixtures, secondhand building material, or any other goods of the class considered personalty, whether related to any of the goods above specifically described or not. 
B.  REGISTER 
(1)  Required 
Any and all persons engaged in business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall keep a register in connection with such business. 
(2)  Daily Entries; Information Required 
At the close of business on each day the pawnbroker or dealer shall enter or cause to be entered therein the following: 
(a)  Facts about Person 
An accurate description of the person, from whom any article of personal property is purchased or received or to whom any loan is made on personal property, which shall include the name, age, sex, color, nationality, and place of residence of such person, as well as their current driver's license number. 
(b)  Facts about Article 
An accurate description of any article of personal property, so purchased or received or upon which a loan is made, which shall contain any mark, brand, monogram, word, or letters blown, stamped, etched, or otherwise permanently marked upon such article. 
(c)  Photo of Person and Items 
Articles, not easily identified by description, namely silver and gold items, and all jewelry shall be photographed (polaroid) along with the person from whom article is purchased or received. 
C.  STOCK ARRANGED FOR INSPECTION 
All articles purchased or received by pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall be so arranged in stock as to enable the same to be inspected by the police department or any other person in authority. 
D.  INSPECTION 
(1)  Register and Articles 
All entries made, as provided in subsection B, and all articles and items bought or obtained by any dealer, along with photograph when applicable, shall be open and subject to inspection and examination at all times by the chief of police or any officer or any other person authorized and designated by him to inspect the same. 
(2)  Seven (7) Days after Purchase 
Such articles and items shall be kept by such dealer within the city for at least seven (7) days from the date of buying or receiving the same, for the purpose of inspection. 
E.  LOCATION REQUIREMENT 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer unless such business is conducted within a permanent building and is in full compliance with all public sanitation and health laws. 
F.  LOCATION PROHIBITED IN PROXIMITY TO SPECIFIED BUILDINGS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer at any place or upon any premises in the city within one hundred feet (100') of any residence, apartment house, boarding or rooming house, hospital, hotel, church, or school, except the residence of a licensed pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. 
G.  DEALING WITH MINORS 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to buy, take, or receive by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange any goods, wares, or merchandise or article of personal property of any kind from any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
H.  ANNUAL LICENSE 
Any and all persons engaged in business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer within the city shall obtain a license from the city secretary. The annual license fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) unless such business is operated by a nonprofit group, in which case the fee shall be waived. 
(Ordinance No. 08-81 of May 18, 1981)  
SECTION 14: - CITY OF SANTA FE CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM[1] 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number: 
(1)  Affiliate means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with Grantee. 
(2)  Basic cable is the tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals. 
(3)  Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 as amended. 
(4)  Cable Service means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or any other lawful communication service. 
(5)  Cable System means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment or other communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service and other service to subscribers. 
(6)  FCC means Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity thereto. 
(7)  Franchise shall mean the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Franchising Authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service or other service to subscribers. 
(8)  Franchising Authority means the City of Santa Fe, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof. 
(9)  Grantee means THE MECA CORPORATION, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof. 
(10)  Gross Revenues means the monthly cable service revenues received by Grantee from subscribers of the cable system inclusive of franchise fees received from subscribers, basic service revenues, pay service revenues and local advertising revenues; provided, however, that such phrase shall not include; (i) revenues received from any national advertising carried on the cable system; (ii) any taxes on cable service which are imposed on any subscriber thereof by any government unit or agency, and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency. 
(11)  Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust corporation, or governmental entity. 
(12)  Public Way shall mean the surface of, and space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority in the service area which shall entitle the Franchising Authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the cable system. Public way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority within the service area for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. Public way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements of rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the Franchising Authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting Grantee's cable service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, compliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system. 
(13)  Service Area means the present municipal boundaries of the Franchising Authority, and shall include any addition thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
(14)  Service Tier means a category of cable service or other services, provided by Grantee and for which a separate charge is made by Grantee. 
(15)  Subscriber means a person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable services or other service therefrom with Grantee's express permission. 
(16)  Video Programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. I) 
B.  GRANT OF FRANCHISE 
(1)  Grant 
The city hereby grants to Grantee a non-exclusive franchise which authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a cable system and offer cable service and other services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under, or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and for that, purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additional thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system. 
(2)  Term 
The franchise granted pursuant to this section shall be for an initial term of fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the franchise as set forth in subsection (3) unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(3)  Acceptance; Effective Date 
Grantee shall accept the franchise granted pursuant hereto by signing this section and filing same with the city clerk or other appropriate official or agency of the Franchising Authority within sixty (60) days after the passage and final adoption of this section. Subject to the acceptance by Grantee, the effective date of this section shall be the sixtieth day after its passage and final adoption. 
(4)  Favored Nations 
In the event the Franchising Authority enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than the Grantee for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the franchise area which contains terms more favorable to such person or entity in any regard than similar provisions of this section, then the Franchising Authority shall amend this section to be effective as of the effective date of the other franchise, permit, license authorization or other agreement, so as to give the Grantee the benefit of any such more favorable terms. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. II) 
C.  STANDARDS OF SERVICE 
(1)  Conditions of Street Occupancy 
All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed or erected by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be so located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways. 
(2)  Restoration of Public Ways 
If during the course of Grantee's construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by Grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. 
(3)  Relocation at Request of Franchising Authority 
Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five (5) business days, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the grantee when lawfully required by Franchising Authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the Franchising Authority; but, the Grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any company other than the Grantee using such street, easement, or right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the Grantee. 
(4)  Relocation at Request of Third Party 
The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Franchising Authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided: 
(a)  the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance; and 
(b)  the Grantee is given not less than ten (10) business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(5)  Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery 
The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the Grantee's wires, cables or other equipment. The Grantee shall reasonably compensate the Franchising Authority or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming, or shall, at its own cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction of the system undertaken by Grantee. Grantee agrees to use tree trimmers approved by the Franchising Authority. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations Grantee may have to the Franchising Authority and the property owner pursuant to the terms of this section. 
(7)  Aerial and Underground Construction 
In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that such facilities are actually capable of receiving Grantee's cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the cable system's signal quality. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications, and electric services are both aerial and underground, Grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in this subsection shall require Grantee to construct, operate, and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this subsection, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date of this section, Grantee shall only be required to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at the time that such are placed underground. 
(8)  Required Extensions of Service 
The cable system as constructed as of the date of the passage and final adoption of this section substantially complies with the material provisions hereof. Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to the terms hereof within the service area. Whenever Grantee shall receive a request for service from at least ten (10) subscribers for aerial construction or thirteen (13) subscribers for underground construction, within 1320 cable bearing strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers; provided that such extension is technically feasible, or as provided for under subsection (9) of this section. 
(9)  Subscriber Charges for Extensions of Service 
No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground, existence of more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers, or a density of less than ten (10) subscribers for aerial construction or thirteen (13) subscribers for underground construction, per 1320 cable bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor and easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by Grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be expanded, Grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers per 1320 cable-bearing strand feet of its trunks or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals ten (10) subscribers for aerial construction or thirteen (13) subscribers for underground construction. Potential subscribers will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro-rata basis. Grantee may required that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance. 
(10)  Service to Public Buildings 
The Grantee shall provide without charge one (1) outlet of basic service to each of the Franchising Authority's office building(s), fire station(s), police station(s), and public school building(s) that are passed by its cable system. The outlets of basic service shall not be used to distribute or sell cable services in or throughout such buildings; nor shall such outlets be located in common or public areas open to the public. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this subsection, the Grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings or premises exceeds one hundred fifty (150) cable feet, unless it is technically feasible and so long as it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the cable system to do so, or unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of one hundred fifty (150) cable feet. In the event that additional outlets of basic service are provided to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the Grantee's time and material cost associated with the installation of such additional outlets. 
(11)  Emergency Override 
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the Grantee shall, upon request of the Franchising Authority, make available its facilities for the Franchising Authority to provide emergency information and instructions during the emergency or disaster period. To the extent allowed by applicable law, the Franchising Authority shall hold the Grantee, its agents, employees, officers and assigns hereunder, harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the Franchising Authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs. 
(12)  Converter-Parental Lock 
Grantee shall provide (by sale of lease) to subscribers, upon request, converters or trapping devices, equipped with a parental lock capable of securing one channel or all channels. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. III) 
D.  REGULATION BY FRANCHISING AUTHORITY 
(1)  Franchise Fee 
(a)  As compensation for administration of this franchise and grant of use of the public ways, Grantee shall pay to the Franchising Authority a franchise fee equal to five percent (5%) of gross revenues received by Grantee from the operation of the cable system, subject to subsection (c) below, on a quarterly basis; provided, however, that Grantee may credit against any such payments (i) any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by Franchising Authority or other governmental entity on a cable operator, or subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such; (ii) any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability imposed by Franchising Authority which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed, both on utilities and cable operators and their services), and (iii) any other special tax, assessment, or fee imposed by Franchising Authority such as a business, occupation, and entertainment tax. For purposes of this section, the three (3) month period applicable under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar quarter, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the Franchising Authority and Grantee. The franchise fee payment shall be due and payable sixty (60) days after the close of the preceding calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report from a representative of Grantee showing the basis for the computation. In no event, shall the franchise fee payments required to be paid by Grantee exceed five percent (5%) of gross revenues received by Grantee in any twelve (12) month period, subject to subsection (c) below. 
(b)  The initial payment of franchise fees under this section shall be due and payable by 30 November 1992, and shall be for the first three (3) calendar quarters of 1992. Thereafter, the payments shall be made as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Should applicable law or regulations change so as to allow the franchise fee to be increased above the level of five percent (5%), the Grantee shall, upon request of the Franchising Authority, increase the fee to an amount not to exceed that which may be established by such law or regulations. Grantee may pass through to subscribers the amount of any increase in the franchise fee. 
(d)  Additional costs to be borne by Grantee, with regard to franchise renewal or any other notice required hereunder, shall include all costs of publication of notices required pursuant to the City Charter, this section, the adoption of this section, or any local, state or federal law. 
(e)  Payment by Grantee of franchise fees as provided herein shall not be considered in the nature of a tax, but shall be in addition to any and all federal, state, and local taxes, which are separate and distinct obligations of the Grantee. 
(f)  No acceptance of any payment of franchise fees shall be construed as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Franchising Authority may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of any other obligation of Grantee. Franchising Authority may not more than once each year require a gross receipt examination certified by an independent auditor in order to verify proper franchise fee payment, subject to subsection (g) below. 
(g)  Limitation on franchise fee actions. The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five (5) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee is due. Unless within five (5) years from and after said payment due date the Franchising Authority initiates a lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fees in a court of competent jurisdiction, such recovery shall be barred and the Franchising Authority shall be estopped from asserting any claims whatsoever against the Grantee relating to any such alleged deficiencies. 
(2)  Rates and Charges 
(a)  The Franchising Authority may not regulate the rates for the provision of cable service and other services, including, but not limited to, ancillary charges relating thereto, except as expressly provided herein and except as authorized pursuant to federal and state law including, but not limited to, the Cable Act and FCC rules and regulations relating thereto. From time to time, Grantee has the right to modify its rates and charges including, but not limited to, the implementation of additional charges and rates; provided, however, that Grantee shall give notice to the Franchising Authority of any such modifications or additional charges sixty (60) days prior to the effective date thereof, and at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date thereof to subscribers. In addition, Grantee shall provide to the Franchising Authority, at least annually, a full schedule of its rates and charges. 
(b)  In the event that change in applicable law or regulations results in rate increases being subject to approval of the Franchising Authority, the Grantee shall, subject to such applicable law, submit its request for rate increase in writing to the Franchising Authority. Franchising Authority will have ninety (90) days within which to either approve or disapprove such rate increase, failing which, Grantee shall automatically be allowed such rate increase. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent Franchising Authority and Grantee from mutually agreeing to amend this agreement or provide for an alternative procedure for rate increase, including a procedure which allows Grantee to automatically increase rates a certain annual amount, subject to the stipulations of such amendment. 
(3)  Renewal of Franchise 
(a)  The Franchising Authority and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Franchising Authority that relate to the renewal of the Grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable Act), unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded, or repealed by the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state law. 
(b)  This paragraph applies to a franchise renewal subject to Section 626 of the Cable Act as provided in subsection (a) above. In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a), the Franchising Authority agrees to notify Grantee of its preliminary assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and interest, as well as, the past performance of Grantee under the then current franchise term. The Franchising Authority further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to the Grantee prior to the time that the four (4) months period referred to in subsection (c) of Section 626 is considered to begin. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this subsection, the Grantee and Franchising Authority agree that at any time during the term of the then current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the Franchising Authority and Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current franchise and the Franchising Authority may grant a renewal thereof. The Grantee and the Franchising Authority consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act. 
(4)  Conditions of Sale 
Except to the extent expressly required by federal or state law, if a renewal of Grantee's franchise is denied and the Franchising Authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern. 
Grantee and Franchising Authority agree that in the case of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at Grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, Grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. The Franchising Authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the Grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, Grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assigned of its cable system, which is reasonably acceptable to the Franchising Authority, Grantee and Franchising Authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law, it being further agreed that Grantee's continued operation of its cable system during the six (6) month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the Franchising Authority or the Grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this subsection, neither Franchising Authority nor Grantee shall be required to violate federal or state law. 
(5)  Transfer of Franchise 
Grantee's right, title, or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate, without the prior written consent of the Franchising Authority, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of Grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. IV) 
E.  COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING 
(1)  Testing for Compliance 
The Franchising Authority may perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the Grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such test may be undertaken only after giving Grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two (2) business days, and providing a representative of Grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the Grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the Grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that Grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the Franchising Authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the Franchising Authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than two (2) times a year in the aggregate, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the Grantee upon Grantee's request. 
(2)  Books and Records 
The Grantee agrees that the Franchising Authority may review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof, or as otherwise required by law. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the Grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. Subject to applicable law, the Franchising Authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Grantee to it as confidential, and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. 
(3)  Subscriber Survey 
The Grantee shall, on an annual basis, generally survey its subscribers concerning the Grantee's performance. Grantee shall report the results of said survey to the Franchising Authority within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the survey. 
(4)  Complaint Procedure 
(a)  Grantee shall maintain a publicly listed toll free phone line to enable customers to communicate with Grantee twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, provided that outside of usual business hours, this may be accomplished through an answering service, but not an answering machine. A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints and their dispositions. 
(b)  The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice to the Franchising Authority and to each affected subscriber and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. A written log shall be maintained for all service interruptions. Except where a subscriber has damaged the system's equipment, upon request by the subscriber, the subscriber's account shall be credited if the subscriber is without service for any reason for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours after the Grantee has received notice of an interruption of service. If the Grantee uses a service contract, it shall contain a notice advising the subscriber of the foregoing right to a credit. If the Grantee does not use a service contract, this notice shall be provided to subscribers as a part of the Grantee's initial subscriber information materials. 
(c)  The Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians that shall respond to subscriber complaints or requests for service under normal business conditions within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint or the request, to the extent possible. 
(d)  In the event a subscriber does not obtain satisfactory resolution of a compliant through the foregoing procedures, such subscriber shall have recourse to refer the complaint to an administrator designated by the city manager to assist in the resolution of the compliant. All subscribers, programmers, and members of the general public may bring any complaint regarding the system or the Grantee before the city council, where there is evidence that the Grantee has not settled the complaint to the satisfaction of the person initiating the complaint. 
(5)  Reviews 
Subject to applicable laws, the Franchising Authority reserves the right to adopt rules and regulations controlling the procedures and subjects for periodic reviews and evaluations of the Grantee and the system to the extent that doing so will not materially affect Grantee's rights and obligations set out under this section. In the absence of any additional rules and regulations, the Grantee shall be subject to the procedures and subjects described in this subsection. Periodic review sessions shall be scheduled within the thirty (30) days of the 6th and 12th anniversary dates of the effective dates of the franchise. The Franchising Authority may require, at its discretion, system performance evaluation sessions at any time during the term of the franchise, but not more than one (1) time in any twelve-month period, or as required by federal or state law. All evaluation sessions shall be published in the same way as a legal notice. To assist in its review and evaluation, the Franchising Authority may, at the Franchising Authority's expense, enlist an independent consultant to conduct an analysis of the system and its performance and to submit a report of such analysis to the Franchising Authority. Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may include, but shall not be limited to: franchise fees, services, application of new technologies, system technical performance, access channels and related facilities and equipment, subscriber complaints, privacy, amendments, subsequent legal development, including judicial and FCC rulings, and Grantee or Franchising Authority rules. During a review and evaluation by the Franchising Authority, the Grantee shall fully cooperate with the Franchising Authority and shall provide, subject to subsection E (2), without cost, such information and documents necessary to the enforcement of the franchise as the city manager may request. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. V) 
F.  INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION, AND BONDS OR OTHER SURETY 
(1)  Insurance Requirements 
Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury, and property damage. Said insurance shall designate the Franchising Authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be non-cancellable except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the Franchising Authority. 
(2)  Indemnification 
The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the Franchising Authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the Grantee's construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable system, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(3)  Bonds and Other Surety 
Except as expressly provided herein, Grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or continuing its existence. The Franchising Authority acknowledges that the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of Grantee are sufficient to afford compliance with the terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee and Franchising Authority recognize that the costs associated with bonds and other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the form of increased rates for cable services. In order to minimize such costs, the Franchising Authority agrees to require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably demonstrated need therefor. The Franchising Authority agrees that in no event, however, shall it require a bond or other related surety in an aggregate amount greater than $10,000, conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms, covenants, and conditions of the franchise. Initially, no bond or other surety will be required. In the event that one is required in the future, the Franchising Authority agrees to give Grantee at least sixty (60) days prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirement. Such reasons must demonstrate a change in the Grantee's legal, financial, or technical qualifications which would materially prohibit or impair its ability to comply with the terms of the franchise or afford compliance therewith. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. VI) 
G.  ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE 
(1)  Notice of Violation 
In the event that the Franchising Authority believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged non-compliance. 
(2)  Grantee's Right to Cure or Respond 
Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in subsection (1) above to: 
(a)  Respond to the Franchising Authority contesting the assertion of non-compliance, or 
(b)  To cure such default or, 
(c)  In the event that by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
(3)  Public Hearing 
In the event that Grantee fails to respond to the notice described in subsection (1) above pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection (2) above, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within sixty (60) days after the Grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to subsection (1) above, the Franchising Authority shall schedule a public meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Franchising Authority. The Franchising Authority shall notify the Grantee with an opportunity to be heard. 
(4)  Enforcement 
Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the Franchising Authority, after such meeting, determines that Grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the Franchising Authority may: 
(a)  Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this franchise, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the Franchising Authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default; 
(b)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; 
(c)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or 
(d)  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages. 
The Grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the Franchising Authority to enforce prompt compliance. 
(5)  Acts of God 
The Grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such non-compliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. 
(6)  Non-Waiver 
The failure of the Franchising Authority at any time to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the provisions of this section shall not constitute a waiver of such provisions, but the same shall be and remain at all times in full force and effect, and may be subsequently enforced by Franchising Authority, subject to subsection D(1)(g). 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. VII) 
H.  UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION 
In addition to those criminal and civil remedies provided by state and federal law, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm, or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the cable system without the express consent of the Grantee. Further, without the express consent of Grantee, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, remove, or injure any property, equipment, or part of the cable system or any means of receiving cable service or other services provided thereto. Subject to applicable federal and state law, the Franchising Authority shall incorporate into its criminal code, if not presently a part thereof, criminal misdemeanor law which will enforce the intent of this subsection. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. VIII) 
I.  PUBLIC ACCESS 
The Grantee shall provide a municipal access channel for the use of the Franchising Authority. Said channel, because of the multiple communities served from a single service facility (La Marque Head-End), will be on a shared basis with other commonly served communities. The Franchising Authority has the right to designate, at its discretion, any entity it chooses to provide programming for the shared time on this channel. The Franchising Authority will notify the Grantee of the entity it wishes to designate in writing before access is granted by Grantee. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. IX) 
J.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
(1)  Preemption 
If the FCC, or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of the franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the Franchising Authority, the jurisdiction of the Franchising Authority shall cease and no longer exist. 
(2)  Actions of Franchising Authority 
In any action by the Franchising Authority or representative thereof, mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(3)  Notice 
Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the Franchising Authority or Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five (5) business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a Post Office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U. S. Postal Service. 
The notice or responses to the Franchising Authority shall be addressed as follows: 
City of Santa Fe 
P. O. Box 950 
4925 Main Street 
Santa Fe, Texas 77510-0950 
The notices or responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
The Meca Corporation 
ATTENTION: System Manager 
P. O. Box 1009 
Kemah, Texas 77565 
with copy to: 
The Meca Corporation 
ATTENTION: Legal Operations 
P. O. Box 5630 
Denver, Colorado 80217 
The Franchising Authority and the Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. 
(4)  Descriptive Headings 
The captions to sections contained herein are intended to solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein. 
(5)  Severability 
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise or any renewal or renewals thereof. 
(Ordinance No. 05-92 of August 13, 1992, Sec. X) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 13-2000, adopted June 8, 2000 provided for the transfer of control of the Santa Fe, Texas, Cable Television Franchise, initially granted to TCI-TKR of Houston, Inc., subsequently transferred to Texas Cable Partners, L.P. (TCP). TWI and America Online, Inc. (AOL) are parties to that certain Agreement of Plan of Merger dated January 10, 2000 and subject to the conditions stated therein, the City Council hereby consents to the transfer of control of the Franchise from TWI to AOL-TWI. 
 
SECTION 15: - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. PERMIT REQUIRED FOR WORK IN RIGHT-OF-WAY 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
Whenever used in this division, the following terms, as well as their singulars, plurals and possessives, shall have the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates otherwise. 
Access line: (1) The transmission media within the rights-of-way extended to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the city that allows delivery of telecommunications service within the city; and (2) Each termination point of a nonswitched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end user for the delivery of nonswitched telecommunications service within the city. Interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device are not access lines that would be separately identified and counted for the purposes of assessing the monthly line fee. 
Antenna: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Cable service: "Cable service" as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 532 et seq. 
City: The City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
City Code: The Code of Ordinances of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, as amended. 
City Council: The municipal governing body of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
City Manager: The city Manager or designee of the city Manager. 
Collocate and collocation: The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Concealment: Any wireless facility that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged, or otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. Concealment includes but is not limited to covering with a façade, designs that blend with the surrounding character of an area, paint that matches surrounding poles, disguising with landscaping, or locating underground. 
Consumer price index: The annual revised Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
Decorative pole: A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to city code. 
Design area: An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by city code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards. 
Design manual: The design requirements for specific types of facilities, including any adopted design manuals, the city's unified development code, adopted constructed codes and any other city requirements. 
Direction of the city: All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Easement: Any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
Facilities: Any and all of the network nodes, transport facilities, equipment cabinets, node support poles, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all transmission media used for the provision of wireless service or telecommunication service. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC: The Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
Highway right-of-way: The right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Historic area: An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic area under municipal, state, or federal law. 
Law: Common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Line fee: A monthly fee to be applied to each access line for the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the city as a rights-of-way fee. 
Location: The city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the Network Node. 
Macro tower: A guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the lesser of: (i) 55 feet, or (ii) 10 feet higher than the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
Micro network node: A network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
Municipally owned utility pole: A utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by Section 11.003, Utilities Code, and located in a public right-of-way. 
Network node or node: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; (ii) a radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and (iii) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and does not include: (i) an electric generator; (ii) a pole; or (iii) a macro tower. 
Network provider: A wireless service provider; or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: (i) network nodes; or (ii) node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
New node support pole or new pole: A new installation, including any extension or replacement of an existing pole where the replacement is not excepted from permit requirements under Division 1.B(c) of this section. 
Node support pole: A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Park: Any property dedicated or used as a park or for public park purposes or that may be dedicated or used as a park or for public park purposes within the city. 
Permit: A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way, including collocation on a service pole, required from the city before a provider may perform an action under this chapter. 
Permit holder: Any person that has applied for or been issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
Person: A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Pole: A service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Private easement: An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
Provider: A network provider or telecommunication service provider. 
Public right-of-way or right-of-way: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include: (A) a private easement; or (B) the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. This includes but is not limited to all present and future public streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives, tunnels, easements, bridges, and other such similar passageways, thoroughfares, and public ways within the city. 
Public utility: A public utility as that term is used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.004, including municipally owned and/or operated utilities. 
Rights-of-way fee: The total amount paid to the city on a quarterly basis for access lines and on an annual basis for other facilities for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. For network providers, this is the rental charge paid in accordance with chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
Service pole: A pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and located in a public right-of-way, including: a pole that supports traffic control functions; a structure for signage; a pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and a pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Street: The portion of the public right-of-way, including a highway, designed or used for vehicular traffic, including that part of the street marked or platted as a bicycle or public transit lane. Street width shall be the widest of the following measurements: (i) edge of pavement to edge of pavement, or (ii) curb to curb. 
Substantially similar: Includes the following: (i) A replacement or upgrade that does not include replacement of an existing node support pole nor defeat existing concealment elements of a node support pole; and (ii) a new or upgraded network node, including the antenna or other equipment element, will not be more than 10 percent larger than the existing node, provided that the increase may not result in the node exceeding the size limitations provided by the city's design manual; and the new or upgraded pole will not be more than 10 percent higher than the existing pole, provided that the increase may not result in the pole exceeding the applicable height limitations prescribed by the city's design manual. 
Telecommunications service: The transmittal of voice, data, image, graphics and other communications between or among points by wire, fiber optics, or other similar facilities, as well as the rental, lease, or furnishing of the facilities to accomplish such transmittal, but does not include transmissions for long distance purposes (interLATA and intraLATA) or any "wireless service" as defined by law. 
Telecommunications service provider: Any person that supplies telecommunications service to others within the corporate limits of the city in exchange for money or other value. 
Telecommunications utility: "Telecommunications utility" as used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002(11). 
Transmission media: Any and all of the cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices owned, maintained or placed by a user to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
Transport facility: Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
Use and occupancy: Acquisition, installation, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, control, or operation of any facilities within the rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever. 
User: Any person that owns, controls, constructs, installs, repairs, maintains, upgrades or removes a structure in the right-of-way, including any contractor or subcontractor of a person who owns or controls a structure in the right-of-way. 
Utility pole: A pole that provides: electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or services of a wireless provider, as defined by Section 51.002, Utilities Code. 
Wireless service: Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider: A person that provides wireless service to the public. 
B.  REGISTRATION AND CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
No person shall commence or continue with the construction or installation of any structure within the rights-of-way of the city except as provided by this chapter, or as provided by other city permits or written agreements with the city. 
(a)  Registration required. All users of the right-of-way must register annually with the City of Santa Fe. Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who will own the facilities. Registration shall include: 
i.  The name of the user of the right-of-way; 
ii.  The name, address, and telephone number of people who will be contact person(s) for the user; 
iii.  The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day; 
iv.  The location, including exact coordinates, of all structures located in the rights-of-way; and 
v.  A description of each structure located in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Construction permit required. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, no person shall perform any construction or installation of structures in the right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit. The permit will be in the name of the person who will own the proposed structures. The permit must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the proposed structures. The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of proposed structures, estimated dates and times the work is to take place and any other conditions set out by the city manager or his/her designee, or other decision making body when applicable. 
(1)  Permit information required. The person requesting a permit will provide the city manager or his/her designee with documentation describing: 
i.  The proposed, approximate location and route of all structures to be constructed or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction; 
ii.  Engineering plans provided on a drawing scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise approved by city manager; 
iii.  Description of all existing public and private utilities in close proximity to applicant's proposed route; 
iv.  Description of the applicant's proposed installation, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, etc.; 
v.  Description of plans to remove and replace pavement or drainage works in streets. Plans submitted must conform to City of Santa Fe standard construction requirements; 
vi.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc. including depth; 
vii.  Manholes of the type applicant plans to use or access; 
viii.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant, which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents; 
ix.  Three (3) sets of engineering plans must be submitted with permit application; 
x.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the estimated dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the city manager or his/her designee; and 
xi.  Proof of insurance or net worth as required. 
(2)  Access to site. All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The city manager or his/her designee shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as may reasonably be required to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(3)  Plans at site. A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the city manager or his/her designee at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(4)  Timeliness. All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request an extension from the city manager or his/her designee. 
(5)  Insurance and bonds. 
i.  An applicant must provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), as approved by the city manager or his/her designee. Such requirements may be waived by the city manager or his/her designee, if the applicant provides acceptable evidence of self-insurance backed by assets equal to but not less than a net worth in the amount of at least five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) as approved by the city manager or his/her designee and the director of financial services or his/her designee. 
ii.  The coverage provided shall be on an "occurrence" basis and shall include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion, and collapse hazards. 
iii.  Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
iv.  The applicant shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to any commencement of work. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
v.  Applicant shall file a surety bond from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) to guarantee the restoration of the right-of-way in the event the applicant leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete, or unsafe. Such requirement for a surety bond may be waived by the city manager or his/her designee upon a showing of financial responsibility by the applicant. 
(6)  Approval. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, requests for permits shall be approved or disapproved by the city manager or his/her designee within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. The city manager or his/her designee shall use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. 
(7)  Pre-construction meeting. The city manager or user may request a pre-construction meeting. 
(c)  Exception to construction permit and registration requirement. The following activities shall not be required to obtain a permit under this chapter: 
(1)  Emergencies. Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the city manager must be notified in writing within two (2) business days of any construction related to an emergency response. A reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map of any facilities moved shall be provided as soon as practicable. 
(2)  Routine maintenance. Except as specifically provided otherwise by this chapter, the installation of structures necessary to initiate utility, water, wastewater or other service to a customer's property or the repair or maintenance of existing structures, unless such repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement, excavation in the right-of-way, or the closure of a public traffic lane for greater than two (2) hours, are not required to obtain a permit under this chapter. 
C.  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
(a)  Advance notice required. The city manager shall be notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the right-of-way user, their contractor or representative, including the name, address, and phone numbers of the contractor performing the actual construction, and the name and telephone number of the individual who will be available at all times during construction. Failure to provide the above information will result in the suspension of the permit until the required information is received. 
(b)  Conformance to other laws. All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
(c)  Erosion Control. Erosion control measures (i.e., silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. Permit holder may be required to show proof of EPA approved plans relating to storm water and erosion when applicable or a letter stating such plans are not required. User shall comply with city, state, and federal guidelines regulating storm water management erosion control. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing, or straw bales, as appropriate. 
(d)  Lane closures. Lane closures on collectors and thoroughfares, as identified by the city's thoroughfare plan, is limited to after 8:30 a.m. and before 4:00 p.m. unless the city manager grants prior approval. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures, with all barricades, advanced warning signs and thirty-six-inch reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the city manager. 
(e)  Workmanship. Users are responsible for the workmanship and any damages caused by a contractor or subcontractor. A responsible representative of the permit holder will be available to city manager at all times during construction. 
(f)  Notice of damage. All users shall notify the city manager immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned. 
(g)  Prior approval required for street or sidewalk cut. Except in the event of an emergency, prior approval must be obtained from the city manager when a street or sidewalk cut is required and all requirements of the city shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals shall be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
(h)  Interference prohibited. Newly installed structures shall not interfere with facilities or structures of other users, in particular gravity-dependent facilities. 
(i)  Depth. Structures shall be installed at a minimum of two (2) feet depth, unless approved by the city manager or as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(j)  Working hours. Except in the event of an emergency, working hours in the rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Work that needs to be performed after 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday must be approved in advance. Except in the event of an emergency, any work performed on Sunday must be approved twenty-four (24) hours in advance by the city manager. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday, unless approved in advance. 
D.  "PLANS OF RECORD" 
Right-of-way users shall provide the city manager director or his/her designee with "plans of record" within ten (10) days of completion of structures in the right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the city in the format specified by the city manager. Submittal of "plans of record" should be in digital formatting as well as written or in any other format requested by the city manager. The requirement to provide "plans of record" may be waived by the city manager upon a showing of good cause. 
E.  FACILITY LOCATION AND CONFORMANCE WITH PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
Prior to initiating construction of a "city project" in the right-of-way, the city will provide each right-of-way user preliminary project plans at various stages of completion (i.e., thirty (30) percent plans, sixty (60) percent plans, ninety (90) percent plans and final plans). Upon receipt of the first submittal of preliminary project plans (thirty (30) percent plans), each right-of-way user shall be responsible for verifying the location of its underground structures in the vicinity of the city's project. In verifying the location of structures as required by this section, each right-of-way user shall compile the information obtained regarding any structures located in the right-of-way that are potentially affected by the city project and shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the first submittal of the preliminary project plans, make that information available to the city in a written and verified format acceptable to the city's project director or his/her designee. Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other city manager projects (i.e., install or improve storm drains, water lines, sewer lines) it shall be deemed necessary by the governing body of the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead structures of a right-of-way user, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the structures at the owner's expense within forty-five (45) calendar days from the receipt of written notice to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the project director or his/her designee. The owner of the structures shall be responsible for any direct costs incurred by the city, associated with project delays resulting from owner's failure to conform structures within the time limits established by this section. Reimbursement for all costs provided for by this paragraph shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days from the day which the owner receives written notice of such costs. 
F.  IMPROPERLY INSTALLED STRUCTURES 
(a)  Proper installation required. Structures in the rights-of-way shall be properly installed, repaired, upgraded and maintained. Structures shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded, or maintained if: 
i.  The installation, repairs, upgrade, or maintenance endangers people; 
ii.  The structures do not meet the applicable city requirements; 
iii.  The structures are not capable of being located using standard practices; or 
iv.  The structures are not located in the proper place in accordance with the plans approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Existing structures. This section shall not apply to structures installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance unless such structures are repaired or upgraded. 
(c)  City Manager review of poles. When poles are used, the type of poles, location, depth, upgrades, etc. shall be subject to review of the city manager, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. 
G.  RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 
(a)  Restoration of affected property required. Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction in the right-of-way to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. This includes, but is not limited to, replacing all natural ground cover with an equal or better type of ground cover damaged during work, either by sodding or seeding, as directed by city manager. 
(b)  Restoration requirements. Restoration shall be to the reasonable satisfaction of the city manager. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
i.  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
ii.  All bore pits, potholes, trenches, or any other holes shall be covered or barricaded daily; 
iii.  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
iv.  Restoration of excavation site to city specifications. 
(c)  Locator flags. All locator flags shall be removed during the cleanup process by the permit holder or his/her contractor at the completion of the work. 
H.  REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT 
If any provisions of this chapter are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the city manager. If any person fails to follow the terms and conditions of this chapter in work performed pursuant to a permit, except as provided by division 2, new permits may be denied or additional terms required prior to issuance of permits to the same user. 
I, J.  RESERVED 
DIVISION 2. TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND WIRELESS FACILITIES 
K.  PURPOSE 
The purpose of this division is to: 
i.  Assist the city in the management of the rights-of-way; 
ii.  Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications and network providers; 
iii.  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and 
iv.  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
L.  EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT; NOTICE REQUIREMENT 
A network provider is not required to obtain a construction permit, or pay a rate to the city for: 
i.  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
ii.  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
iii.  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
At least forty-eight (48) hours' advance written notice to the city of work performed under this section is required, including proof that the network provider is acting with approval of a pole's owner; and proof that the size limitations may not in any event exceed the parameters prescribed by this chapter and the city's design manual. 
M.  GENERAL TERMS 
(a)  Permit rights apply to permit holder only. The rights granted by this chapter inure to the benefit of the permit holder only. The rights granted by permit may not be assigned, transferred, or sold to another by the permit holder. For the purposes of this section, assignment, transfer or sale means a change of operating control of the permit holder, expressly excepting an assignment or transfer to entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control with permit holder. 
(b)  Not exclusive. No rights agreed to in this chapter by the city shall be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the city to any person as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(c)  Deed restrictions. A provider installing facilities in a public right-of-way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area. 
(d)  Cable service not authorized by permit. A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable operator in the city under this chapter, but must first obtain a franchise agreement from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. A permit for the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a network node or transport facility under this chapter shall not confer authorization to provide cable service or video service, as defined by Section 66.002, Utilities Code, or information service as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24), or wireless service as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53), in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Interference not permitted; Notice and time for correction of interference. A network provider shall ensure that the operation of a network node does not cause any harmful radio frequency interference to a Federal Communications Commission-authorized mobile wireless operation of the municipality operating at the time the network node was initially installed or constructed. On written notice, a network provider shall take all steps reasonably necessary to remedy any harmful interference. If a network provider fails to correct any harmful interference within 60 days of written notice, the city may upon 14-days' advance written notice revoke any and all permits for the network node. 
(f)  Permit limited. A permit provided under this chapter does not provide authorization for attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, as defined by Section 31.002, Utilities Code, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, as defined by Section 162.003, Utilities Code, or wireless providers, as defined by Section 51.002, Utilities Code. 
(g)  Other requirements. The city may impose additional requirements on the activities of providers in the public right-of-way to the extent that the regulations are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
N.  COMPENSATION 
(a)  Construction permit fee. The applicant shall pay to the city a construction permit fee that is calculated as of the date of application for permit by applying the appropriate permit fee to each of the facilities included in the application, in accordance with the city's design manual, not to exceed the values provided in the table below. 
(b)  Rights-of-way fee. The permit holder shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end for access lines and as of year-end for all other facilities by applying the appropriate fee to each facility type owned, placed, or maintained by the permit holder. The rights-of-way fee for access lines shall be as proscribed by the Texas Public Utilities Commission. Rights-of-way fees for all facilities other than access lines shall be prorated for the first year in which a construction permit fee is paid, and shall be paid at the time of the permit application. 
Equipment Type 	Construction Permit Fee 	Rights-of-way Fee 
Transport Facilities 	$500 for first 5 nodes, $250 for each additional node 	$28 per month per node 1, 4 
Network Nodes 	$500 for first 5 nodes, $250 for each additional node 	$250 per year per node 2, 3 
Node Support Poles 	$1000 per pole 	$250 per year per pole 2 
 
1  Unless equal or greater amount is paid under Chapter 283 of the Local Government Code or Chapter 66 of the Utility Code. 
2  As adjusted by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the consumer price index. The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60th day following the written notice. 
3  Collocated network nodes on city service poles shall also pay an annual collocation fee at a rate not greater than $20 per year per service pole. 
4  A network provider may not install its own transport facilities unless the provider: (i) has a permit to use the public right-of-way; and (ii) pays to the city a monthly public right-of-way rate for transport facilities in an amount equal to $28 multiplied by the number of the network provider's network nodes located in the public right-of-way for which the installed transport facilities provide backhaul unless or until the time the network provider's payment of fees to the city exceeds its monthly aggregate per-node compensation to the city. A network provider that wants to connect a network node to the network using the public right-of-way may: (i) install its own transport facilities as provided in this section; or (ii) obtain transport service from a person that is paying municipal fees to occupy the public right-of-way that are the equivalent of not less than $28 per node per month. A public right-of-way rate required by this section is in addition to any other public right-of-way rate required by the city. 
(c)  Annexation and disannexation. Within thirty (30) days following the date of the passage of any action effecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish user written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city under this chapter, a permit holder shall start including or excluding facilities within the affected area in the permit holder's count of facilities within thirty (30) days of notice of the annexation or disannexation. 
(d)  No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection, or other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business license fees customarily assessed by the city for the use of the rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of the permit holder. Further, such rights-of-way fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all of a telecommunication services provider's facilities located within the rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are not used in the calculation of the rights-of-way fee. 
(e)  Timing of line fee payment. Permit holder shall remit the rights-of-way fees on a quarterly basis for transmission media, and on an annual basis for all other facilities. The payment of rights-of-way fees for transmission media shall be due on the forty-fifth day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated. The payment of rights-of-way fees for all other facilities shall be due on January 31 st of each year following the year in which a construction permit fee and prorated rights-of-way fee was paid. 
(f)  Telecommunication service providers uncollectibles. City and telecommunication service provider understand and agree that telecommunication service provider has a statutory right to pass through to its customers on a pro rata basis any compensation paid to the city for access to the rights-of-way. Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, telecommunication service provider shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines for which revenues remain uncollectible. 
(g)  Facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers. To the extent allowed by applicable state and federal law, any telecommunications service providers that purchase unbundled network elements or other facilities for the purpose of rebundling those facilities to create telecommunications service for sale to persons within the city shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the appropriate line fee, as specified in subsection (b) above, to each access line created by rebundling services or facilities. Such direct payment to the city is necessary because it is only the person creating the services for resale that will be able to determine the number of access lines being provided, so that the rights-of-way fee imposed herein can be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all telecommunications service providers that sell telecommunications service within the city. Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, the permit holder shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any unbundled network elements or other facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers for rebundling into telecommunications services, if the telecommunications service provider that is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a signed statement to the permit holder that the telecommunications service provider is paying the access line fees applicable to those rebundled services directly to the city. If permit holder provides a copy of the signed statement to the city, then permit holder is absolved of all responsibility for the line fees payable on the services, unbundled network facilities, and other facilities rebundled for the creation of telecommunications service for sale within the city. 
(h)  Fee application to leased facilities. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 54.206, a telecommunications service provider may collect the line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this chapter through a pro rata charge to the customers in the boundaries of the city, including any other persons who are leasing, reselling or otherwise using the permit holder's access lines to provide telecommunications service. With respect to any person leasing, reselling, or otherwise using a permit holder's access lines, if a permit holder believes it does not have sufficient information to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the person using the access lines provides to the permit holder sufficient written information to determine the correct line fee. If a person provides sufficient written information for the application of the line fee, permit holders may bill the person on the basis of the information provided. Permit holder shall provide to the city any information regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by another person for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers, so long as city first obtains written permission of such other person for permit holder to provide the information to the city. Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, however, a telecommunications service provider shall not be liable for underpayment of line fees resulting from the permit holder's reliance upon the written information provided by any person that uses permit holder's service or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers. 
O.  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES 
(a)  Construction requirements. Except where otherwise provided by state law, a provider shall construct and maintain facilities in accordance with the design manual to ensure facilities do not: 
i.  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
ii.  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
iii.  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
iv.  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
v.  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). 
(b)  Design Manual; Separate agreements. Facilities to which this chapter applies must conform to the specifications required by the design manual. If the city desires to attach or place electric light or power wires, communications facilities or other similar systems or facilities in or on the permit holder's facilities, then a further separate, noncontingent agreement with the permit holder shall be required. Nothing contained in this chapter shall obligate the permit holder to exercise or restrict the permit holder from exercising its right to enter voluntarily into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with any person authorized to operate as a public utility or a wireless utility or authorized to offer cable service within the city. 
(c)  Requests for temporary moves. Upon request, the permit holder shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the permit holder may require payment in advance. The permit holder shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements. 
(d)  Tree trimming. The permit holder, its contractors and agents have the right, permission and license to trim trees upon and overhanging the rights-of-way to prevent trees from coming in contact with the permit holder's facilities and transmission media. When directed by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city or under the supervision of the city's delegated representative. 
P.  ADMINISTRATION 
(a)  Reasonable inquiries. The city may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries pertaining to the terms, conditions, rights and obligations of this chapter, and the permit holder shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(b)  FCC/PUC documents. Copies of petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the permit holder to the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utility Commission of Texas shall be provided to the city upon specific request. 
(c)  Consolidated permit application. A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network nodes. 
(d)  Documents required for application. The provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications: 
i.  The name and address of the person to whom notices are to be sent, a 24-hour per day contact number for the applicant in case of emergency; 
ii.  Location map that includes all other structures within 300 feet of the proposed location; 
iii.  Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant will comply with the city's design manual and applicable codes; 
iv.  A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; 
v.  certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60 th day after the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed; 
vi.  A certificate of insurance that provides that the provider and its contractor has at least $1,000,000.00 in general liability coverage; 
vii.  An industry standard pole load analysis certified by a licensed engineer; 
viii.  Geotechnical survey for any proposed new pole; 
ix.  Specific location information, including geographic positioning system coordinates; 
x.  A complete application and supporting documents for conditional use permit or other land use approval where required by the design manual; 
xi.  Proof of payment of the construction permit fee and prorated rights-of-way fee for the remaining portion of the current calendar year; and 
xii.  Any additional information reasonably related to the provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design manual and this chapter. 
(e)  Determination of Application Completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination: 
i.  For Network Nodes and Note Support Poles: no later than 30 days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
ii.  For a Transport Facility: no later than 10 days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(f)  Approval or Denial of Application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the city: 
i.  For Network Nodes: No later than 60 days after the date the city manager receives the complete application. 
ii.  For Network Support Poles: No later than 150 days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
iii.  For Transport Facilities: No later than 21 days after the city receives the complete application. 
(g)  Basis for Denial of Application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city manager denies the application. 
(h)  Resubmission of Denied Application. The permit holder may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial application. 
i.  The permit holder has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city. 
ii.  The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90 th day after the city manager receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
Q.  INDEMNIFICATION 
The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses, and damages to persons or property arising directly or indirectly from the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of the permit holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the permit holder. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. The city shall give the permit holder prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The permit holder shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties, but rather this provision is solely for the benefit of the city. 
R.  RELOCATION AND REMOVAL OF FACILITIES 
(a)  Street widening or straightening. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 54.203(c), upon thirty (30) days' notice by the city, permit holder shall begin relocation of its facilities within the rights-of-way at its own expense to permit the widening or straightening of streets. The notice by the city shall include a specification of the new location for the permit holder's facilities along the rights-of-way. 
(b)  City's right to relocate. The city retains the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way to cure or otherwise address a public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the extent possible with the permit holder in such instances to assure continuity of service and to afford to the permit holder the opportunity to make such relocation itself. 
(c)  Expense and timelines for relocation. Except as otherwise provided in existing state and federal law, upon notice from the city, a network provider shall relocate or adjust network nodes in a public right-of-way in a timely manner and without cost to the municipality managing the public right-of-way. 
S.  FUTURE CONTINGENCY 
In the event this chapter or any tariff or other provision that authorizes permit holders to recover the fee provided for in this chapter, becomes unlawful or is declared or determined by a judicial or administrative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, or illegal, in whole or in part, then the city and all permit holders shall negotiate a new compensation arrangement that is in compliance with the authority's decision. 
T.  CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS 
Where this Division conflicts with any other provision of the City Code of Ordinances, this Division shall control. 
Editor's note— Section 15, Right-of-Way Management, was added to the Code by Ordinance No. 07-2017 of August 24, 2017, Sec. I. Formerly, Section 15 concerning coin-operated amusement devices was deleted by Ordinance No. 03-86 of March 13, 1986.  
SECTION 16: - GEOPHYSICAL MINERAL EXPLORATION 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Active equipment means energy source equipment. 
(2)  Passive equipment means receiving equipment. 
(3)  Building means a roofed and walled structure intended for supporting or sheltering a specific use or occupancy. 
(4)  Dwelling means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile/manufactured home, industrialized housing, or any other building occupied, intended for occupancy, or used for residential purposes. 
(5)  Water Well means a bored, drilled, driven, or dug excavation utilized for the purpose of extracting groundwater from an aquifer. 
B.  PERMITS 
(1)  Permit Required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct any method of geophysical mineral exploration within the city without first having obtained a permit from the City Council. 
(2)  Permit Requirements. 
(a)  Application for a permit hereunder shall be made with the City Secretary. Such application shall contain the name of the applicant, address of the applicant, the geophysical methods of mineral exploration to be used, the purpose therefore, and the location and use with a map attached designating the points of use. Such application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first mile and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per mile thereafter, pro-rated for any portion less than a mile. On receipt of such application by the City Secretary, the same shall be referred to the City Manager for a report as to the compliance of such application with the provisions of this Section. Such report and the application shall then be submitted to the City Council. No permit shall be issued except by the approval of the City Council. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall cover a single set of lines for a single client or project. Should the applicant determine, after the permit is granted, that additional lines or extensions of existing lines are necessary, these shall be considered a new project and a new application shall be filed, along with all required documents and fees applicable. 
(3)  Insurance and Bond Requirements. 
(a)  Upon approval of a permit, but before issuance thereof, the applicant shall provide an insurance certificate showing insurance coverage of the applicant in amounts not less than: 
Commercial General Liability: 	$1,000,000 each occurrence 
	$2,000,000 annual aggregate 
	Combined Single Limits or equivalent 
Commercial Automobile Liability: 	$1,000,000 each occurrence 
	Combined Single Limits or equivalent 
Workers' Compensation: 	State Statutory Limits 
Employers' Liability Coverage: 	$500,000 Bodily Injury by Accident 
	$500,000 Bodily Injury by Disease—Each Employee 
	$500,00 Bodily Injury by Disease—Policy Limit 
 
Such insurance coverage shall be provided by a good and solvent insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas. In addition, the certificate of insurance shall name the city as additional insured with respect to operations performed under the permit. 
(b)  Within 30 days of receipt of same, the applicant shall notify the city, in writing, of each claim for injuries to, or death of, persons or damages or losses to property occurring or in any way incident to, arising out of or in connection with, the operations of the applicant, its contractors, agents or representatives under this permit. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide a cash bond in the principal sum of such number of dollars as determined by the City Council, but not to be less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The amount of such bond shall be based upon the location and length of the proposed route of operations and the potential hazards involved. In addition to the cash bond, the City Council may determine the need for the applicant to post a satisfactory corporate obligation commercial bond, depending upon the location and length of the proposed route of operations and the potential hazards involved. Said bond(s) shall be posted with the City for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this section. Said bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city secretary and shall remain in force and effect and on deposit for at least a period of six (6) months after exploration ends. If after exploration ends and permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this section, permittee may apply for a full refund of the cash bond. 
(d)  The applicant shall agree to protect, indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City, including its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, and representatives from and against any and all claims, demands and causes of action of every kind and character brought for or on account of any injuries, damages, or losses, real or asserted, including attorneys' fees, and any other costs and expenses incurred by the city in defending against any such claims, demands and causes of action received or sustained by any person or property on account of any negligence or gross negligence, or any act of omission, of the applicant, its employees, contractors, subcontractors, agents and representatives, arising directly or indirectly or in any way connected with the operations performed under this agreement. 
(4)  Duration of Permit. 
All permits issued hereunder shall expire six (6) months from the date of issuance. 
(5)  Terms of Permit. 
(a)  Energy source equipment to be an offset distance of at least six hundred (600) feet from any water well, in-ground swimming pool, and dwelling and any building made with a concrete slab. The offset distance may be reduced to four hundred (400) feet if the applicant secures and files with the city a signed authorization from the owner or agent of any water well, in-ground swimming pool, and dwelling and any building made with a concrete slab consenting to such testing and releasing the city from all future claims resulting from such operations. 
(b)  Written agreement to cover damage, caused by geophysical mineral exploration, to any water well, in-ground swimming pool, dwelling, and any building made with a concrete slab effective for six (6) months after completion of work. 
(c)  Employ at least one (1) Santa Fe officer (off-duty) to accompany the work crew while recording on city right-of-way. 
(d)  Obtain written permission from property owners before entering upon or crossing their property. 
(e)  Employ a third party engineer (specializing in seismology), to be approved by the city, who shall be on the job site during the entire period of recording to mitigate any potential damage to public or private property. 
(f)  No recording shall be conducted on Sunday, nor between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. local time. 
(g)  No explosives shall be used. 
(h)  The applicant shall restore any lands or rights-of-way used in its operations to its original condition, free of damage, including ruts or injury to vegetation. 
(i)  The applicant shall ensure that its operations will not interfere with the free and safe flow of traffic. The applicant will prepare for approval by the chief of police, a traffic flow plan for the project. When operations are immediately adjacent to the pavement, all equipment shall be parked and/or operated on one (1) side of the roadway only, unless demonstrated in the traffic flow plan that another method would be safer. 
(j)  Cables placed on the pavement within rights-of-way must be arranged so they do not create a hazardous condition or rumble strip effect. All cables must be securely anchored to the roadway with materials that will not damage or puncture the pavement. Nails, spikes, and similar materials used for anchors shall not be placed inside the pavement. 
(k)  Operations under the permit shall be suspended when the city's street superintendent determines that the ground conditions are such that operations would cause extensive rutting in the rights-of-way or easements. In the event that mud, gravel, rock, or debris is inadvertently tracked onto roadways in a way that creates a safety hazard or potential for damage to vehicles, the operator shall immediately cease operations and clean the roadway of all mud, gravel, rock or debris. The time for completion of operations as specified under Subsection B(4) shall be extended by one (1) day for each day operations are suspended under the provisions of this subsection. 
(l)  The applicant shall furnish adequate signs, barricades, flares, flagmen, etc., as necessary, to protect the traveling public. 
(Ordinance No. 23-2013 of October 24, 2013) 
C.  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 
(1)  No geophysical method of mineral exploration shall be used under this permit without the permittee having first notified designated city personnel, at least twenty-four (24) to forty-eight (48) hours prior to performing the actual work, of the proposed time, location of the planned use, and name and telephone number of a company representative who will be available at all times during the recording operations. 
(2)  Prior to performing the actual work, the applicant shall offer, in writing to each owner, resident, and business and shall provide, if requested, a pre-damage and post-damage inspection report for all dwellings, buildings, water wells, and in-ground swimming pools located within six hundred (600) feet of its planned operations. 
(3)  The applicant shall notify, by mail, each owner, resident, and business located within one thousand (1,000) feet of its planned operations not earlier than two (2) weeks but no later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to performing the actual work. 
(4)  At least one (1) week but no earlier than two (2) weeks prior to commencement of exploration operations, the applicant shall place a newspaper advertisement in the local daily newspaper of general circulation in the city of not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches explaining the work to be performed, the location of the proposed work, the anticipated time frame for exploration activity, and a toll-free number where residents may call for more information. 
(Ordinance No. 10/85 of July 11, 1985; Ordinance No. 06-2006 of April 13, 2006; Ordinance No. 23-2013 of October 24, 2013)  
SECTION 17: - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Church or place of religious worship means a building in which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with faith, or for propagating a particular form of belief. 
(2)  Child Care Facility means a building used as a day nursery, children's boarding home, child placing agency or other place for the care or custody of children under fifteen (15) years of age licensed by the State of Texas pursuant to Subsection 42.002 of the Human Resources Code. 
(3)  Dwelling means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or any other building used for residential purposes. 
(4)  Hospital means a building used to provide health services for human in-patient medical care for the sick or injured, licensed pursuant to the Texas Hospital Licensing Act, (Article 4437f, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) or operated by an agency of the federal government, or a convalescent facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 242 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(5)  Person means an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity however organized. 
(6)  Public Building means a building used by federal, state, or local government and open to the general public. 
(7)  Public Park means a tract of land maintained by the federal, state or local government for the recreation and enjoyment by the general public. 
(8)  School means a building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with the playgrounds, dormitories, stadiums and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. 
(9)  Sexually Oriented Commercial Enterprise means a massage parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
(10)  Massage Parlor means an establishment which has as its primary business purpose the treating of the superficial parts of a patron for medical, hygienic, exercise or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with hands, feet or any instrument. Provided, however, that this definition shall not include any business or establishment operated by or employing licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed cosmetologists, or licensed barbers engaged in performing functions authorized under the license held; and provided further, however, that this definition shall not include any business or establishment operated by or employing licensed physicians or licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
(11)  Nude Studio or Modeling Studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
(12)  Love Parlor means any place whose major business is the provision of premises where customers either congregate, associate, or consort with employees who engage in "specified sexual activities" with or in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customers. 
(13)  Adult Movie Theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(14)  Adult Video Arcade or Adult Movie Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(15)  Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
(16)  Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
(Ordinance No. 12-91 of November 14, 1991) 
(17)  Specified Sexual Activities means human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts, or any combination of the foregoing. 
(18)  Specified Anatomical Areas means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, or buttock, or female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or, human male genitals in a discernible erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ordinance No. 15-91 of January 9, 1992) 
B.  APPLICABILITY 
A business is not exempt from this section because it holds a license or permit under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code authorizing the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. This section applies to all businesses that happen to hold such a license or permit whose major business is the offering of a service which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
C.  EXCEPTIONS 
This section does not apply to the following: 
(1)  A bookstore, movie theatre or video store, unless that business is an adult bookstore, adult theater, or adult video store under Subsection A(9). 
(2)  A business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under the license held. 
(3)  A business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
D.  CORPORATE LIMITS 
This section applies only within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
E.  PERMITS 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a sexually oriented commercial enterprise located within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, without a valid permit. 
(2)  Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant must certify that the proposed sexually oriented commercial enterprise will be located a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) feet from the following: 
(a)  A child care facility 
(b)  A church or place of religious worship 
(c)  A dwelling 
(d)  A hospital 
(e)  A public building 
(f)  A public park 
(g)  A school 
(3)  The applicant must also certify that the proposed sexually oriented commercial enterprise will be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any other sexually oriented commercial enterprise. 
(4)  For the purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line of the proposed sexually oriented commercial enterprise to the nearest portion of the property line of the facility described in Subsections E(2) and E(3). 
F.  PERMIT DISPLAYED 
A sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit issued under this section shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place within the establishment for which it was issued. 
G.  PERMIT APPLICATION 
Any person desiring a sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit shall file a written application with the City Manager on a form to be prescribed by him. 
(1)  The application shall set forth the following: 
(a)  The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(b)  The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the service to be provided. 
(c)  The address and full legal description of the parcel of land on which the establishment is to be located. 
(d)  The name, residence address and telephone number, if any, of the manager or other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of the establishment. 
(e)  Written declaration that the information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed and sworn to be the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed and sworn to by a partner thereof. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the application shall be signed and sworn to by an authorized officer of such corporation or entity. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(a)  A tender of the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act. (Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Business and Commerce Code, Chapter 36), if the applicant is to operate the establishment under an assumed name. 
(c)  A certified copy of the Articles of Incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, if the applicant is a Texas Corporation. 
(d)  A certified copy of the certificates of authority to transact business in this State, together with all amendments thereto, if the applicant is a foreign corporation. 
(e)  A certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the Office of the Secretary of State under the Texas Limited Partnership Act (Article 6132a Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), if the applicant is a limited partnership formed under the Laws of Texas. 
(f)  A certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the Office of the Secretary of State under the Texas Limited Partnership Act, if the applicant is a foreign limited partnership. 
(g)  A complete list of the names and the residence addresses of all employees in the business and the name and residence address of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business. A current list of such names and addresses of employees shall be maintained with the City Manager at all times as a condition to the issuance and maintenance of the permit. 
H.  INVESTIGATION 
Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit, the City Manager shall cause to be conducted an investigation for the purpose of determining whether or not such proposed enterprise complies with the location requirements as set forth in Subsection E herein. 
I.  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEAL 
(1)  The permit required by this section shall be issued and signed by the City Manager or his duly authorized deputy. 
(2)  The City Manager shall issue a sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application unless he finds that: 
(a)  The correct permit fee has not been tendered. 
(b)  The operation as proposed by the application is prohibited by law. 
(c)  The applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by this section to accompany the application. 
(d)  The application or the proposed location does not meet all requirements of this section. 
(3)  If a permit application is denied, the City Manager shall notify the applicant in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address provided in the application. Each denial shall explain the reasons therefore. If an applicant desires to challenge such denial he shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Manager by filing a written request within ten (10) days of applicant's receipt of the denial. The City Manager shall hold a hearing and render a written decision within thirty (30) days after receipt of the applicant's request for hearing. 
(4)  An applicant may appeal the City Manager's final decision to the City Council of the City of Santa Fe by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Secretary within ten (10) days of receipt of the City Manager's final decision. The notice of appeal shall state the specific grounds therefore. The City Council shall hold a hearing and render its decision within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the notice of appeal. If the City Council determines that a permit should have been granted, it shall forward the application to the City Manager with instructions to issue the permit. 
J.  FEES 
To defray the actual costs of processing the permit application, a permit fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be required. 
K.  RETURN OF FEES 
No portion of any fee collected under this section shall be returned after a permit has been issued or refused. 
L.  TRANSFER PROHIBITED 
A sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit is not transferrable, assignable or divisible. 
M.  PERMIT VALID FOR SPECIFIED LOCATION 
Each permit issued under this section shall be valid only for the location specified. 
N.  OBTAINING PERMIT BY FRAUD 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent, or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or to in anyway knowingly conceal any material fact, or to give or use any other assumed name or fictitious name other than one duly filed for record in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act. 
O.  THE USE OF PERMIT OF ANOTHER 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit which has been issued to another person. 
P.  COUNTERFEITING, CHANGING, DEFACING PERMIT 
It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, or alter a sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit. 
Q.  VIOLATION 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor. 
R.  NUISANCE 
The operation of a sexually oriented commercial enterprise without a sexually oriented commercial enterprise permit is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
S.  INJUNCTION 
The City of Santa Fe may file suit in District Court to enjoin a violation of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 12-91 of November 14, 1991)  
SECTION 18: - EARTHEN EXCAVATIONS, QUARRIES AND PITS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
(1)  Excavation means any act by which soil, earth, clay, sand, gravel, rock, loam, caliche, dirt, humus or any other similar matter is dug, cut into, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed over one (1) foot in depth in earth. 
(2)  Soil means any earth, sand, clay, loam, caliche, gravel, humus, rock, dirt or any other matter in or upon the ground, without regard to the presence or absence therein of minerals or other organic matter. 
B.  PERMIT, APPLICATION AND FEE REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct and maintain any quarry, mine, sand or gravel pit, or excavation for the purpose of removing, screening, crushing, washing or storing of dirt, sand, ore, clay, stone, gravel or similar materials within the City without having first obtained a permit therefor. Any person, firm, or corporation desiring a permit required by the provisions of this section shall make application to the City Clerk therefor. At the time of the making of an application for a permit required by the provisions hereof, the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the adequate administration, inspection, regulation, and enforcement of this section. In the event of a refusal of issuance of the permit, five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be retained by the City as a nonrefundable permit application fee and the remainder shall be refunded to the applicant. 
C.  CONTENT OF APPLICATION 
(1)  A complete application shall include the identity and residence address of the applicant, the identity and residence address of the owner of the land, the location and legal description of the land, the purpose or reason for the removing or moving of the soil from or on the land, the quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved or removed from the land, the place to which the soil is to be removed, and the proposed date of completion of the soil removal or moving. 
(2)  A complete application shall further include any supporting information deemed necessary by the City Manager in order to evidence the applicant's ability and intent to comply with the standards under Subsection D; and in order to evaluate the review criteria under Subsection E. 
D.  STANDARDS 
(1)  Setback 
No permit shall be issued for the digging or construction of any excavation, pit, or quarry where any portion of the same shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any public street or road or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any building, residence or structure or nearer than three hundred fifty (350) feet to any exterior property line boundary of lands utilized for a hospital, a church, public building or a cemetery or within an area where there is on public record restrictions or covenants prohibiting excavation. 
(2)  Safety 
The applicant shall install and maintain a drainage system to keep the excavation from collecting water within it, and such quarry, excavation, or pit shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot high chain link fence. 
(3)  Geology Report 
Any excavation within twenty-five hundred (2,500) feet of an existing water well will require a written geology report from a certified geologist supplied by the applicant. 
(4)  Slope 
The bank of slope of such excavation, quarry, or pit shall be five (5) feet of slope for each foot of depth for the first fifteen (15) feet from the bank. 
(5)  Reclamation 
Applicant must supply an acceptable reclamation plan which would account for the intended use of the land following excavation. 
(6)  Bond and Insurance 
Any permit issued hereunder shall require that applicant therefor to give his bond with a good and sufficient corporate surety in favor of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, in a sum to be set by the City Council at the time of such permit, but not to be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), which bond shall be conditioned that the applicant or permittee shall comply with all the terms of such permit and all laws and ordinances relating to the issuance of same. Liability insurance must be carried by the applicant in an amount set by City Council, but not to be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
E.  REVIEW BY CITY MANAGER 
Upon receipt of a complete application for an excavation permit, the City Manager shall review the application for the purpose of making a recommendation to the City Council regarding action on the permit application. In reviewing said application, the City Manager shall be guided by the general purpose of orderly municipal planning, the prohibiting of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, health hazard or endangering the lives or property of others. As aids in accomplishing these purposes, the following points shall be considered by the City Manager in reviewing applications for excavation permits; however, such aids shall not be exclusive in the City Manager's consideration and ultimate recommendation: 
(1)  Soil and earth erosion by water and wind; 
(2)  Surface water drainage and water drainage facilities of the excavation; 
(3)  Lateral supports of the excavation; 
(4)  Condition in which excavation to be maintained and safeguards to be taken to prohibit creating a nuisance, such as noise, dust or traffic, health hazard, attractiveness to children, and features provided to dispense with the endangering of the lives and property of the public; 
(5)  Land values and uses in the area of the excavation; 
(6)  Such other factors as may bear or relate to the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of the City; 
(7)  Ground water use in the general areas of excavation. 
In arriving at an ultimate recommendation, the City Manager may attach such special conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to attain the overall purpose of this section. 
F.  NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING 
(1)  After reasonable time to review application, the City Manager shall set the same down for public hearing of all parties interested in the subject matter of the application. Written notice of such public hearing before the City Council shall be sent to the owners of real property located within five hundred (500) feet of the property on which the excavation is proposed. Such notice is to be given at least five (5) working days before the hearing by mailing such notice to the owners who have rendered their property for City taxes, as the ownership appears on the last approved City tax roll. When a portion of the property located within five hundred (500) feet of the property upon which the excavation is proposed is located outside the City limits or which was annexed to the City after the final date for making the renditions which are included on the last approved City tax roll, then notice to such owners shall be given by publication as set forth below. In addition to the notice herein provided, notice of such public hearing shall be published once in the official publication of the City, at least five (5) working days prior to the date of such hearing. The publication and notice shall include such application information under paragraph C(1) and setting a time and place for such public hearing before the City Council. In addition, the applicant shall publish at his expense a display ad at least two (2) by three (3) column inches, ten point minimum type in the official newspaper of the City giving notice of the application and public hearing. 
(2)  The City Council shall hold the public hearing at a special or regular meeting of the Council and shall give a hearing to all interested parties who wish to express themselves for or against the opening of such pit. 
G.  CITY COUNCIL ACTION REQUIRED 
Upon the conclusion of the public hearing thereon, the City Council shall at its earliest convenience by majority vote either grant or refuse the permit applied for under the provisions of this section. The City Council shall have the power and reserves the authority to refuse any application for an excavation permit at any particular location within the city limits, by reason of such particular location and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on or approximately adjacent to the particular location in question, and the use in which the land and surroundings are adopted for school, college, university, hospital, park, civic purposes or for health and safety reasons, or any of them, when in the City Council's opinion the excavating or operation of an excavation on such particular location might constitute a nuisance, be injurious to public health, a public hazard or a disadvantage to the City in its planned growth, or to its inhabitants as a whole, or to a substantial number of its inhabitants or visitors as a group. 
H.  DURATION OF PERMIT; APPLICATION FOR NEW PERMITS 
Each excavation permit issued shall be issued for a maximum period of one (1) year, after which period the permit is void and the person to whom the permit was issued must make a new application for a new permit for each succeeding year or portion of a year that an excavation is operated or maintained. 
I.  TRANSFERRING, SELLING, ASSIGNING, ETC. OF PERMIT 
No excavation permit issued under the terms of this section to any person shall ever be transferred, sold, assigned or otherwise disposed of in any manner to any other person without the written consent of the City Council. 
J.  REVOCATION OF PERMIT 
Any excavation permit issued under this section where a notice to cease operations thereunder is issued by a City inspection official may be revoked by the City Manager after notice and hearing for: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the excavation permit; 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this section or any other applicable ordinance or law relating to excavations; 
(3)  The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others. 
K.  APPEALS FROM PERMIT REVOCATION 
Any person who has been issued an excavation permit who is aggrieved by its revocation by the City Manager of the City may appeal to the City Council by filing with the City Secretary a written notice thereof within five (5) working days from the date of the revocation of the excavation permit. The aggrieved person shall be given a hearing before the City Council, in due order of business, after which the City Council may modify or overrule the City Manager's decision. 
Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the person to whom the permit was granted at least three (3) working days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relief upon for revoking such excavation permit. Notice of the hearing may be given by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the address appearing in his application. In the event any appeal is taken from the decision of the City Manager, in the manner prescribed above, all work shall be stopped at the excavation while the appeal is pending. 
L.  INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY OF CITY INSPECTION OFFICIAL 
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this section, an inspection official of the City shall have the right to enter into and upon any lands within the city limits, in or upon which an excavation exists or on any lands on which operations are being conducted in creating an excavation, to examine and inspect such lands and excavations, to determine whether the excavation itself or the operations in creating an excavation are in violation of this section and to further determine whether an excavation permit has been secured as is required in this section. 
M.  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS 
If it is determined that the excavation is being operated or maintained in violation of the excavation permit issued, the inspection official shall immediately give notice in writing to the person in charge at the site of the excavation to cease operations, setting forth therein the exact reason for the issuance of the notice. 
N.  CESSATION OF OPERATIONS; TIME LIMITATION FOR CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS; ADDITIONAL INSPECTION 
After issuance of the notice as provided for above, there shall be no further operation of the excavation until the violations complained of by the inspecting official have been remedied. The operator shall have three (3) working days from the date of receipt of the complaint notice from the inspecting official to remedy the violations complained of by the inspector and to notify the City Manager that the violations complained of have been remedied and that the excavation is ready for additional inspection. 
O.  PROCEDURE UPON FAILURE TO REMEDY VIOLATIONS 
In the event an operator of an excavation fails to remedy the violations complained of as provided, the inspecting official shall notify the City Manager of the violations discovered and request that a hearing be set for a revocation of the operator's excavation permit. A continuation of work or operation of the excavation, other than to remedy the violation complained of, after written notice has been received by the operator to cease the excavation operations shall constitute a violation of this section. 
P.  CERTAIN EXCAVATIONS DECLARED NUISANCES 
Any excavation located within the city limits, or hereafter created within the city limits, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Santa Fe shall and does constitute a nuisance when maintained or permitted to exist by any person in an unwholesome or nauseous condition, or in a manner by which stagnant water accumulates, or in a manner in which water collects where it is possible and probable mosquitoes will breed, or in a condition where rats could harbor, or in a manner and condition constituting a breeding place for flies, or in a manner and condition where filth, garbage, trash, debris and other discarded material accumulates and is deposited, or is maintained or permitted to exist in an unfenced, open condition, accessible to children and other members of the public, or is maintained and worked in such a manner as to disturb, effect or destroy the lateral support of or block and impede traffic on any public street, alley, road or way, or that is worked in such a manner as to drop or deposit material on public streets and highways, or that is maintained or permitted to exist in any condition which constitutes a possible and probable medium of transmission of disease to or between human beings, or to maintain or permit to exist any one or more of the above enumerated conditions. It is further declared that any person in locating or maintaining any excavation in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalty for the violation of this Code and is hereby deemed to be maintained a nuisance. Nothing herein shall in any way reduce the remedies which the City may otherwise have to regulate, correct, abate, or abolish any nuisance within the City limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Santa Fe. 
Q.  EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS OF SECTION 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or apply to any person engaged in normal agricultural, industrial, horticultural and residential enjoyment and use of property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to nor affect a person in excavating to install, construct or complete a structure, building or facility of any kind when the plans and specifications for such objective have been submitted and approved by the inspection department of the City of Santa Fe, provided that the progress on the facility or project is not delayed for a period of more than two (2) weeks, excepting delays attributable to acts of nature; provided that any soil or material excavated shall not be removed from the premises; and further provided, that such excavation created is not of a permanent nature and will not be left open and uncovered on the completion of the project without authorization of such permit. The provisions of this section shall not apply to nor affect the excavation operations of private utility concerns constructing facilities by virtue of a franchise or a special permit issued by the City; provided, that the progress on the private utility project or facility is not delayed for a period of more than two (2) weeks, excepting delays attributable to acts of nature, and further providing, that such excavation created is not of a permanent nature and will not be left open and uncovered on the completion of the facility of the project. This section shall not apply nor affect the operations of the United States of America, the State of Texas nor any political subdivision of either thereof. 
R.  PENALTY 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall on conviction be fined in accordance with the general provisions of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ordinance No. 08-91 of July 11, 1991)  
SECTION 19: - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Hotel : Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations, including hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses or other building where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
(2)  Consideration : The cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping, and not including the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
(3)  Occupancy : The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
(4)  Occupant : Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
(5)  Person : Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
(6)  Tax Assessor-Collector : The tax assessor and collector of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(7)  Quarterly Period : The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of October, November and December; the second quarter being the months of January, February and March; the third quarter being the months of April, May and June; and the fourth quarter being the months of July, August and September. 
(8)  Permanent Resident : Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
B.  TAX LEVIED; AMOUNT; EXEMPTIONS 
There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent (7%) of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. 
Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  No tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident. 
(2)  No tax shall be imposed for federal or state employees traveling on official business. 
(3)  No tax shall be imposed for diplomatic personnel who presents a Tax Exemption card issued by the United States Department of State. 
(4)  No tax shall be imposed for federal or state military personnel traveling on official military business. This exemption does not cover military staff on leave or between stations. 
C.  COLLECTION OF TAX 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this section for the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent (1%) of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as hereinbelow provided, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the city if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the city or file a false report with the city. 
D.  QUARTERLY REPORTS TO TAX ASSESSOR-COLLECTOR 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period (beginning the last day of the month following the second quarterly period of calendar year 1999), every person required to collect the tax imposed hereby shall file a report with the assessor-collector of taxes showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the assessor-collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the assessor-collector. The assessor-collector is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this section. The assessor-collector shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation for information contained in the report to the city by the hotel. 
E.  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF TAX ASSESSOR-COLLECTOR: ACCESS TO BOOKS AND RECORDS 
The assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this section, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of the article. 
F.  PENALTIES 
If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed herein when said report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five percent (5%) of the amount due as penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days, he shall forfeit an additional five percent (5%) of such tax. However, such penalty shall never be less than one and no/100 ($1.00) dollar. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the due date. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, including hotel operators who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a false return, or who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed five hundred and no/100 ($500.00) dollars, and each twenty-four (24) hours of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
G.  ADDITIONAL PENALTIES 
The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)  Require the forfeiture of any revenue the city allowed the hotel operator to retain for its cost of collecting the tax; 
(2)  Bring suit against the hotel for noncompliance; and/or 
(3)  Bring suit against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under Texas law. 
H.  ADDITIONAL AUTHORIZATION TO BRING SUIT 
The city Attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and required to pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction. 
I.  USE OF REVENUE DERIVED FROM LEVY OF HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this section may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  the acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities (as such is defined in V.A.T.S. Tax Code. Section 351.001); 
(2)  the furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or it's vicinity; 
(4)  the encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(5)  historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums; 
(a)  which are at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or 
(b)  which are located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates, or other visitors to the municipality. 
Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and hotel industry as hereinbefore delineated. Such revenue shall not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the municipality which are not directly related to promoting the hotel and convention industry or tourism in the municipality. 
J.  ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS; ACCOUNTABILITY; KEEPING OF RECORDS 
The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the entity to which it delegates those functions, and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least annually listing the expenditures made by the entity of revenue from the tax provided by the municipality. 
The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the municipality from the tax in a separate account established for the purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account. 
The municipality may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by contract as provided herein. 
The approval by the city council of the annual budget of the entity to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the municipality to the person or entity under the contract. 
A person or entity with whom the municipality contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity and, on request of the city council or other person, shall make the records available for inspection and review. 
Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures hereinbefore authorized. The portion of the total administrative costs for activities for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the authorized activities. 
Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of the person's job in an efficient and professional manner. 
K.  EFFECTIVE DATE 
The hotel occupancy tax authorized herein shall become effective commencing on the first day of the month following the date upon which this section, or an amended form thereof, has been adopted and enacted by the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
L.  SEVERABILITY 
In the event that any one or more of the provisions, clauses, or words of this section or the application thereof to any situation or circumstance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any other provisions, clauses, or words of this section or the application thereof to any other situations or circumstances and it is intended that this section shall be severable and that it shall be construed and applied as if such invalid or unconstitutional clause, section, provision, or word had not been included herein. 
(Ordinance No. 08-99 of May 13, 1999)  
CHAPTER 5 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 05-2006, adopted Mar. 9, 2006, amended Ch. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5, §§ 1—5, pertained to fire protection, and derived from Ordinance No. 9-78, adopted September 21, 1978; Ordinance No. 10-78, adopted September 21, 1978; Ordinance No. 03-83, adopted Mar. 10, 1983; Ordinance No. 07-88, adopted May 12, 1988; Ordinance No. 33-98, adopted November 12, 1998; Ordinance No. 02-2000, adopted January 13, 2000; Ordinance No. 26-2000, adopted November 9, 2000; Ordinance No. 22-2003, adopted August 28, 2003; and Ordinance No. 07-2005, adopted May 26, 2005. 
 
SECTION 1: - FIRE CODE 
A.  STANDARD FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY CODES ADOPTED 
(a)  There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code recommended by the International Code Council, known as the International Fire Code, 2012 edition thereof, and the whole thereof save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended as prescribed in this section. One (1) copy of said code is on file in the office of the City Secretary, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(b)  There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the 2015 edition of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code and the whole thereof save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended as prescribed in this section. One (1) copy of said code is on file in the office of the City Secretary, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(c)  Revisions: 
Amend 2012 edition of the IFC, Chapter 9 by deletion of Section 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area. 
Amend 2012 edition of the IFC, Chapter 9 Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3. By adding the following: Exception: Bonafide 501C-3 (Non-Profit) activities are exempt from installing an automatic sprinkler system where there exists an inadequate public water system to support the required automatic sprinkler system; or where no adequate on-site storm water detention/capacity capable of supporting the required automatic sprinkler system exists; or where no adequate containerized water storage system is available to support the required automatic sprinkler system. 
Amend 2012 edition of the IFC, Chapter 1006 Means of Egress Illumination [B] 1006.1 Illumination required. By adding the following: "This includes all commercial restroom facilities." 
(Ordinance No. 05-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 05-2015 of March 26, 2015, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 17-2019 of December 12, 2019, Sec. 1) 
B.  CONFLICT 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the Fire Code adopted by reference in subsection "A" above and any other provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances shall prevail. 
C.  ENFORCEMENT 
The provisions of said Fire Code shall be enforced by the City Fire Marshal or his designee. 
D.  PERMIT, INSPECTION, INVESTIGATION, AND FEES 
The City Fire Marshal or his designee shall issue all City of Santa Fe, Texas, fire permits; perform all Fire Code inspections or investigations; and enforce the requirements associated with each of the following permits, inspections, and investigations; burn permit, recreational/ceremonial bonfires, re-inspections, work without a permit, fire suppression, change to existing suppression system, fire alarm systems, flammable and combustible storage tank removal, industrial burns, annual fire alarm and annual fire safety inspections for non-residential uses. Permit fees shall be established and determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2007 of January 11, 2007, Sec. 1) 
E.  APPEALS 
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any decision of the City Fire Marshal shall have the right to make an appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be perfected by written notice submitted to the City Secretary and addressed to the Mayor and City Council requesting a public hearing by the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of the action in appeal. Decisions of the City Council thereon shall be final. 
F.  PENALTY 
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Code of Ordinances, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2006 of Mar. 9, 2006, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 02-2007 of January 11, 2007, Sec. 2)  
SECTION 2: - FIRE MARSHAL 
A.  OFFICE OF FIRE MARSHAL CREATED 
The office of the Fire Marshal is hereby created. 
B.  QUALIFICATIONS & COMPENSATION OF FIRE MARSHAL 
The office of the Fire Marshal shall be independent of other city departments. The Fire Marshal shall be properly qualified for the unique duties of the office. City Council shall appoint the Fire Marshal; establish the annual salary for the position; and may discharge the Fire Marshal without cause at the discretion of City Council. (Ordinance No. 7-88 of May 12, 1988). 
C.  DUTIES 
The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city limits by which property has been damaged or destroyed. The Fire Marshal shall make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or by design. The Fire Marshal shall "quarterly" review the records of the Santa Fe, Fire & Rescue of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss. 
D.  ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHAL 
The Fire Marshal shall nominate and appoint persons for the position of Assistant Fire Marshal subject to approval of City Council. The Assistant Fire Marshal(s) shall perform such duties as delegated by the Fire Marshal, and the Assistant Fire Marshal(s) may have powers of a police officer in performing his duties. The salary, if any, of the Assistant Fire Marshal(s) shall be established by the City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2006 of Mar. 9, 2006, Sec. 2; Ordinance No. 05-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 2)  
SECTION 3: - FIREWORKS 
A.  DEFINITION 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  Distributor: Those who sell fireworks to retailers or to jobbers for resale to others. 
2.  Fireworks: Any composition or device designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, such as firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and such term shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, whether specifically designated and defined in this subsection or not. 
3.  Illegal Fireworks: A fireworks device manufactured, distributed or sold in violation of this section. 
4.  Importer: Those who import fireworks from a foreign country for sale to distributor, jobbers, or retailers within the state. 
5.  Jobber: Those who purchase fireworks for resale to consumers only. 
6.  Manufacturer: Persons that are engaged in the making of fireworks. 
7.  Person: The term means and includes any natural person, association of persons, partnerships, corporation, agent, or officer of a corporation, and shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and administrators. 
8.  Public display: The igniting and shooting of fireworks for public amusement. 
9.  Retailer: Those who purchase fireworks for resale to consumers only. 
B.  GENERAL PROHIBITION 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this subsection, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or have in his possession with intent to sell, keep, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire, or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. 
C.  EXCEPTIONS 
The general prohibitions as set forth in subsection "B" shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Subsection B shall not apply to toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or similar devices in which paper caps obtaining 0.0025 grains or less of explosive compounds are used, provided they are so constructed that the land cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for exploding, and toy paper pistol caps which contain less than 0.0025 grains of explosive compounds, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(b)  It shall not be unlawful, upon a permit issued by the Fire Marshal, for any person engaged in any organized play, legitimate theatrical performance, circus, or other show designed for the amusement and edification of the general public to use, discharge, or cause to be discharged and ignited fireworks as a part of an act, performance, play, or circus, so long as such person does not also engage in the retailing, wholesaling, selling, or distribution of any of such fireworks. The Fire Marshal shall cause to be made an investigation of each application made under this subsection to determine whether the use of such fireworks as proposed shall be of such character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person; and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application. 
(c)  Subsection B shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroads, which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any railroad for use in railroad operation; nor shall Subsection B apply to any marine signal flare or rocket which is transported or received or stored for use as ship's stores; nor shall Subsection B apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use; nor shall Subsection B apply to signal flares for use by motorists in distress. 
D.  PUBLIC DISPLAYS EXEMPTED 
The provisions of Subsection B shall not apply to a public display of fireworks made under the terms and conditions of this subsection, and such display shall be permitted upon compliance with the provisions of the City's adopted Fire Prevention Code and of this subsection, as follows: 
(a)  Any adult person or any firm, co-partnership, corporation or association planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make written application for a permit to the Fire Marshal at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the date of the proposed display. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to make an investigation as to whether the display as proposed by the applicant for a permit under this section shall be of such a character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person; and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to the conditions prescribed in this subsection. If the application is approved, a permit shall be issued for the public display by the Fire Marshal. Such permit shall be for a period of time designated on the permit, but shall not exceed fourteen (14) calendar days, and the permit shall not be transferable. If the application is denied by the Fire Marshal, he shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing. 
(c)  The applicant for a display permit under this Subsection shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that he carries compensation insurance for his employees as provided by the laws of the State; and he shall file with the Fire Marshal a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance in an amount not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the State, for the benefit of the person named therein as insured, as evidence of ability to respond in damages in at least the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), such policy to be approved by the Fire Marshal. In lieu of insurance, the applicant may file with the Fire Marshal a bond in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), issued by an authorized surety company approved by the Fire Marshal, conditioned upon the applicant's payment of all damages to persons or property which shall or may result from or be caused by such public display of fireworks or any negligence on the part of the applicant or his agents, servants, employees, or subcontractors in the presentation of the public safety. 
(d)  The range of aerial displays shall not be more than two hundred (200) feet, and the fireworks shall be discharged vertically from tubes approved by the Fire Marshal. 
(e)  The limit of a display authorized by this subsection shall not be more than forty-five (45) minutes per performance, and there shall not be more than two (2) performances in each twenty-four (24) hours. 
(f)  No public display of fireworks shall be of such a character and so located, discharged, or fired as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or property, and this determination shall be within the sound discretion of the Fire Marshal. 
(g)  The persons handling the display of fireworks under this Subsection shall be competent, adult persons and experienced pyrotechnic operators approved by the Fire Marshal. No person not approved by the Fire Marshal shall handle fireworks at the public display. The names of the experienced pyrotechnic operators shall be designated on the permit issued. 
(h)  For each public display of fireworks under this Subsection, the Fire Marshal may require that not less than two (2) firefighters of the Santa Fe Fire and Rescue be in attendance during the display. The expense of such firefighters at the display shall be borne by the applicant for the permit and shall be paid in advance at the time of the application for the permit. 
(i)  The material to be used for a public display authorized by this Subsection shall not be stored within the city limits, but shall be brought in on the day of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place of the display for further handling and storage. 
E.  ILLEGAL FIREWORKS DECLARED NUISANCE; SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION 
(a)  The presence of any fireworks within the city and within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits extending for a distance outside of such city limits for a total of five thousand (5,000) feet, in violation of this Section, is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The Fire Marshal or any other law enforcement officer is directed and required to seize any fireworks found in violation of this Section, and any authorized deputy of the Fire Marshal, or any police officer of the City, or any other duly-constituted State peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the Fire Marshal can be notified, in order that such fireworks may be seized in accordance with the terms of this Section. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any penal provision of this Section, the City Attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the City, the Fire Marshal, or both for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping, or use of fireworks within the city or within the five thousand-foot area described in (a) of this Subsection. It shall not be necessary to obtain injunctive relief as a prerequisite to seizure of fireworks. 
(c)  If any fireworks or combustibles are deemed by the Fire Marshal to be in such a state or condition as to constitute a hazard to life or property, the Fire Marshal may dispose of such fireworks or combustibles without further process of law. The Fire Marshal is authorized to dispose of any abandoned fireworks or combustibles that he deems to be hazardous to life or property. 
(d)  If the person so charged is found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto with regard to possession, handling, or storage of fireworks or combustibles, the Fire Marshal is authorized to dispose of the confiscated material in such a way as he shall deem equitable. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2009 of April 9, 2009, Sec. 3) 
F.  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SECTION 
Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, store, or process fireworks in violation of this Section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of the Code. If fireworks are separately wrapped or packaged, the commission or omission of any act prohibited by this Section shall be a separate offense as to each such separately wrapped or separately packaged firework. 
G.  CONFLICT 
If there is any conflict between the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and the provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall preempt and be controlling. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herein and with are hereby expressly repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
H.  SAVINGS CLAUSE 
That, in the event any section, clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this ordinance shall be for any reason adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect, invalidate, or impair the remainder of this ordinance. 
I.  EFFECTIVE DATE 
This section shall become effective on January 3, 2001. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2006 of Mar. 9, 2006, Sec. 3)  
SECTION 4: - ARSON REWARD 
A reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is hereby offered by the City of Santa Fe, Texas for the arrest and conviction of any person guilty of the crime of arson committed within the limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, and said sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is hereby appropriated out of the General Funds of the city to be paid out by warrant to the person or persons entitled thereto upon satisfactory proof of such arrest and conviction being filed with the City Council of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2006 of Mar. 9, 2006, Sec. 4)  
SECTION 5: - OUTDOOR BURNING 
A.  GENERAL PROHIBITION OF OUTDOOR BURNING 
No person may cause, suffer, allow, or permit any outdoor burning within the City of Santa Fe, except as provided by the Texas Clean Air Act, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), rules and orders, and this section. 
B.  DEFINITIONS 
Unless specifically defined in the Texas Clean Air Act (TCAA) or in the rules of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), the terms used by the commission have the meanings commonly ascribed to them in the field of air pollution control. In addition to the terms which are defined by the TCAA, the following terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(1)  Air Curtain Incinerator (ACI): An incinerator that operates by forcefully projecting a curtain of air across an open chamber or pit in which combustion occurs. Incinerators of this type can be constructed above or below ground and with or without refractory walls and floor. 
(2)  Bonfire: An outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes. 
(3)  Extinguished: The absence of any visible flames, glowing coals, or smoke. 
(4)  Fire Code Official: The Fire Marshal or his designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the City Fire Codes or a duly authorized agent. 
(5)  Fire Watch: A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building, portion thereof or a burn site by one (1) or more generally qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying, detecting fires, raising alarms of fire and notifying the fire and police departments. 
(6)  Land Clearing Operation: The uprooting, cutting, or clearing of vegetation in connection with conversion for the construction of buildings, rights-of-way, residential, commercial, or industrial development, or the clearing of vegetation to enhance property value, access or production. It does not include the maintenance burning of on-site property wastes such as fallen limbs, branches, or leaves, or other wastes from routine property clean-up activities, nor does it include burning following clearing for ecological restoration. 
(7)  Nuisance: Any act, thing, occupation, condition or use of property which is of such a nature and continues for such length of time as to substantially annoy or endanger the comfort, health, repose, or safety of the public. No person shall discharge from any source whatsoever one (1) or more air contaminants or combinations thereof, in such concentration and of such duration as are or may tend to be injurious to or to adversely affect human health or welfare, animal life, vegetation, or property, or as to interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of animal life, vegetation, or property. 
(8)  Open Burning: The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudge pots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames or recreational fires. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimney's necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open. 
(9)  Practical Alternative: An economically, technologically, ecologically and logistically viable option. 
(10)  Prescribed Burn: The controlled application of fire to naturally-occurring vegetative following appropriate planning and precautionary measures. 
(11)  Recreational Fire: An outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel of three (3) feet or 914 mm or less in diameter and two (2) feet or 610 mm or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
(12)  Sensitive Receptor(s): A man-made structure utilized for human residence, business, the containment of livestock, or the housing of sensitive live vegetation. The term does not include such things as range fences, roads, bridges, or facilities used solely for the storage of hay or other livestock feeds. The term "sensitive live vegetation" is defined as vegetation which has potential to be damaged by smoke and heat. 
(13)  Site: One (1) or more contiguous or adjacent properties that are under common control of the same person, or persons under common control. 
(14)  Sunrise/Sunset: Official sunrise/sunset as set forth in the United States Naval Observatory tables available from National Weather Service Offices. 
(15)  Traffic Hazard: Any act, thing, condition or use of property that unlawfully and substantially interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage of any street, alley, highway, roadway, or other public way. 
(16)  Wild Land: Uncultivated land other than fallow, land minimally influenced by human activity, and land maintained for bio-diversity, wildlife forage production, protective plant cover or wildlife habitat. 
C.  EXCEPTIONS 
(1)  FIREFIGHTER TRAINING 
Outdoor burning shall be authorized for training fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the Fire Marshal. Such burning does not have to conform to the general requirements for other forms of allowable burning. 
(2)  RECREATION, COOKING, OR WARMTH 
Outdoor burning shall be authorized for "camp fires" used solely for recreational purposes, or the preparation of food, or exclusively for the purpose of supplying warmth during cold weather. 
(3)  DISPOSAL OR LAND CLEARING DEBRIS BY CITY, ITS AGENT OR PUBLIC. 
(a)  Domestic Waste 
The burning of domestic waste is generally prohibited. However, when authorized, limited types of domestic waste may be burned when restricted to the following materials and conditions: 
(i)  The waste may is burned at a property designed for and used exclusively as a private residence or duplex residence housing not more than two (2) families, and when the waste is generated only from the residential use occurring on the property. 
(ii)  The waste is restricted to the following materials: fallen limbs, trunk or branches of a tree, landscaping trimmings, brush, untreated, unprocessed wood products. Such burning of wood products containing manufacturing resins, binders, glue, biological growth inhibitors or insecticides is prohibited. Limited domestic waste shall not include any materials prohibited by any other provision of this section. 
(iii)  Other conditions of allowable burning in paragraph "d" of this section do not apply to the burning of limited domestic waste. However, burning of such waste may not cause a nuisance condition or traffic hazard. Furthermore, some substantial means of containing or controlling the fire must be utilized or be provided immediately available to the person supervising the fire. For example, a charged water hose, sand supply, front-end loader or other sufficient means to control the fire must be immediately available. Burn barrels and similar containers are specifically prohibited. 
(iv)  The total domestic material that may be burned in any twenty-four-hour period shall be restricted to three (3) cubic yards of un-compacted volume per domestic parcel or tract of land. 
(b)  Diseased Animal Carcasses 
Diseased animal carcasses may be burned when diseased animal carcass burning is the most effective means of controlling the spread of disease. Such outdoor burning may only be authorized with a permit issued by the City Fire Marshal. 
(c)  Maintenance or Land Clearing 
Trees, brush, and other plant growth may be burned on-site for right-of-way maintenance, land clearing operations, when no practical alternative to burning exist and when the materials are generated from property on which the burning occurs. Such burning shall be subject to the General Requirements for Allowable Burning established by subsection D of this section; TCEQ, Chapter 111, Control of Air Emissions from Visible Emissions and Particulate Matter, Sub-Chapter B, Outdoor Burning; TCEQ, Chapter 106, Permit by Rule, Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, 106.496, Air Curtain Incinerators authorizing trench burners and above ground fireboxes; and, TCEQ Regulatory Guidance, Small business and Environmental Assistance Division, RG-422 for "Outdoor Burning: A guide for local governments". Maintenance or land clearing outdoor burning shall only be authorized with a permit issued by the City Fire Marshal or designee consistent with these standards and guidelines. 
(d)  Brush, Trees, and debris removed by the City 
Brush, trees and debris causing a detrimental public health and safety condition may be burned by the City of Santa Fe at a site it owns upon receiving site and burn approval from the executive director of the TCEQ. Such a burn can only be authorized when there is no practical alternative, and it may be done no more frequently than once every two (2) months. Such burns cannot be conducted at municipal solid waste landfills unless authored by the Executive Director of the TCEQ and shall be subject to the requirements of subsection D of this section. 
(e)  Burn Permit 
A burn permit is required for all authorized burning (residential and commercial) within the city limits. Burn permit requests for non-residential purposes shall require a "trench burn" permit. 
(f)  Camp Fires & Outside Cooking 
A permit is not required when a fire is authorized under subsection C(2) "Exception for Recreation, Cooking, or Warmth" when the following conditions are observed at the fire site: 
(i)  The fire (recreational and private) is contained wholly within the confines of a steel, stone or masonry structure such as a fireplace, lined fire pit, barbeque cooker, smoker or similar formal structure designed to control and contain the fire. Barrels and metal trash burners are prohibited. 
(ii)  The structure (campfires and bonfires) is surrounded by paving or bare packed earth to a distance no less than twelve (12) feet or is shielded from surrounding or nearby combustibles by a masonry fire barrier of sufficient breadth and height to eliminate ordinary risk of exposure to such surroundings. 
(iii)  The fuel is restricted to seasoned and sized firewood, solid fuels designed and manufactured as fuels or fuel gases and liquid fuels when burned in devices approved by code for such fuels. 
The Fire Marshal shall be authorized to vary the terms of any burn permit when he shall determine doing so is in the best interest of public safety and welfare. 
(4)  OTHERWISE PROHIBITED BURNING 
A one-time outdoor burning may be authorized with a permit issued by the City Fire Marshal or his designee if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  A permit is not otherwise authorized by this section, 
(b)  There is no practical alternative, 
(c)  The burn will not cause or contribute to a nuisance, traffic hazard or to a violation of any federal or state primary or secondary ambient air standard. 
(5)  EMISSION ABATEMENT 
The city council may specify procedures or methods to control or abate emissions from outdoor burning authorized pursuant to this rule. Authorization to burn may be revoked by the City Fire Marshal or his designee at any time if the burning causes nuisance conditions, violates any provision of an applicable permit, or causes a violation of any air quality standard. 
(6)  PERMIT FEES 
Burning permit fees shall be as established by council resolution. Additional fees attributable to the direct cost of monitoring burning, authorized under subsection C(3)(b), "Diseased Animal Carcasses" and subsection C(3)(c) "Maintenance or Land Clearing" and subsection C(4) "Exception for Otherwise Prohibited Outdoor Burning" may consist of the cost of the labor and/or overtime cost of a full or part-time inspector, the cost of stand-by fire equipment and personnel and other costs directly related to the monitoring of a burn. The city may charge a surcharge of up to ten percent (10%) of the additional fees as administrative expense. 
A permit shall be issued and the fees waived by the City Fire Marshal for the following: 
(a)  Firefighter Training 
(b)  Brush, Trees and debris removed by the City (trench burn permit) 
D.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
(1)  All air-curtain incinerator type burn activities shall require an on-site inspection by the Fire Marshal prior to burning. 
(2)  Burning must be commenced and conducted only when wind direction and other meteorological conditions are such that smoke and other pollutants will not cause adverse effects to any public road, landing strip, or off site structure containing sensitive receptor(s). 
(3)  If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow onto or across a road or highway, it is the responsibility of the person initiating the burn to post men with flags to warn motorists on affected roads. 
(4)  Burning must be conducted downwind of or at least three hundred (300) feet from any structure containing sensitive receptors located on adjacent properties unless prior written approval is obtained from adjacent occupant with possession or control. 
(5)  Burning shall be conducted in compliance with the following meteorological and timing considerations: 
(a)  The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one (1) hour after sunrise. Burning shall be completed on the same day not later than one (1) hour before sunset, and shall be attended by responsible party at all times during the active burn phase, when the fire is progressing. In cases where residual fires and/or smoldering objects continue to emit smoke after this time, such areas shall be extinguished if the smoke from these areas has the potential to create a nuisance or traffic hazard condition. In no case shall the extent of the burn area be allowed to increase after this time. 
(b)  Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind speed is predicted to be less than six (6) miles per hour (m.p.h.) (five (5) Knots) or greater than twelve (12) m.p.h. (10.4 knots) during the burn period. 
(c)  Burning shall not be conducted during periods of actual or predicted persistent low-level atmospheric temperature inversions. 
(d)  The burn shall be monitored continuously by a responsible person who shall maintain the burn within their field of view at all times. Equipment and fire control methods, pre-approved by the, City Fire Marshal or his designee shall be maintained at the fire site at all times until the fire is extinguished. 
(6)  Electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics, clothing, cloth and fabrics, furniture, carpet, and appliances non-wood construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphalt type materials, potentially explosive materials, chemicals wastes, and items containing natural or synthetic rubber must not be burned. The preceding list is intended to be indicative and not an exhaustive list of prohibited materials. 
(7)  All burning authorized by the City Fire Marshal or his designee under the provisions of subsection C.(3)(b), "Diseased Animal Carcasses" and subsection C.(3)(c) "Maintenance or Land Clearing" and subsection C.(4) "Exception for Otherwise Prohibited Outdoor Burning", shall be by trench burning. The equipment used for such burning shall be licensed under the regulations of the TCEQ and the operator shall comply with TCEQ regulations for air curtain incinerator trench burning and above ground fire-boxes. 
E.  RESPONSIBILITY 
The authority to conduct outdoor burning under this section does not exempt or excuse any person responsible from the consequences, damages, or injuries resulting from the burning and does not exempt or excuse anyone from complying with all other applicable laws or ordinances, regulations, and orders of governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the burning is otherwise conducted in compliance with this section. 
F.  ENFORCEMENT 
(1)  Enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the City Fire Marshal or his designee. The City Fire Marshal or his designee shall have the authority to issue citations for any violations of this section. If the subject cited is not present, the City Fire Marshal or his designee may leave the citation at the residence of the subject or send the citation to the subject by registered or certified mail. Furthermore, at the discretion of the City Fire Marshal or his designee, any fire which is deemed to be in violation of this section or is determined to be a nuisance, a traffic hazard, or endangering a neighboring property containing sensitive receptors, or deemed to be an endangerment to public health or safety, may be grounds for ordering a fire to be extinguished. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any the City Fire Marshal or his designee in the performance of his duties. 
(2)  In the event of drought, environmental health or safety conditions, or other environmental conditions aggravated by the by-products or processes of combustion, the City Fire Marshal or his designee may declare a burning moratorium. A burning moratorium shall apply to all forms and types of burning except that type listed in paragraph C(2) "Exception for Recreation, Cooking, or Warmth" of this section. Under extraordinary conditions, a burning ban may be declared by the City Fire Marshal or his designee. A burning ban shall include all forms of burning without exception. 
(3)  In the absence of the City Fire Marshal or his designee, the director of public safety or director of code enforcement may assume the enforcement responsibilities of this section. 
G.  PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount consistent with City of Santa Fe, Texas, City Code, Article 1, Section 5, General penalty for violation of code in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, with each continuing days violation constituting a separate offense. 
(Ordinance No. 05-2006 of Mar. 9, 2006, Sec. 5)  
SECTION 6: - FIRE LANES 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  Fire apparatus access road. 
A road that provides fire apparatus access from a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as safety zone, fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway. 
(2)  Fire lane. 
A road, safety zone or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus. 
B.  PERMIT AND INSPECTION 
The City Fire Marshall or his designee shall perform all Fire Code inspections or investigations and enforce the requirements associated with the Standard Fire Prevention and Safety Codes adopted by reference in Section 1, subsection A of Chapter 5 of the City Code of Ordinances. All developments requiring fire apparatus access roads will be reviewed and approved by the Fire Marshall or his designee before a development permit can be issued. 
C.  FIRE LANE SPECIFICATIONS 
(1)  Dimensions. 
Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than twenty (20) feet, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches. 
(2)  Surface. 
Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus weighing seventy-five thousand (75,000) pounds and shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete to provide all-weather driving capabilities. 
(3)  Marking. 
Curbs located on either side of a fire lane shall be painted RED or a six-inch RED stripe shall be placed along the pavement where there is no curb. Where a fire lane passes between head-in parking spaces, the red stripe should be placed along the rear of these spaces clearly defining the fire lane. Painted curbs and fire lane stripes shall also be marked with the warning "FIRE LANE-TOW AWAY ZONE" in white letters at least four (4) inches in height, at intervals not exceeding fifty (50) feet. 
D.  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS 
(1)  Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount consistent with the City of Santa Fe, Texas, City Code, Article 1, Section 5, General penalty for violation of code in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, with each continuing days violation constituting a separate offense. 
(2)  Parking or standing in a designated fire apparatus access road will result in a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance to Santa Fe Municipal Court fines of not less than one hundred twenty dollars ($125.00) per violation. 
(Ordinance No. 15-2015 of December 10, 2015, Sec. 1)  
CHAPTER 6 - HEALTH & SANITATION 
 
SECTION 1: - TRASH, LITTER, WEEDS AND BRUSH CONTROLS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
The following words and terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Bulky waste : Household furniture, electronic appliances (such as televisions, stereos, microwave ovens), lawn mowers, door and window screens, swing sets, oversized children's toys, lawn furniture, wading pools, barbecue grills, whole or parts of boats and automobiles, and items banned from the landfill such as white goods (stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc.), tires or other items generated by a household as part of its solid waste which are too large for placement in a garbage container. 
(2)  Container : A watertight receptacle made of metal, heavy-duty plastic, or material of similar strength with a tight-fitting cover for storage and disposal of solid waste. 
(3)  Litter : Any unsecured or inadequately secured and improperly stored or disposed solid waste placed, thrown, dropped, deposited, blown, leaked or in any other manner distributed as prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Private property : Includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations owned by private individuals, firms, corporations, institutions or organizations: yards, grounds, driveways, entrance ways, passageways, parking areas, working areas, vacant lots, drainage basins and on-site storm water collection/retention or detention areas, loading and unloading areas, storage facilities, contiguous and noncontiguous open lot storage areas and recreation facilities. 
(5)  Public property : Includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations: streets, street medians, roads, road medians, catch basins, state, county or municipally maintained ditches, sidewalks, strips between sidewalk and street lanes, alleys, public rights-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds, housing project grounds, publicly owned vacant lots, recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, parks, conservation areas, boat landings, and beaches, waterways and bodies of water. 
(6)  Solid waste : Garbage, refuse, litter, rubbish, trash or any material including recyclable materials, and arboreal materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural or residential activities not otherwise disposable or reusable in accordance with state regulations. 
(7)  Rubbish and Unsightly maintenance of property : Any overgrowth of grasses, bushes, shrubs, weeds, trees, vines, limbs or branches, excessive collection and storage of putrescible or non-putrescible solid waste, loosely strewn construction and demolition debris (including, but not limited to, all residential and commercial building materials, paint, tools, lumber, fencing), automobile repair or reconstruction items (including, but not limited to, used vehicle parts or whole and partial segments of vehicle engines, drive trains, frames, tires, wheels), appliances, household fixtures and furnishings (including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, washers, drivers, sinks, bathtubs), external to the primary residential, commercial or industrial unit or a defined screen storage area or secondary storage facility, which will or is likely to constitute a nuisance or health hazard. 
(8)  Vehicle : Any device capable of being moved upon a public highway or roadway and in, upon or by which any property is, or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway or roadway. 
(9)  Weeds : All rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter, including grass, which has grown to more than nine inches (9") in height or which regardless of height, is liable to become an unwholesome or a decaying mass or breeding place for mosquitoes or vermin. 
(10)  Brush : All trees or shrubbery under seven feet (7') in height which are not cultivated or cared for by persons owning or controlling the premises. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
B.  NUISANCE 
(1)  A nuisance shall exist on any parcel of land within the City when either, weeds, brush, trash, debris or an unsightly maintenance of property results in the covering of the surface of any such parcel of land within the corporate limits; or 
(2)  A nuisance shall exist if a parcel has any condition upon it which causes such property to hold or retain surface water; or 
(3)  A nuisance shall exist when any property's condition causes or contributes to the creation of, or furtherance of, any disease, harboring of insects or spreading of germs, or any activity/action which tends to render the surrounding atmosphere unhealthy, unwholesome or obnoxious; or 
(4)  A nuisance shall exist when any condition on such property constitutes a fire hazard, present an unsafe chemical condition, or posses an undue risk to the immediate neighborhood. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
C.  PUBLIC NECESSITY 
(1)  For fire or chemical hazard violations, immediately notify the City Fire Marshal. 
(2)  Fire and chemical hazard violations shall be immediately abated and verified by the City Fire Marshal. 
(3)  Any nuisance creating a habitat or harboring insects, rodents, reptiles or other creatures shall be abated as directed by the Community Services Director or his designee. 
(4)  Any solid waste debris shall be properly disposed of as directed by the Community Services Director or his designee at an appropriate solid waste disposal facility. 
(5)  No burning of solid waste debris shall occur in the City limits absent of an approved City Burning Permit. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
D.  PEDESTRIANS AND MOTORISTS 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit solid waste in any manner or amount on any public or private property within City of Santa Fe, except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such purposes. 
(2)  In the prosecution charging a violation of the above subsection (a), from any vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was the origin of the solid waste, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such violation, the registered owner of said vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner or his designee to whom he gave permission or authorization to operate said vehicle, committed the violation. Origin of the solid waste may be substantiated by documentation or information contained on, within or through the solid waste which establishes ownership of the solid waste to either the registered owner or a designee to whom permission or authorization was granted or because of assumed permission or authorization being granted due to the relationship between the registered owner and the driver. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of every person distributing commercial handbills, leaflets, posters, flyers or any other advertising or information materials to take all appropriate and necessary measures to keep such materials from littering public or private property. 
(4)  To prevent litter by pedestrians, motorists and property owners, publicly used establishments and institutions, shall provide readily accessible solid waste containers which shall be regularly emptied and maintained in good condition. Such containers shall be of sufficient size and dimension to adequately handle the solid waste generated as a part of the delivery of goods and services to the public. This requirement shall be applicable to, but not limited to, fast-food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, service stations, commercial parking lots, mobile canteens, motels and hotels, hospitals, schools, colleges or other public/private institutions. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
E.  LITTER TO BE COVERED TO PREVENT IT FROM ESCAPING FROM VEHICLE DURING TRANSPORTATION 
No vehicle which transports litter may be driven or moved on any highway unless the litter is secured by means of a covering which is fastened securely so as to prevent any of its pay-load from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle onto the public right-of-way or private property. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
F.  LOADING AND UNLOADING OPERATIONS 
(1)  The owner or principal manager of any establishment or institution where packing and unpacking, and/or loading and unloading of materials takes place at exterior locations, shall provide suitable containers there for the proper collection and storage of waste materials. Such establishment owners and managers shall ensure that all tenants and their employees are aware of good waste handling practices and such practices are being routinely practiced to prevent the blowing, dropping, or scattering of solid waste materials from their storage units or during transfer to a collection vehicle for disposal or recycling. 
(2)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, tenant, lessee or their designees to remove or cause to be removed, at the end of each working day, any solid waste materials in the proximity of the development or establishment or in and around the public access areas of the development or establishment. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
G.  CONSTRUCTION, RENOVATION OR DEMOLITION PROJECTS 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, agent, contractor, or subcontractor to have adequate on-site containers and organized temporary storage areas, which are of sufficient size and dimension to prevent the scattering, dropping, sifting, blowing of solid waste on-site and during the transfer of such solid waste to a solid waste collection vehicle for disposal or recycling, for the retention of all solid waste materials produced as a direct or indirect result of a construction, renovation or demolition project. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, contractor or subcontractor to ensure all solid waste materials are properly disposed of in a City designated disposal facility. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
H.  COMMERCIAL MATERIAL CONTAINERIZATION AND REMOVAL 
(1)  All establishments, businesses or institutions including, but not limited to, restaurants, schools, convenience stores, offices, retail and wholesale business concerns, which generate solid waste requiring collection, shall make use an appropriate sized onsite solid-waste container to accommodate the normal volume of materials generated therein between collection events. 
(2)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of any establishment, institution, business, commercial or industrial activity to make appropriate arrangements for collection and disposal of all solid waste generated by the business or its customers. 
(3)  All commercial and industrial containers shall be completely screened from view of adjoining properties, have their own concrete slab and be located to the side or rear of the commercial or industrial structure served by the solid waste container. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
I.  KEEPING PROPERTY CLEAN 
(1)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, agent, occupant or lessee to keep exterior private and public property free of litter. This requirement applies not only to removal of loose litter, but to litter that is or has become trapped at such locations as fences, wall bases, ditches, grassy and planted areas, borders, embankments, bumper stops, curbed area or other such lodging points. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from buildings, or property, onto strips in the street, sidewalks or storm drainage ditches. 
(3)  Each property owner adjacent to the Santa Fe Railroad is responsible for the cleanliness and upkeep of the land area projecting forward to the edge of the traveled right-of-way. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners of any property in the City of Santa Fe, to disobey or fail to comply with any provision of this article. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
J.  DUMPING AND DEPOSITING MATERIAL IN THE RIVERS, CREEKS, DRAINAGE CANALS AND DITCHES PROHIBITED 
No person shall throw or place any refuse, paper, trash, glass, nails, tacks, wire, bottles, cans, grass clippings, brush, yard trash, concrete, earthen fill, garbage, containers, or litter or other debris in any ditch, stream, river, or retention basin that regularly or periodically carries surface water runoff. Any person who deposits any of the above shall remove it or shall cause it to be removed there from immediately. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
K.  INSPECTION 
The Community Services Director, or his designee, shall have authority to inspect any property within the City limits of the City, at any reasonable time in order to make a thorough examination thereof for the purpose of determining whether or not any of such unsanitary conditions mentioned herein exist, subject, however, to the restrictions against such inspection and entry of a private residence or private property for said inspection as provided by laws of the State of Texas. The director or his designee is designated as the Code Enforcement Officer for the purpose of being issued a "search warrant" as may be required, pursuant to Section 18.05 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
L.  NOTICE TO ABATE, SERVICE 
(1)  Generally 
If the owner of any real property fails or refuses to comply with this article, and the Community Services Director or his designee receives information of the existence of any property in violation of this article, he or his designee assigned such responsibility, shall serve the owner of the property with a written notice informing the owner of such condition and directing that action be taken to bring the property into compliance within ten (10) calendar days. 
(2)  Service of notice on owner or occupant 
The notice authorized by this section shall be given personally to the owner or occupant or both in writing or by letter mailed "certified mail return receipt requested" or equivalent addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located and to the occupant at the mailing address of the subject property. If personal service cannot be obtained and the owner is not an individual, then the notice shall be served upon the persons designated under applicable law for service of process on a non-individual or nonresident. 
(3)  Service of notice by publication; contents 
If personal service of the notice cannot be obtained, service may be given by publication, at least once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, addressed to the owner or if the owner is not known, "to the owner of (legal description of the property involved)". The notice shall give the legal description of the property, state the condition which constitutes a violation of this section, and shall state that upon failure of the owner to rectify the situation within ten (10) calendar days of the date the notice is mailed, published or posted, a complaint may be filed in the municipal court of the City for violation of this article, stating the penalties for violation. In addition, the notice shall advise that the City may do work or make the improvements required or pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the owner for the expense involved, and upon failure of the owner to pay the City for such expense, fix a lien on the property for the expense involved as provided in this article. 
(4)  Notice by posting; contents 
In addition to publication in a local newspaper, notice may be served by posting said notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. Any notice posted on the property shall be on a placard and shall have the same contents as provided in subsection (3) above. 
(5)  Notice returned as "refused or unclaimed" 
In the event a notice is mailed to a property owner in accordance with this article and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refuse or unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(6)  Additional notice not required 
In a notice provided under this section, the City may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the one-year anniversary of the date of the notice, the City without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within the one-year period, and the City has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the City without notice may take any action permitted in this article and assess expenses against the property. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
M.  UNLAWFUL NON-COMPLIANCE; FILING OF COMPLAINT; FINES 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any land within the City to fail to have any weeds, grass, brush or rubbish mowed, cut, removed, or otherwise fail to bring property into compliance with the standards and time frame set forth within the notice after such notice is mailed or published, directing that such standards be met; the Community Services Director or his designee assigned such duties shall, whenever a violation is found, file a complaint with the municipal court; and the prosecutor of the municipal court assigned such duties shall prosecute the case, and upon conviction for violation of this article the owner shall be fined in accordance with Texas Local Government Code, 54C, 54.001 (a), (b) and (c). 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
N.  ABATEMENT BY CITY; PAYMENT OF COSTS BY OWNER; LIEN IMPOSED FOR NON-PAYMENT 
(1)  In addition to the remedy provided for in Subsection N., the City may also cause the work necessary to bring any property into compliance with this article to be done if the owner fails to do such work or cause the work to be done within fifteen (15) calendar days from receipt of notice or publication, and to charge the owner for the costs incurred by the City. A statement of the costs incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises, if the owner and mailing address are known, and if not known, may be published in the official newspaper designated by the City for notice or other local newspaper having at least weekly issues. The statement shall demand payment within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt or publication. 
(2)  In addition to all costs for equipment, manpower and other related expenses, a minimum fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each lot of record, adjacent lots under common ownership, or tract of land is hereby established for all associated administrative functions as may be required. 
(3)  If the statement of the costs served or published pursuant to this section is not paid within such period, the director of finance may file with the County Clerk a statement of expenses incurred to abate and correct such condition on the premises, to be filed in the deed records, sand such statement shall be and the City shall have a privileged lien upon the lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which such expenses were incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, together with ten percent (10%) interest per annum on the delinquent amount from the date such payment was due. For any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the City; and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
O.  PENALTIES 
(1)  A person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined per offense, per Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code, Ordinance No. 33-98 of November 12, 1998. 
(2)  Violations and enforcement of this article shall be executed and prosecuted by the Community Services Director or his designee; or, by the Chief of Police and his officers. 
(3)  Anyone interfering with, hindering, or molesting any city officer or official in the performance of any official duty performed in the enforcement of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine. 
(4)  In the event that the City deems it necessary to bring civil action to enforce the terms of this section, the violator shall be responsible for all court costs and attorney fees incurred by the City. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2005 of May 26, 2005) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-2005, adopted May 26, 2005, amended Section 1 and Section 2 of this chapter in their entireties and combined them into a new Section 1 to read as herein set out. Former Section 1 pertained to trash and litter and derived from the ordinance adopting this Code; and former Section 2 pertained to weeds, brush and rubbish and derived from the original codification.  
SECTION 2: - RESERVED 
Editor's note— See editor's note for Section 1.  
SECTION 3: - DUMPING, STORAGE, AND BURNING OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "hazardous materials" are defined as including the following: 
(a)  Explosive is defined as any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion, i.e., with substantially instantaneous release of gas and heat, unless such compound, mixture, or device is otherwise specifically classified. 
(b)  Flammable liquid is any liquid which gives off flammable vapors, as determined by flash point from Tagliabue's open-cup tester as used for test of burning oils, at or below a temperature of 140° F. 
Pyroforic liquids that become self-igniting when exposed to air. 
(c)  Flammable solid is any solid material, other than one classified as an explosive, which, under conditions incident to transportation, is liable to cause fires through friction, absorption of moisture, spontaneous chemical changes, retained heat from manufacturing or processing, or which can be ignited readily and when ignited burns so vigorously and persistently as to create a serious transportation hazard; such as, not by way of limitation, but by way of example only, certain metallic hydrides, metallic sodium and potassium, and certain oily fabrics, processed meals, and nitrocellulose products. 
(d)  Oxidizing material is a substance such as a chlorate, permanganate, peroxide, nitro carbo nitrate, or a nitrate that yields oxygen readily to stimulate the combustion of organic matter. 
(e)  Acids and other corrosive liquids are those acids, alkaline caustic liquids, and other corrosive liquids which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe damage of such tissue by chemical action, or in case of leakage, will materially damage or destroy other freight by chemical action, or are liable to cause fire when in contact with organic matter or with certain chemicals. 
(f)  Flammable compressed gas is any compressed gas that is so classified by Section 173.300 of the regulations of the Department of Transportation governing the transportation of dangerous articles in tank motor vehicles, dated September, 1967. 
(g)  Nonflammable compressed gas is any compressed gas which is poisonous to human beings or which has asphyxiating or toxic effect to human beings. 
(h)  Class "A" poisons are poisonous gases or liquids of such nature that a very small amount of the gas or vapor of the liquid, mixed with air is dangerous to life. This class includes, not by way of limitation, but by way of example only, bromacetone, cyanogen, cyanogen chloride containing less than 0.9 percent water, diphosgene, ethyldichlorarsine, hydrocyanic acid (see note of this paragraph), lewisite, methyldichlorarsine, mustard gas, nitrogen peroxide (tetroxide), phenylcarbylamine chloride, phosgene (diphosgene), nitrogen tetroxide-nitric oxide mixtures containing up to 33.2 percent weight nitric oxide. 
Note— Diluted solutions of hydrocyanic acid of not exceeding five percent (5%) strength are not class "A" poisons. 
(i)  Class "B" poisons are those substances, liquid or solid, including pastes and semi-solids, other than class "A" poisons, which are known to be so toxic to man as to afford a hazard to health during transportation, or which, in the absence of adequate data on human toxicity, are presumed to be toxic to man. 
(j)  Radioactive materials include any nuclear or fissionable material, radioactive or waste that have external radiation requiring critical safety control. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section "industrial wastes" are defined as a mixture of materials collected for reuse or resale collected for disposal containing one (1) or more hazardous materials as defined under section A(1). 
B.  PROHIBITED DUMPING OR STORAGE 
No industrial waste or hazardous materials, or other materials capable of polluting water wells, public or private, or of injuring crops, cropland, grass, and other vegetation, livestock or wildlife, or of injuring human health, or that of domestic animals, through the air or by direct contact, shall be emptied, dumped, stored, kept, held, or put into open pits, tanks, ditches, lagoons, earthen levees, or behind dikes within the territorial limits of the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
C.  BURNING 
No industrial waste or hazardous materials shall be burned within the city or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, nor shall any of such materials be burned, whether within such areas or not, under such conditions that gaseous residue thereof capable of injuring plant life or irritating skin of human beings or affecting the health of human beings or of domestic animals, or of damaging or discoloring the surface of buildings is emitted and allowed to drift over or across the territorial limits of the city or any portion thereof. 
D.  TRANSPORT 
(1)  No person shall drive or permit to be driven over and along any street of the city, other than a state highway, Hwy. 6, FM Road 646, and Hwy. 1764, any truck or other vehicle containing industrial waste or hazardous materials without first having obtained from the city secretary and approval of mayor or council, a permit pursuant to an application signed by the owner or person having charge of such materials stating: 
(a)  The ownership thereof. 
(b)  The character of the materials, define types of material. 
(c)  The place and manner at which and by which they are to be disposed of. 
(d)  That such materials will not be disposed of in such manner as will violate the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Number of loads or frequency estimate. 
(2)  The fee for a permit required by this subsection shall be a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. Such permit shall remain in effect for one (1) year and may be renewed annually upon payment of the permit fee. 
(3)  A permit issued under this subsection shall provide and the authority of the permittee shall be subject to the provisions that there shall be no transportation of industrial waste and hazardous materials as defined in subsection B hereof over and on city streets except in vehicles equipped with liquid-tight and securely attached tanks or containers in good condition and free of leakage at all times while in use. 
(4)  Any vehicle transporting industrial waste shall be placarded on the front end, both sides, and rear with the words "DANGEROUS CHEMICALS" in red letters at least four inches (4") in height. 
(5)  Every vehicle used for the transportation of any hazardous materials, regardless of the quantity being transported, or whether loaded or empty, shall be conspicuously and legibly marked on each side and the rear thereof in letters not less than four inches (4") in height on a background of sharply contrasting color as follows: 
(a)  For vehicles used for the transportation of explosives, with a sign or lettering with the word "EXPLOSIVES". 
(b)  For vehicles used for the transportation of flammable compressed gas, with a sign or lettering with the word "FLAMMABLE" or "COMBUSTIBLE". 
(c)  For vehicles used for the transportation of oxidizing materials or acids and other corrosive liquids, with a sign or lettering with the word "CORROSIVE". 
(d)  For vehicles used for the transportation of nonflammable compressed gas, class "A" poisons, with a sign or lettering with the word "POISON". 
(e)  For vehicles used for the transportation of radioactive materials, with a sign or lettering with the word "RADIOACTIVE". 
(6)  No operator of any truck used for the transportation of industrial waste or hazardous materials in bulk shall at any time leave such truck unattended upon any highway, street, or public thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city, including sleeping, except for the purpose of eating meals or by reasons of nature. 
(7)  Every tank truck, tank trailer, or semi-trailer granted a permit of approval shall be given a serial number by the city secretary, and such number shall be painted or placed in an approved manner on the tank truck, tank trailer, or semi-trailer as designated by the fire marshal or chief of police. 
(8)  Subject to appeal within ten (10) days to the city council, a permit issued under this subsection may be revoked by the city upon a finding and determination by the council that the permittee has violated any of the provisions of this section on more than one (1) occasion, the second or any later violation having occurred after written notice that such previous violation had occurred, mailed to the address of the permittee shown on his application. 
E.  HAULING LIMITED TO CERTAIN HOURS 
Hauling on the city streets under a permit required by subsection D shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
F.  INSPECTION OF HAULING EQUIPMENT 
The chief of police and the fire marshal shall have the right to make periodic or spot inspections of the equipment and contents used by the holder of a permit required by subsection D. 
G.  IDENTIFICATION OF STORAGE TANKS 
All tanks used in the storage of industrial waste or hazardous materials shall be numbered with NFPA Coding System for identification purposes and the capacity, in gallons, shall be stated on each tank so used in such a manner that such numbering and capacity, the size of the numbers to be six inches (6") in height, may be seen and read. 
H.  PENALTY 
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day such violation occurs shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ordinance 05-80 of June 12, 1980)  
SECTION 4: - NOISE 
A.  SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN VEHICLES 
(1)  No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway, whether public or private property, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the vehicle. 
(2)  Sound amplification system means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound. 
(3)  Plainly audible means any sound produced by a sound amplification system from within the vehicle, which clearly can be heard at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based on direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway, on either public or private property. 
(4)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound amplification system, and any of the following apply: 
(i)  The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition. 
(ii)  The vehicle was emergency or public safety vehicle. 
(iii)  The vehicle was owned and operated by a public utility company, including the city. 
(iv)  The system or vehicle was used in an authorized public activity, such as parade, fireworks, sporting event, musical production or other activity which has the approval of the city council or a department of the city authorized to grant such approval. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2013 of March 28, 2013, Sec. 1) 
B.  NOISES AS PUBLIC NUISANCES 
(1)  No person may play any musical type apparatus inside or outside a residence or business particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet outside of the building or structure from the source of noise or sound. 
(2)  No person shall sound any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle which not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after, or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended so that such signal device is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the source of noise or sound. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal or bird causing a frequent or long-continued noise plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the source of noise or sound constitutes a nuisance. Refer to Section 2, Animal Control, Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2013 of March 28, 2013, Sec. 2; Ordinance No. 02-2016 of March 10, 2016) 
C.  EXCEPTIONS 
It shall not be a violation of this section if in the case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public safety, the City Council issues a permit to allow the erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or development in a residential or business district for any time during the day or night. 
(Ordinance No. 02-94 of April 14, 1994; Ordinance No. 06-2013 of March 28, 2013, Sec. 3) 
D.  PENALTY 
The violation of any provision of this section shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense, punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each referral and each day a violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2013 of March 28, 2013, Sec. 4)  
SECTION 5: - POLLUTING OR OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE SYSTEM 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the drainage system of any street, alley, channel, or gutter in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, except for the purpose of carrying off the natural surface water; and any person who shall cause, or be instrumental in causing, either as principal, agent, workman, or employee, any wastewater or obstruction from any other source, to flow or be thrown into any such street, alley, or gutter in sufficient quantities to cause the same to stand or cause damage or injury to same, or obstruct same, shall be deemed guilty of creating and maintaining a nuisance.  
SECTION 6: - ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling, or other structure under his or its control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other container which has an air-tight door or lid equipped with a snap-lock or other locking device which may not be released form the inside, without first removing said lid or door, snap-lock, or other locking device form said ice box, refrigerator, or container. 
(Provision for inclusion of sections 5 and 6 above provided for in ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances.)  
SECTION 7: - COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of the collection of garbage from residential customers within the City of Santa Fe, making use of the city streets and highways therefor, other than the city's contractor carrier. 
(Ordinance No. 11-87 of October 13, 1987)  
SECTION 8: - FIREARMS 
A.  UNLAWFUL 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm of any kind or to discharge an air rifle or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known, that is capable, by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or by any other means, of discharging shots, pellets or any solid object at a velocity in excess of three hundred (300) feet per second, in the city. 
(Ordinance No. 08-90 of May 10, 1990) 
B.  SHOTGUN EXCLUSION 
(1)  This section shall not apply to any person possessing a permit as provided for in subsection (2) for the discharge of any shot-type firearms, including shotguns, within the city at a distance greater than one hundred (100) yards from any residence, business, house, public street or state highway. 
(2)  The chief of police may issue a permit to allow a person to discharge any shot-type firearms, including shotguns, within the city at a distance greater than one hundred (100) yards from any residence, business, house, public street or state highway under the following conditions: 
(a)  The applicant lawfully conducts an agricultural enterprise, such as growing pecans, fruit, vegetables, raising cattle, rabbits, poultry, swine; and 
(b)  The agricultural enterprise is at risk due to damage caused by pests and varmints, such as squirrels, birds, dogs, cats, raccoons, snakes and opossums. 
(c)  The use of a shotgun is essential to reducing the damage to the agricultural enterprise caused by pests and varmints. 
(d)  The applicant is not prohibited by law to own or possess a shotgun. 
(e)  The applicant has never been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving the illegal use or possession of a firearm. 
(f)  The shot size of the shells to be used by the applicant shall be number 7 ½, number 8, or number 9. 
(g)  No magnum shell loads are to be used by the applicant. 
(h)  The permit will be issued for one year and must be renewed to be valid. 
(i)  No fee shall be required for the permit. 
(j)  The permit shall be issued for a particular location which must be inspected by the chief of police prior to issuance of the permit. 
(k)  The permit shall not be transferable to another person or to another location. 
(Ordinance No. 01-2000 of January 13, 2000) 
C.  OTHER EXCLUSIONS 
This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any organization conducting target practice under the supervision of a National Rifle Association certified instructor, or equivalent, or a rifle or pistol range approved by the city council. 
(2)  Any law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty. 
(3)  Law enforcement officers conducting target practice under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Ordinance No. 08-90 of May 10, 1990) 
D.  POSSESSION OF FIREARMS 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a licensed peace officer, to carry a firearm in any city building, regardless of whether or not the person is duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed handgun. 
(2)  The term "city building" as used in this section is defined as any building or portion of a building owned, occupied, leased, or controlled by the city for city operations and activities. 
(3)  The term "handgun" as used in this section is defined as any firearm that is designed, made, or adapted to be fired with one (1) hand; and the term "concealed handgun" as used in this section is defined as a handgun, the presence of which is not openly discernible to the ordinary observation of a reasonable person. 
(4)  The terms "gun," "pistol," "rifle," and "firearm" as used in this section shall not only be defined as to include all percussion weapons, but shall also include all air guns, air pistols, air rifles, and all other firearms using air pressure to propel a projectile at a velocity in excess of three hundred (300) feet per second. 
(5)  This ordinance shall be consistent with the Texas Penal Code Chapter 30 Section 30.06 Trespass by Holder of License to Carry Concealed Handgun and Chapter 46 Section 46.03 Places Weapons Prohibited. 
(Ordinance 08-2003 of April 10, 2003) 
E.  PENALTY 
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction there[of], shall be punished as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Code of Ordinances, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code. 
(Ordinance 08-2003 of April 10, 2003)  
SECTION 9: - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 
A.  DEFINITIONS: 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Bar. A lounge bar or restaurant bar. 
Business. A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
Dining area. Any area in which meals or entrees are served but shall not include areas where the incidental service of hors' d'oeuvres, snacks, pretzels, popcorn, or similar items are provided. 
Educational facility. Any public or private day care center, nursery school, elementary school, middle school, junior high school, senior high school, vocational school, special education center, or institution of higher education. 
Employee. Any person other than a domestic household servant who is employed in consideration of direct or indirect monetary wages, commissions or profits and any contract employee, or a person who volunteers services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer. Any person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one (1) or more employees. 
Enclosed areas. All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by smoke-impermeable walls or windows (exclusive of doorways) that extend from that floor to the ceiling. An enclosed area may be a portion of a larger enclosed area. 
Exception area. An area in which smoking is permitted pursuant to this section. 
Large multi-tenant building. A multi-tenant building with twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more of useable floor space that has a common heating, ventilating, and air conditioning system in which fifty (50) percent or more of the gross useable floor space is devoted to other than residential, restaurant, hotel/motel, and retail establishment uses. The exterior area within twenty-five (25) feet of any entrance or exit door or wheelchair ramp serving the door, if any, shall also be included, to the extent it is within the building owner's control and is not being used as a restaurant outdoor seating area. 
Lounge bar. All areas of any establishment having fifty (50) or more percent of its gross sales from sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
Minor. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Multi-tenant. Any building that has two (2) or more separate occupancies, such as a building owner and one (1) or more tenant occupancies, or if the building owner has no occupancy in the building, then two (2) or more tenant occupancies. For this purpose, an occupancy shall not include a transient occupancy of ten (10) days or less. 
Place of employment. Any area under the control of an employer to which employees have access during the course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, hallways, stairs, employee cafeterias, and vehicles. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Private function. A gathering of persons for the purpose of deliberation, education, instruction, entertainment, amusement, or dining where membership, attendance, or specific invitation is a prerequisite for entry and where the event is not intended to be open to the public. 
Private residence. A private home where food is prepared or served for guests and individual family consumption. 
Public ground transportation facility. Any facility used in connection with public ground transportation into which the public is provided access. 
Public place. An enclosed area or any portion thereof to which at any time the public is admitted by general invitation or is otherwise given generally unrestricted access, or routinely has access for municipal services, including but not limited to an enclosed area, which, at any time is being utilized in whole or in part by the public. The imposition of an entry fee, use charge, membership requirement or other condition of entry to an enclosed area shall not prevent it constituting a public place, provided that admission is granted on a uniform basis to persons who meet the established criteria for use or admission. In addition to the enclosed area described above, the term public place shall include any associated exterior area, whether enclosed or not, that is within twenty-five (25) feet of any entrance or exit door or wheelchair ramp serving the door, if any, that provides public ingress or egress to the public place, to the extent that the area is within the control of the person who controls the public place and is not being used as a restaurant outdoor seating area. 
Restaurant. An eating establishment or any place where food is manufactured, packaged, produced, processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, vended, or otherwise handled. The term includes any such place regardless of the duration of the permit or whether there is a charge for the food. The term includes, but is not limited to, any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, private or public school cafeteria or eating establishment, and any other eating establishment that gives or offers food to the general public, guests, or employees, including kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, such as catering facilities, except that the term restaurant shall not be construed to include any portion of the establishment that constitutes a restaurant bar. A lounge bar shall not constitute a restaurant for any purpose. 
Restaurant bar. One (1) contiguous area of a restaurant that is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which food service, if any, is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
Restaurant outdoor seating area. Any patio, sidewalk cafe, or similar unenclosed area in which a contiguously situated restaurant provides outdoor food service to its patrons. 
Retail establishment. Any enclosed area in any portion of which goods or services of any nature are sold or offered for sale directly to consumers including, but not limited to grocery stores, convenience stores, dry goods stores, banks, department stores and specialty shops. 
Retail establishment mall. An enclosed area that connects customer entrances to two (2) or more retail establishments and is used for customer pedestrian traffic, regardless of whether the area is also used for other purposes. The term retail establishment mall does not include separate enclosed areas that may be appended thereto. Separate enclosed areas that are appended to a retail establishment mall shall be subject to separate regulation hereunder, as applicable. 
Smoke or smoking. The possessing, carrying, or holding of a burning tobacco product, lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, or the lighting, emitting, inhaling, exhaling, or burning of any tobacco product, pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or device. 
Tobacco specialty retail shop. An enclosed area utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
B.  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS 
1.  Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including but not limited to, the following places: 
a.  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums; 
b.  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels; 
c.  Auditorium, convention centers, and convention facilities; 
d.  Elevators and stairs; 
e.  Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, theatre, or other similar performance, except performers when smoking is a part of the stage production; 
f.  Licensed child care, adult day care, and health care facilities, including hospitals, nursing homes, doctors' and dentists' offices, and waiting rooms; 
g.  Educational facilities; 
h.  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, multi-tenant buildings, large multi-tenant buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, hotels, motels, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
i.  Polling places; 
j.  Public transportation facilities, other than limousines for hire, including buses, taxicabs, ferries, and public transit deposits, terminals, and waiting areas; 
k.  Restaurants, businesses, commercial establishments, and places of employment; 
l.  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common use areas; 
m.  Retail establishments and retail establishment malls; 
n.  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including governmental facilities owned, leased, operated, or managed by a governmental entity; 
o.  Sports arenas, including enclosed areas in outdoor arenas. 
2.  A person commits an offense if the person is knowingly or intentionally in possession of a burning tobacco product or smokes in any place where smoking is prohibited. 
C.  SMOKING NOT REGULATED IN CERTAIN AREAS 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
a.  Billiard halls, where the establishment uses more than fifty (50) percent of the premises for operational pool tables, provided that food sales constitute less than ten (10) percent of gross sales, and minors are not admitted, unless accompanied by their parent or legal guardian. Billiard halls may establish no smoking hours during which minors may be admitted; 
b.  Bingo facilities, provided that food sales constitute less than ten (10) percent of gross sales, and minors are not admitted, unless accompanied by their parent or legal guardian. Bingo facilities may establish no smoking hours during which minors may be admitted; 
c.  Comedy clubs; 
d.  Enclosed bar areas; 
e.  Enclosed dining areas within restaurants designated as exception areas in accordance with subsection E of this section, provided that minors are not admitted unless accompanied by their parent or legal guardian; 
f.  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided however, that not more than twenty-five (25) percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated; 
g.  Outdoor seating areas of restaurants designated as exception areas in accordance with subsection E of this section, provided however, that a non-smoking area shall also be provided in outdoor seating of restaurants; 
h.  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility; 
i.  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and long term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; 
j.  Private functions in facilities where smoking is not prohibited; 
k.  Tobacco specialty retail shops; provided however, that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. 
D.  POSTING OF SIGNS 
1.  It shall be the duty of every person having ownership, possession, or control of any place, public or private, where smoking is prohibited to post a clearly visible sign with the words "No Smoking" at each entrance to the area where smoking is prohibited. Additionally, the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) may be posted at each entrance where smoking is prohibited. 
2.  All areas where smoking is prohibited shall be equipped with facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials. Facilities for extinguishment of smoking materials shall be accompanied by a clearly visible sign stating "No Smoking." 
E.  EXCEPTION AREAS 
1.  A person having ownership, possession, or control of an area where smoking is generally prohibited may, but is not required to, designate an exception area in which smoking is permitted. Any exception area that is designated must be created and maintained in strict compliance with this section. 
2.  An exception area shall not be designated in an elevator, restroom, stairway, public means of mass transportation, or areas where possession of a burning tobacco product or smoking is prohibited by the Fire Code, state or federal law, or other city ordinances. No place other than a bar or a tobacco specialty retail shop may be designated as an exception area in its entirety. 
3.  Any area that is designated as an exception area must be located in a separately ventilated enclosed area and situated so that air is not drawn into or across the non-smoking area. Physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the effect of smoke in adjacent non-smoking areas. 
4.  An exception area cannot be located in such a manner that requires patrons to travel through the smoking area to reach a non-smoking area. 
5.  The total of all designated smoking areas within an establishment may not exceed thirty (30) percent of the seating area of the establishment. 
6.  It shall be the duty of every person having ownership, possession, or control of an exception area to post a clearly visible sign at each entrance thereto indicating the bounds of the exception area and stating that smoking is permitted therein. 
7.  The exception area must contain ashtrays, containers, or other facilities for extinguishing smoking materials prior to leaving the exception area. 
F.  RULES AND REGULATIONS 
The Community Services Department of the City of Santa Fe will be responsible for the enforcement of these regulations. The Director of the Community Services Department may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this section to ensure compliance, including inspection, reporting, and compliance procedures. The Director may establish a program to explain and clarify the purposes of this section to citizens affected by it and to guide owners, operators and managers in their compliance with it. 
G.  OTHER SMOKING PROHIBITIONS NOT AFFECTED 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to repeal or excuse compliance with smoking prohibitions or restrictions imposed by the Fire Code or any other state or federal law or ordinances of the city. The extent that any offense specified in this article also constitutes an offense under the Fire Code, then the offense shall be punishable pursuant to the Fire Code. 
H.  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY 
Whenever in this article an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or whenever in this article the doing of any thing or act is required or the failure to do any thing or act is prohibited, the violation of the provision shall be and constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction, fined in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, Code of Ordinances, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code. Each violation shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision is cumulative of and shall never be a bar to any other civil or administrative remedy provided or allowed in this article or by law. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2005 of September 8, 2005, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 10: - PARK REGULATIONS 
A.  PURPOSE 
These rules are established as written guidelines for the use of City of Santa Fe parks and recreational facilities. These rules are intended to secure and preserve the fullest enjoyment of parks and recreational facilities to a wide range of park patrons. Failure to abide by these rules shall be cause for removal. The commission of offenses under local ordinances or state law shall be cause for arrest. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
B.  APPLICABILITY 
These rules apply to and in all parks and recreational facilities or areas belonging to the City or managed by or under the authority of the City. These rules shall not apply to City, State or Federal agents or officials in the performance of official duties. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
C.  USE OF PARK FACILITIES 
Park facilities generally are available for public use on a first-come, first-served basis except for areas that require rental fees or that have previously been reserved. 
Reservations Fees - Patrons shall not use or occupy a facility or area for which a reservation fee has been paid, when such use conflicts with the use by persons holding the reservation. Reservations shall be made in accordance with the Park Department's reservation policies. Confirmation of the reservation shall be displayed on request to city employees charged with supervision or patrolling of parks. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
D.  OCCUPANCY LIMIT 
The Parks and Recreation Department may establish and post maximum occupancies for any park area or facility. 
Patrons shall not enter into or remain in an area or facility for which an occupancy limit has been established when such action will have the effect of exceeding the established occupancy limits. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
E.  CLOSED AREA(S) 
(1)  The City Manager or his designee may close park areas or facilities to the public entry or otherwise restrict use until such time as the area or facility can be made available for public use. 
(2)  Except in emergency circumstances, notice of closure shall be posted and patrons shall not enter closed or restricted areas. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
F.  DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR AND EJECTION FROM PARK AND CITY FACILITIES 
Patrons engaged in disruptive, destructive or hazardous conduct may be warned and asked to stop such conduct immediately by any designated city employee. Under circumstances where a patron's conduct is unlawful, or poses an imminent threat of injury or prevents the public enjoyment of the park or facility, any designated city employee may eject such patrons by any reasonable means, including arrest. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
G.  VENDING 
Persons shall not conduct the commercial sale or offer to sell any goods, wares, drinks, food or items nor render or offer to render any service for hire, at any park, or city facility except as authorized by contract, or permit properly issued by the City of Santa Fe. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
H.  ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED PROPERTY 
No person shall abandon a vehicle or other personal property at any park or city facility. Abandoned property shall be removed, impounded, and sold in conformance to City ordinances or state laws or as may be determined by the City. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
I.  PEACE AND QUIET 
(1)  Patrons shall preserve the peace and quiet enjoyment of the parks by observing all city ordinances and state laws governing noise and amplified sound. 
(a)  Patrons shall not use offensive language, make unreasonable noise, discharge weapons or fireworks, or engage in offensive gestures or conduct constituting disorderly conduct under state law (Texas Penal Code 42.01). 
(b)  Patrons shall not operate noise-making devices in violation of local ordinances prohibiting unreasonable noise. 
(2)  Patrons shall observe and comply with noise restrictions posted at individual facilities. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
J.  WEAPONS AND FIREARMS 
(1)  Patrons shall not carry or possess weapons or firearms while in parks or city facilities. 
(2)  No patron may display a firearm or other weapon at any park or city facility in a manner calculated to alarm or threaten anyone. (Texas Penal Code 42.02) 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
K.  WILDLIFE 
All wildlife within the boundaries of any City of Santa Fe park is protected. No person may harm, harass, hunt, trap or remove any animal, including mammals, fish insects, birds, reptiles, or other living creature from any park facility except upon written approval of the City Manager. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
L.  PLANT LIFE 
All plant life within the boundaries of any City of Santa Fe park facility is protected. Patrons shall not willfully mutilate, injure, destroy, thrash, or remove any live tree, shrub, vine, wildflower, grass, sedge, fern, moss lichen, fungus or any other member of the plant kingdom or portion thereof, except upon approval by the Parks Department. No person shall collect or harvest dead wood or plants, or portions thereof, except upon written approval of the City Manager. The collecting of pecan nuts on the ground is allowed; the thrashing of pecan trees is prohibited. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
M.  ANIMALS 
(1)  Persons bringing pets or other animals into outdoor park areas shall keep them under confinement or direct control and immediately remove any waste deposited by their pet or animal. Leads on leashes used to control animals shall not be more than six feet long. 
(2)  Patrons shall not permit a pet or other animal to remain unattended or create a disturbance or a hazard. 
(3)  Patrons shall not bring into, or permit to range at any park facility domestic fowl, horse, swine, sheep, goat, or other livestock except upon approval by the City Manager. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 06-2018 of July 12, 2018, Sec. 1) 
N.  FIRES, SMOKING, FIREWOOD OR FIREWORKS 
(1)  No person may light, build, or maintain a fire on any of the City of Santa Fe park facilities, except in a facility or device provided, maintained or designated for such purposes. 
(2)  During periods of extreme fire hazard, the Fire Marshal may prohibit or restrict fires and smoking in designated areas. 
(3)  No person may cut, gather, or collect wood or other combustible material at any City of Santa Fe park facility for use as firewood or fuel, except for material designated for this purpose by the Parks Department. 
(4)  The possession or use of any kind of firework is prohibited in all City of Santa Fe parks and facilities. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
O.  CAMPING AND OVERNIGHT USE 
No person may camp or sleep overnight at any City of Santa Fe park facility. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
P.  MOTOR VEHICLES 
No person may operate a motor vehicle at any park facility except upon roads, driveways, parking areas, and areas designated open to motor vehicles except as authorized by the Parks Department. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
Q.  PARKING 
(1)  No person shall park a motor vehicle on parkland except in designated areas, or within twelve feet of a public park road, if not otherwise prohibited. 
(2)  A vehicle or trailer parked in such a manner as to create a hazardous or unsafe condition may be impounded, consistent with City Ordinance and State Law. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
R.  WALKING TRAIL USE 
No person may operate or use a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, motorbike, mini-bike, or bicycle on a trail or path within a City of Santa Fe park. Skateboards and roller skates are not allowed on park trails or sidewalks. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
S.  ADHERENCE TO PARK SIGNS 
All persons shall comply with the signs and markers installed by the Parks Department. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
T.  ALCOHOL 
Unless authorized by the City of Santa Fe, the sale, possession with intent to sell or the consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in all city parks and facilities. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
U.  GLASS CONTAINERS 
Glass bottles and containers are prohibited in city parks. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
V.  SPECIAL RULES FOR SPECIFIC PARKS FACILITIES 
Each park or city facility may develop rules and regulations that address problems specific to that facility, which shall be in writing and approved by the City Council. Patrons shall comply with all rules and regulations posted at individual facilities or for special events. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1) 
W.  PENALTY 
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon convections thereof, shall be punished as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Code of Ordinances, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code. Further, defacement or destruction of public property, criminal mischief, and nuisance violations will be prosecuted under the Texas State Penal Code or such other county or city ordinances as shall apply. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2009 of March 12, 2009, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 11: - PET WASTE 
A.  PURPOSE 
To establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid waste in the City of Santa Fe, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply. 
B.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(1)  Immediate - shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay. 
(2)  Owner/Keeper - any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the owner of such pet. 
(3)  Person - any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
(4)  Pet - a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship. 
(5)  Pet solid waste - waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet; excrement. 
(6)  Proper disposal - placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal. 
C.  REQUIREMENT FOR DISPOSAL 
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that person. 
D.  EXEMPTIONS 
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is being used for that purpose. 
E.  ENFORCEMENT 
The provisions of this Section shall be enforced by the Santa Fe Police Department and the Santa Fe Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Santa Fe. 
F.  PENALTY 
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Code of Ordinances, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code. 
Editor's note— Section 11, Pet Waste, was added to the Code by Ordinance No. 06-2018 of July 12, 2018, Sec. 2.  
CHAPTER 7 - PERSONNEL 
 
SECTION 1: - RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE 
Editor's note— Section 1, which was previously titled "Appointment of City Officers," was determined to be in conflict with the Home Rule Charter, and therefore, was deleted from the Code of Ordinances with the preparation of Supplement No. 1. See Chapter 7, Section 6.  
SECTION 2: - RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE 
Editor's note— Section 2, which was previously titled "Chief of Police," was determined to be in conflict with the Home Rule Charter, and therefore, was deleted from the Code of Ordinances with the preparation of Supplement No. 1. See Chapter 7, Section 6.  
SECTION 3: - AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE 
A.  FORCE ESTABLISHED: PURPOSE 
There is hereby established in the City of Santa Fe a police reserve force to be known as the auxiliary police force in addition to the regularly constituted police force of the city. The purpose and necessity for the auxiliary police force is to aid in the creation of an active and efficient civil defense program in the city, and to aid the regularly constituted police force in the performance of its duties. The Auxiliary Force shall be comprised of duly certified officers through the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
B.  PURPOSE, NEED AND IMPLEMENTATION 
(1)  Assist the City of Santa Fe Police, both in line and support operations while in the performance of delegated duties, including calls for service. 
(2)  As a group of volunteers augmenting the Regular Force, the Auxiliary Force will enable the availability of increased personnel to meet departmental goals and objectives. 
C.  MAXIMUM NUMBER 
The Auxiliary Force shall consist of not more than fifteen (15) members. 
D.  APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP 
(1)  An application must be submitted to the Chief of Police accompanied by a signed waiver of liability for an in-depth background investigation. 
(2)  Pending satisfactory results from the background investigation, the applicant must take both a physical and psychological examination, required by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
(3)  Personnel file upon appointment must contain the following data: 
(a)  Copy of birth certificate; 
(b)  High school diploma or equivalent; 
(c)  Fingerprint card; (fingerprinted by department) 
(d)  Discharge papers if served in armed forces; 
(e)  Specialized training certificates; 
(f)  College transcript if attended prior to appointment; 
(g)  Documentation of last re-qualification signed by Firearms Instructor; 
(h)  Recent photograph; 
(i)  Completion certificate of Basic Peace Officer Police Academy. 
(4)  Appointment is made by the Chief of Police and confirmed by the City Manager. 
(Ordinance No. 11-2001 of May 24, 2001) 
E.  QUALIFICATIONS 
(1)  To be appointed to the Auxiliary Force as an Auxiliary Officer, an applicant must fulfill the requirements herein and be a fully certified peace officer, as provided by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
(2)  Complete a probationary period satisfactory to the Chief of Police and FTO. 
(a)  Work with and under the direct supervision of a Regular Officer or Supervisor, learning booking procedures, fingerprinting, required paperwork, its structure, etc. 
(b)  Required to complete sixteen (16) hours minimum service per month. 
(c)  Once the initial training has been completed, the Auxiliary Officer must continue to ride with a Regular Officer until the FTO, Supervisor or Chief feels the Officer is capable of working or riding alone. 
F.  COMMISSION 
(1)  Upon being appointed by the Chief of Police and being confirmed by the City Manager, the applicant's commission will be activated by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer's Standards and Education and the applicant will then be classified as a non-paid officer with the Auxiliary Force of the City of Santa Fe Police Department. 
(Ordinance No. 11-2001 of May 24, 2001) 
(2)  The Chief of Police may approve an Auxiliary Officer to carry a service weapon while on probation upon documentation of firing range qualification before obtaining uniforms. (During the training period, the Auxiliary officer will be under the direct immediate supervision of Regular Officers and Ranking Officers while on duty.) 
G.  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
(1)  The Auxiliary Force is under control and direct supervision of the Chief of Police or designee. 
(2)  Operations Liaison Officer, an Auxiliary Officer appointed by the Chief of Police, will coordinate the activities of the Auxiliary Force through the Patrol Supervisor of shift scheduled to work. 
(3)  Auxiliary Officers are required to complete sixteen (16) hours per month on active duty. Approved training hours will count toward this requirement. 
(4)  Policy to remedy non-compliance of number of working hours per month required: 
(a)  The officer will be required to make up any lost hours within two (2) months following the month in which the service hours were insufficient. Failure to do so may result in suspension or discharge. 
(b)  Habitual non-compliance over a period of time will be reviewed by the Chief of Police or a recommendation by Supervisors for dismissal in writing to the Auxiliary Officer. 
(c)  Auxiliary Officers may request, in writing, a leave of absence, submitted to the Chief of Police, explaining the reason and the length of time of the leave. The Chief of Police will, in writing, respond with his/her approval or disapproval and a copy of both will be placed in that officer's file. 
(5)  Upon completion of FTO training, acceptable by the FTO and the Chief of Police, Auxiliary Force members will be allowed to operate a patrol vehicle alone for the purpose of patrol duties. 
H.  COMPENSATION 
(1)  Auxiliary force personnel will not receive compensation from the City of Santa Fe for rendering their normal duties. Normal duties include, but are not limited to, parade activities, special functions, etc. 
(2)  Auxiliary force personnel recommended by the Auxiliary Police Sergeant and approved by the Chief of Police may participate in the Special Traffic Enforcement Program (STEP) as established by the Chief of Police. The STEP may be modified by the Chief of Police subject to approval of the City Manager. Such officers may be compensated at a rate of entry level police officer and entry level police sergeant according to the collective bargaining agreement in force. However, said officers shall not be a part of the collective bargaining unit nor shall they be covered by the collective bargaining agreement. Officers in the STEP will be considered part-time employees as defined by the city's personnel policies. 
(Ordinance 02-2002 of January 24, 2002) 
I.  UNIFORM AND IDENTIFICATION 
(1)  Auxiliary Officers will be issued a uniform, badge, and identification card. 
(2)  Auxiliary Officers will be required to purchase bullet proof vest at own expense and will be reimbursed by the city upon completion of one year service to the city. 
(3)  Officers will furnish their own service weapon (minimum .38 caliber revolver 4" or 9mm semi automatic), gun belt, and boots. 
(4)  Auxiliary Force Officers will carry evidence of their appointment while on active duty. 
J.  POLICE POWERS OF AUXILIARY FORCE 
(1)  Powers and authority will be that of a Regular Officer as set down by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
K.  TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 
(1)  Auxiliary Officers are required to attend a minimum of twenty (20) hours of specialized training per year or forty (40) hours in two years. This minimum will be made available by the Santa Fe Police Department. 
(2)  Auxiliary Officers must qualify on Firing Range under the direction and supervision of a certified Firearms Instructor once a year. 
(3)  Auxiliary Officers must maintain required mandated hours set forth under Texas, Government Code Chapter 415.034 requiring reserve officers to include 3939 and 3737. 
L.  DISCIPLINE/DISCHARGE 
(1)  Any member of the Auxiliary Force may be disciplined or discharged at the discretion of the Chief of Police. 
(2)  Discipline or discharge may be reviewed by the Chief of Police upon the request of any supervisor. 
(Ordinance No. 10-98 of March 26, 1998)  
SECTION 4: - MUNICIPAL COURT 
A.  CREATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT 
There is hereby created a court in and for the City of Santa Fe, Texas, which shall be known as the municipal court. This court shall have jurisdiction within the city with power to hear and determine all cases of alleged violations of the ordinances of the city and all other cases over which municipal courts are generally given jurisdiction by state law. 
(Ordinance adopting Code) 
B.  APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE 
There is hereby created the office of judge of the municipal court who shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two years and shall have all the powers and authority as granted by, and shall perform all the duties as required by state law. The amount of compensation to the judge shall be set from time to time by the city council. The city council may appoint an alternate municipal court judge for a two-year term to serve in the case of the temporary inability, disability, or absence of the regular municipal court judge. The alternate municipal court judge shall have all the powers and duties of the office and shall receive such compensation as set by the city council. 
(Ordinance No. 19-99 adopted September 9, 1999) 
C.  OATH REQUIREMENT 
The judge of the municipal court, prior to taking office, shall take the oath of office required by the state constitution and the state laws. This is the oath required by the state law for the mayors of cities. 
D.  JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
(1)  JUDGE AND ATTORNEY —The judicial department shall consist of the municipal court, the judge of which shall be known as the municipal court judge. There shall be a legal division, the head of which shall be the city attorney, to be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney or such other attorneys selected by him with the approval of the city council, will represent the city in all litigation. He shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the city and all officers and departments thereof. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the council may engage special legal counsel to represent the City of Santa Fe in any specific matter or for the performance of any specifically delineated duties otherwise to be performed by the city attorney. 
(2)  MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK —A clerk shall be appointed by the city manager as municipal court clerk. The city manager may also appoint such deputy clerks as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the municipal court. The clerk of the municipal court and such deputy clerks as may be appointed shall perform those duties that are to be performed by the clerk under the ordinances of the city, the city charter, or as prescribed by state law. 
(3)  CITY MARSHAL/BAILIFF —A city marshal/bailiff shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve under the direct supervision of the judge of the municipal court and/or municipal court clerk. The city marshal/bailiff shall serve and execute warrants of arrest and subpoenas and serve as bailiff in municipal court and other legal process issuing out of municipal court in the city. The city marshal/bailiff shall additionally perform such other and further duties as may be assigned by the judge of the municipal court and/or municipal court clerk. The city marshal/bailiff shall meet the qualifications for certification as a peace officer as established by the Texas Commission of Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education as a necessary condition for employment as city marshal/bailiff. The city marshal/bailiff shall serve as a peace officer and has full police authority in the exercise of duties and shall be armed while on duty. The city marshal/bailiff is not a regular member of the police department of the city within the meaning of the state laws governing such department as to civil services, minimum wages, hours of employment, or pension. The city marshal/bailiff shall not be a paid law enforcement officer for the purpose of and within the meaning of Article 6228 of Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated. Nothing herein provided shall prevent or in anywise inhibit any regular police officer of the City of Santa Fe from serving or executing any process issuing out of municipal court which may be placed in his hands to be served or executed. 
(Ordinance No. 12-2000 of May 25, 2000) 
Editor's note— Ordinance 12-2000, adopted May 25, 2000, amended provisions formerly set out as Chapter 7, Section 4, Subsection D, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, subsection D. pertained to "Court Clerk". 
E.  RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 12-2000, adopted May 25, 2000, deleted Chapter 7, Section 4, Subsection E., in its entirety to be reserved for future use. Prior to amendment Subsection E. pertained to "Duties of Court Clerk". 
F.  PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES 
The rules prescribed by state law governing trials in the state justice of peace courts shall govern the procedure and practice of the municipal court, and the city council may prescribe such additional rules of practice and procedure as are not inconsistent with state law. 
G.  CASH BAIL 
(1)  Acceptance and Forfeiture of Bail 
The judge of the municipal court is authorized to receive from any person arrested for a violation of any section of the city Code of Ordinances or any state law over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, cash bail for the appearance of such person before the municipal court. If such person voluntarily signs a written agreement in which he agrees that, in the event of failure to make an appearance by or upon the date therein named, his bail may be forfeited by the municipal court to the city by an order or judgment of the court entered upon its minutes, without service of notice or citation of any kind upon him, and such person shall, in the same instrument, authorize such officer to plead "guilty" for him in the event of his failure to appear on said date, then, said cash bail shall be applied to the payment of the fine and the costs which may be assessed against him. 
(2)  Amount of Bail 
The judge of the municipal court so accepting any cash bail shall fix the same at any amount not less than five dollars ($5.00), which in his judgment, shall be deemed to be sufficient to compel the appearance of such person on the date fixed, provided that no cash bail shall be accepted unless voluntarily offered by the person charged. 
(3)  Issuance of Receipt for Payment of Bail 
When a cash bail is tendered and accepted, the judge of the municipal court accepting the same shall issue a special cash bail receipt therefor to the person tendering such cash bail, a copy of which is to remain in the cash bail receipt book. When a cash bail is returned to the person who deposited it, a receipt shall be taken therefor. 
The same procedure shall apply whether or not the person who has deposited money is present and orders such bail to be applied on the payment of any fine and costs assessed against him. When such person fails to make his appearance and a guilty plea is entered for him, the judge shall apply as much of the cash bail as may be necessary for the satisfaction of such fine and cost, and the balance shall be returned to the defendant. In the event such cash bail is forfeited, then the entire sum shall be paid to the proper officer of the city. 
(Provision for inclusion of Sections 4.A—G above provided for in Ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances.) 
H.  SPECIAL EXPENSES 
(1)  The Municipal Court of the City of Santa Fe is hereby authorized to collect a special expense for services performed in cases in which the laws of the State of Texas require that the case be dismissed because of actions on behalf of the defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense. Such actions are limited to compliance with the provisions of Subsection (a), Section 143A, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (Art. 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes). Such special expense shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred for the services or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is less. 
(Ordinance No. 03-88 of February 15, 1988) 
(2)  The presiding judge and any associate or alternate judge of the municipal court of this city may, after conviction, assess upon the defendant a special expense fee, not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense committed under Section 38.11, Penal Code (bail jumping and failure to appear), or under Section 149, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (Article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, violation of written promise to appear). The presiding judge and any associate or alternate judge of the municipal court of the city may assess the special expense fees described in Article 17.04, Code of Criminal Procedure, dealing with the requisites of a personal bond and a special expense fee for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest, after due notice, not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(Ordinance No. 12-90 of June 26, 1990) 
Cross reference— See also Article 5 of Home Rule Charter and Section 6.E. of this Chapter. 
(3)  Building Security Fund 
There is hereby created a special revenue municipal court building security fund, in accordance with Article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, to be used to provide security for the municipal court, its employees, and judges. The building security fund may be used only to finance the items authorized by Article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
Defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay into such fund a security fee as cost of court in an amount provided by Local Government Code Section 134.103. For the purposes of this ordinance, a person is considered convicted if: 
1.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
2.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
3.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the municipal treasurer, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to the municipal treasurer, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund. The municipal court building security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(Ordinance 12-2000 of May 25, 2000; Ordinance No. 02-2020 of January 23, 2020, Sec. 1) 
(4)  Technology Fund 
There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund to be used for the purpose of technological enhancements for the municipal court, including: 
1.  Computer system; 
2.  Computer networks; 
3.  Computer hardware; 
4.  Computer software; 
5.  Imaging systems; 
6.  Electronic kiosks; 
7.  Electronic ticket writers; and 
8.  Docket management systems. 
Defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay a technology fee of four dollars ($4.00) as a cost of court. A person is considered convicted if: 
1.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
2.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
3.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the municipal treasurer, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to the municipal treasurer, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court technology fund. The municipal court technology fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(Ordinance No. 12-2000 of May 25, 2000; Ordinance No. 01-2016 of January 14, 2016)  
SECTION 5: - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
A.  ORGANIZATION 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Santa Fe which shall be held by the city mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this section. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)  The operational cooperative emergency management organization is comprised of personnel of the Galveston County office of emergency management and appointed personnel of the City of Santa Fe as designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as volunteer individuals and groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees of the city in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
B.  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR-POWERS AND DUTIES 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Santa Fe and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this section. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the cooperative emergency management organization for the City of Santa Fe as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization related to the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution of an agreement with Galveston County and with other municipalities within the county for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Government Code Chapter 418. 
C.  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. This plan, developed with the direction of the Santa Fe emergency management director, is an integrated plan with Galveston County. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this section. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management (DEM) of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State DEM. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this section and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
D.  INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Galveston and the mayors of the other cities in Galveston County in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Galveston and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Santa Fe. 
E.  OVERRIDE 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this section shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
F.  LIABILITY 
This section is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the City of Santa Fe, the agents and representatives of Santa Fe, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Santa Fe a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
G.  COMMITMENT OF FUNDS 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this section without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
H.  OFFENSES; PENALTIES 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this section. 
(2)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the office of emergency management of the City of Santa Fe/Galveston County, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(3)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this section. 
(4)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ordinance No. 04-94 of May 12, 1994)  
SECTION 6: - CITY ADMINISTRATION 
A.  ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 
There shall be an administrative department of the city, the head of which shall be the city manager and which shall consist of the city manager, the city clerk to be appointed by the city council, and such assistants as may from time to time be authorized by the city council for employment by the city manager. The city manager shall perform those duties as are outlined in the city charter. The city clerk shall perform those duties that are to be performed by the city secretary under the ordinances of the city that have been heretofore adopted where reference is made to the city secretary, shall act as city registrar, shall issue all licenses and permits to be issued in the name of the city, except as may otherwise be specifically provided by the ordinances of the city, and shall further perform those duties as are prescribed in the city charter and may from time to time be assigned to the city clerk by the city council or as prescribed by state law. 
B.  STREET DEPARTMENT 
The head of the street department shall be the director of public works to be appointed by the city manager. This department shall consist of the director of public works, a street superintendent under him, and such other persons as may from time to time be authorized by the city council for employment by the city manager. The street department shall perform such duties as shall be assigned to it by the city manager. 
C.  POLICE DEPARTMENT 
1.  The police department shall consist of the chief of police, such paid policemen as may be authorized by the city council for employment by the city and the unclassified auxiliary police force created by Ordinance No. 16-79, adopted September 13, 1979, which shall constitute the auxiliary division of the police department. 
2.  The city manager shall, with approval of the city council, appoint the chief of police. 
3.  The police department shall be responsible for providing police service within the city and shall perform those duties and functions that are usually and customarily performed by city police departments and other functions assigned to it by the city manager which are consistent with the laws of the United States, the State of Texas and the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
4.  It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct themselves in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and each city peace officer shall preserve the peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest violators of the law, protect life and property and enforce those laws and ordinances which they authorized by law to enforce at all times in accordance with the Constitutions and laws of the United States and Texas. 
5.  The city has adopted, on behalf of its police department, the relevant provisions of Texas Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq., as modified by the collective bargaining agreement between the city and the Santa Fe Police Officer's Association currently in force. 
6.  The number of officers of the police department shall be determined by the city council. 
7.  As of October 1, 2008, the police department consists of one (1) chief of police and one (1) individual who holds the position immediately below the chief of police, currently the rank of captain. Classification, appointment and removal of the chief of police is governed by the relevant provisions of § 143.013 of the Texas Local Government Code. Classification, appointment and removal of the individual holding the position immediately below the chief is governed by the relevant provisions of § 143.014 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
8.  In addition to the duties required of every city peace officer, the chief shall also serve as the department head of the police department, including its auxiliary division, but neither the chief of police nor any subordinate officer shall have authority to enact any policy for the city. 
9.  In addition to the duties required of every city peace officer, the individual who holds the position immediately below the chief of police shall supervise all officers of the police department who hold the rank of lieutenant, sergeant or police officer. 
10.  As of January 1, 2020, the City of Santa Fe, Texas, police department also consists of one (1) lieutenant, four (4) police sergeants, and sixteen (16) police officers. Classification and appointment of these individuals who hold the rank of lieutenant, sergeant, and police officer will be governed by the relevant provisions of Subchapter B of Chapter 143 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
11.  In addition to the duties required of every city peace officer, each individual who holds the rank of lieutenant shall supervise all officers of the police department who hold the rank of sergeant or police officer. 
12.  In addition to the duties required of every city peace officer, each individual who holds the rank of sergeant shall supervise all police officers of the police department. 
(Ordinance No. 24-2008 of October 23, 2008; Ordinance No. 23-2009 of October 8, 2009; Ordinance No. 14-2011 of October 27, 2011; Ordinance No. 01-2020 of January 23, 2020, Sec. 1) 
D.  INSPECTION DEPARTMENT 
The director of this department shall be the building inspector, who shall be appointed by the city manager, and shall consist of the building inspector and such assistants as may from time to time be authorized by the city council for employment by the city manager. This department shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the city building, electrical, and plumbing codes, and ordinances relating thereto, and such other duties as shall be assigned to it by the city manager. The building inspector and his assistants, if any, shall perform the duties of electrical, plumbing, and building inspector under applicable ordinances of the city. 
E.  RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ordinance 12-2000, adopted May 25, 2000, deleted Chapter 7, Section 6, Subsection E, in its entirety to be reserved for future use. Prior to amendment Subsection E pertained to "Judicial Department" and derived from Ordinance No. 02-82, adopted February 18, 1982. 
F.  PARK DEPARTMENT 
(1)  Park Department Established 
There shall be a park department, the head of which shall be the Community Services Director who shall be appointed by the City Manager upon authority of the City Council. There shall be such assistants and workers in this department as may from time to time be authorized by the City Council for employment by the City Manager. 
The park department shall be charged with the duty of maintaining all city parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas and the planning, execution, and maintenance of any recreation programs for such park facilities for the city in conjunction with the city park board. 
(2)  Park Board 
There is hereby established a park and recreation board to consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve under direction of the Community Services Director. The members shall serve staggered terms of two (2) years; that is, four (4) members' terms shall expire on odd-numbered years, and three (3) members' terms shall expire on even-numbered years. Appointments to vacancies shall be for the un-expired term of the position to which the appointment is made. 
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the conducting of business. The members of the park and recreation board shall serve without pay, shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council, and may be removed by the City Council with or without cause. 
(3)  Mission 
Mission of the Park and Recreation Board is to develop parks and recreational opportunities, in aesthetic places, for people of all ages to pursue safe, healthy, cultural and educational activities. 
(4)  Goals 
(a)  Goal 1 
Members of the Santa Fe Park and Recreation Board will increase community awareness of plans for the development and improvement of parks and recreation. 
(b)  Goal 2 
Members of the Santa Fe Park and Recreation Board will become familiar with parks and recreation possibilities, responsibilities and standards to better serve the recreational needs of the community. 
(c)  Goal 3 
Members of the Santa Fe Park and Recreation Board will pursue all sources of funding, private, municipal, state and federal, to fulfill the parks and recreation projects. 
(d)  Goal 4 
Members of the Santa Fe Park and Recreation Board will develop a park and recreation master plan to serve the recreational needs of the community. 
(Ordinance No. 22-98 of September 10, 1998) 
Editor's note— Section 6 was previously titled City Administrator, and was determined to be in conflict with the Home Rule Charter and therefore was deleted from the Code of Ordinances with the preparation of Supplement No. 1. See also Article 4 of Home Rule Charter.  
SECTION 7: - LIBRARY 
A.  LIBRARY ESTABLISHED 
A library department is hereby created within the frame-work of the governmental organization of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, which shall be known as the Mae S. Bruce Library, and it shall function according to the laws of the State of Texas, the ordinances of the City of Santa Fe, the policies adopted by resolution of the City Council, and the provisions of this Section. 
(Ordinance No. 10-2010 of August 26, 2010, Sec. 1) 
B.  GIFTS AND DONATIONS 
The City of Santa Fe hereby accepts gifts and donations made for the Mae S. Bruce Library in accordance with the Gift Policy adopted by resolution of the City Council, with grateful thanks to the donors, and it is ordained that such donations, together with such additions as may be made from time to time, shall constitute and form the assets of the Mae S. Bruce Library. 
(Ordinance No. 10-2010 of August 26, 2010, Sec. 1) 
C.  LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD CREATED 
There is hereby created and established within and for the City of Santa Fe, Texas, a Mae S. Bruce Library Advisory Board consisting of five (5) regular members and one (1) alternate member who shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. Library advisory board members may be removed by the City Council with or without cause, and members should be removed from the board if unable to attend any two (2) of the quarterly meetings per calendar year. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum to conduct business. 
(Ordinance No. 18-2004 of July 8, 2004, Sec. 1) 
D.  TERMS OF LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD 
(1)  Each appointed member of the Board shall hold that office for a period of two (2) years or until their successor takes office. 
(2)  Board members shall be assigned to a specific position designated Position 1 through Position 5, and Alternate 1. During the transitional phase from nine (9) members to five (5) members, Positions 1, 3, and 5 shall be appointed for a one-year term to expire July, 2005, with two-year terms thereafter. Positions 2, 4, and Alternate 1 shall be appointed for a two-year term to expire July, 2006, with two-year terms thereafter. 
(3)  Appointment to vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the position to which the appointment is made. 
(Ordinance No. 18-2004 of July 8, 2004, Sec. 1) 
E.  FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
The Mae S. Bruce Library Advisory Board shall make studies and project plans for the improvement of the library with a view to its future development and extension, so as to ensure orderly growth of the Mae S. Bruce Library. 
F.  THEFT OF AND FAILURE TO RETURN LIBRARY MATERIALS 
(1)  Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Library facility includes any public library or museum, or any library or museum of an educational, historical or eleemosynary institution, organization or society. 
Library material includes any book plate, picture, photograph, engraving, painting, sculpture, statue, artifact, drawing, map, newspaper, pamphlet, broadside, magazine, manuscript, document, letter, microfilm, sound recording, audiovisual material, magnetic or other tape, electronic data processing record or other documentary, written or printed material regardless of physical form or characteristics, or any part thereof, belonging to, or on loan to or otherwise in the custody of a library facility. 
Premises of a library facility means the interior of a building, structure or other enclosure in which a library facility is located and in which the library facility keeps, displays, or makes available for inspection or borrowing library material. 
Library card means a card or plate issued by a library facility for purposes of identifying the person to whom the library card was issued as authorized to borrow library material, subject to all limitations and conditions imposed on such borrowing by the library facility issuing such card. 
(2)  Library Theft 
A person commits the offense of library theft when he or she does any of the following acts: 
a.  knowingly and intentionally removes any library material from the premises of a library facility without authority to do so; or 
b.  knowingly and intentionally conceals any library material upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, while still in the premises of a library facility and in such a manner that the library material is not visible through ordinary observation although there may be some notice of its presence, and removes such library material beyond the last point in the premises of that library facility at which library material may be borrowed in accordance with procedures established by that library facility for the borrowing of library material; or 
c.  with the intent to deceive, borrows or attempts to borrow any library material from a library facility by use of a library card issued to another without the other's consent, use of a library card knowing that it is revoked, cancelled or expired, or use of a library card knowing that it is falsely made, counterfeit or materially altered; or 
d.  checks out or borrows any library material and fails to return the library material within 10 days after receiving written notice from the library facility demanding the return of such library material. 
(3)  Failure to Return Library Materials 
No person shall be charged with Library Theft unless such person is provided written notice signed by a library official, agent or employee setting forth at least the following: 
a.  A reasonable description of the library materials; 
b.  The date the library materials were removed from the library; 
c.  The date that the library materials were due to be returned; 
d.  The final date by which the library materials are to be returned; and 
e.  The statement that, "Your failure to comply with the demands of this notice will subject you to being prosecuted for a violation of Chapter 7, Section 7, Subsection F, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, and upon conviction, a penalty of $25.00 to $300.00 for the first offense and $100.00 to $500.00 for a second or subsequent offense within three (3) years of the first offense, reimbursement to the library of the replacement costs of the materials lost, mutilated, or vandalized, and other pecuniary losses, payment of all court costs, and possible revocation of borrowing privileges. 
(4)  Mutilation or Vandalism of Library Materials 
A person commits the offense of mutilation or vandalism of library materials when the library materials are returned with tears, marks, defacement, disfigurement, or soils which damages or destroys the library materials, wholly or partially, making the material unsuitable for its intended purpose. 
(5)  Penalties 
Any person who violations any provision of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to: 
a.  a penalty of $25.00 to $300.00 for the first offense and $100.00 to $500.00 for a second or subsequent offense within three (3) years of the first offense; and 
b.  reimbursement to the library of the replacement costs of the materials lost and other pecuniary losses; 
c.  payment of all court costs; and 
d.  possible revocation of borrowing privileges. 
For the purposes of this section, an offense by a minor shall be imputed to the parent or legal guardian having control and custody of the minor. 
(6)  Posting of Warning 
The library facility shall post a copy of this section at a location adjacent to each entrance to the premises of the library facility and at each point in the premises of the library facility at which the borrowing of library material occurs. 
(Ordinance No. 16-99 of July 8, 1999; Ordinance No. 19-2008 of September 25, 2008, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 8: - LEGAL DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For purposes of this Section, the term "officer" shall include any elected or appointed official of the city, and the term "employee" shall include all employees of the city, whether under civil service or not, including firemen and policemen. 
(1) The City Manager is hereby directed to notify the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the City has elected to participate and have the employees of the City covered in said System. 
B.  INDEMNIFICATION 
Any officer or employee who is liable for the payment of any claims or damages, excluding punitive damages, arising out of the course and scope of employment shall be entitled to indemnification by the City provided that the acts or omissions resulting in such liability were done in good faith and without malicious or felonious intent. For the purposes of this Section, the term "arising out of the course and scope of employment" shall not include any action which occurs during a period of time in which the officer or employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the City. Whether the acts were done in good faith, without malicious or felonious intent, and within the course and scope of employment shall be determined by the City, and such determination shall be final for the purposes of the representation and indemnity of this section; provided, however, that in the event such representation and indemnity have been denied by the City, if upon a trial on the merits the City determines that the officer or employee was acting in good faith, without malicious or felonious intent and within the scope of employment the indemnification hereunder shall be granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. The City shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its consent, and the city reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient. Payments under this section may not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to any one (1) person or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any single occurrence in the case of personal injury or death or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a single occurrence of property damage. 
C.  REPRESENTATION IN ACTION 
The City shall have the right and duty to provide legal representation through the City Attorney, or in its discretion through the selection of outside legal counsel, to any officer or employee sued in connection with any claim for damages or other civil action against such person arising out of the course and scope of employment, provided that such officer or employee is entitled to indemnification as set forth in this Section. Such legal representation shall be provided at no cost to the officer or employee, and any officer or employee may have his or her own counsel assist in the defense at the sole expense of the officer or employee. The officer or employee shall cooperate fully with the City in preparation and presentation of the case, and the failure to cooperate shall waive such officer's or employee's right to representation and indemnity under this Section. 
D.  CITY'S DEFENSE 
Nothing in this Section shall be construed as waiving the City's defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the City or such officer or employee. For any suit or claim arising under the Texas Tort Claims Act, the indemnity provided by this section shall be limited to the statutory limits applicable to the city provided in said Act, as amended. 
E.  NOTICE 
The provisions of this section shall apply only where the city has been given notice of the action brought against any city officer or employee within ten (10) days of service of process upon the officer or employee. 
F.  DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking disciplinary action against any officer or employee for conduct defended or indemnified by the city under this section, either before or after conclusion of the civil suit. 
G.  SUITS IN BEHALF OF THE CITY 
Nothing in this section shall require the city to indemnify any officer or employee for recoveries made against him or her in suits by or on behalf of the city. The city council may, however, authorize the city attorney to represent any officer or employee in a suit brought by a taxpayer in behalf of the city against the officer or employee. 
(Ordinance No. 03-90 of February 8, 1990)  
SECTION 9: - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
A.  PARTICIPATION 
(1)  The city council of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, on behalf of said city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act. 
B.  ELIGIBILITY 
Each person who becomes an employee of a participating city on or after the effective date of participation of such city whose position shall require more than 1,000 hours per year shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of their employment. 
(Ordinance No. 13-96 of August 22, 1996) 
C.  RATE OF DEPOSITS 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of the TMRS Act, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of seven percent (7%) of the full earnings of each employee of said departments. 
(Ordinance No. 13-96 of August 22, 1996; Ordinance No. 30-98 of October 22, 1998; Ordinance No. 28-2000 of November 9, 2000) 
(2)  For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is 100% (100, 150, or 200) of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. 
D.  PRIOR SERVICE CREDIT 
Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed "prior service credit" (as defined in Section 853.101 of the TMRS Act) at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) of the "base credit" of such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in Section 853.105 of said Act. 
(Ordinance No. 13-96 of August 22, 1996) 
E.  AUTHORIZATION OF RESTRICTED PRIOR SERVICE CREDIT 
(1)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "System") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that: 
(A)  The person does not otherwise have credited service in the System for that service; and 
(B)  The service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305. 
(2)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of Updated Service Credits. 
(3)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this article must take the action required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this City. 
(Ordinance No. 01-97 of January 9, 1997) 
F.  REPORTING BY CITY 
The City Secretary is hereby directed to remit to the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the City contributions to the System and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said Board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of this City the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each of the employees of the participating departments and make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the City under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ordinance No. 13-96 of August 22, 1996) 
G.  ADDITIONAL RIGHTS GRANTED 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, which Subtitle shall herein be referred to as the 11TMRS Act," the City of Santa Fe, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "System"): 
(1)  Any employee of the City who is a member of the System is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in the System performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  Prior to adopting this ordinance, the governing body of the City has: (1) prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at twenty (20) years of service; and (2) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(3)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this ordinance pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(4)  The City Council of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, elects not to provide five-year vesting under Section 854.205 of the TMRS Act, and the City is hereby authorized and directed to file notice of this election with the Board of Trustees of the System before December 31, 2001. 
(Ordinance No. 32-98 of November 12, 1998; Ordinance No. 30-2001 of December 27, 2001) 
H.  AUTHORIZATION OF UPDATED SERVICE CREDITS—2005 
(1)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS ACT"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "System") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the System in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the City, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the System, shall be and is hereby allowed "Updated Service Credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(2)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the System who is eligible for Updated Service Credits on the basis of service with this City, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with Updated Service Credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this Section. 
(3)  The Updated Service Credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the "base Updated Service Credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(4)  Each Updated Service Credit allowed hereunder shall replace any Updated Service Credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(5)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the City. 
(Ordinance No. 28-2000 of November 9, 2000; Ordinance No. 25-2004 of December 9, 2004, Sec. 1) 
I.  INCREASE IN RETIREMENT ANNUITIES—2005 
(1)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the City hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the City under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the City. An annuity increased under this Section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(2)  The amount of the annuity increase under this Section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy percent (70%) of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this Section. 
(3)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(4)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(5)  The amount by which an increase under this Section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the City and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the System. 
(Ordinance No. 28-2000 of November 9, 2000; Ordinance No. 25-2004 of December 9, 2004, Sec. 2) 
J.  DATES OF ALLOWANCES AND INCREASES—2005 
The initial allowance of Updated Service Credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2005, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the System. An allowance of Updated Service Credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until Subsections H. through K. cease to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the System has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ordinance No. 30-98 of October 22, 1999; Ordinance No. 28-2000 of November 9, 2000; Ordinance No. 25-2004 of December 9, 2004, Sec. 3) 
K.  INCREASED MUNICIPAL CONTRIBUTIONS—2005 
(1)  Effective January 1, 2005, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the City will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is one hundred fifty percent (150%) of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the City's account in the municipality accumulation fund. 
(2)  Pursuant to Section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the City hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its account in the municipal accumulation fund of the System at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the City to employees who are members of the System, as the System's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the City under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out of the City's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of City contributions. 
(Ordinance No. 25-2004 of December 9, 2004, Sec. 4, 5)  
CHAPTER 8 - SUBDIVISIONS 
The Santa Fe Subdivision Development Ordinance as adopted by Ordinance No. 22-97 of November 13, 1997, is included as Exhibit A to this chapter. 
[Next page after Exhibit "A" is 147] 
  
[This page intentionally left blank] 
  
CHAPTER 8 
EXHIBIT "A" 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
 
Santa Fe Subdivision Development Ordinance 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Article 1: Legal Foundation 
	1.1 	Preamble 
	1.2 	Purpose 
	1.3 	Legal Authority 
	1.4 	Jurisdiction 
Article 2: Definitions 
	2.1 	General Definitions 
Article 3: Administration 
	3.1 	Responsibility 
	3.2 	Plat Approval Required 
	3.3 	Interpretation 
	3.4 	Amendments 
	3.5 	Conditions Related to Community Goals 
	3.6 	Platting Required 
	3.7 	Building Permits 
	3.8 	Certification Regarding Compliance with Platting Requirements 
	3.9 	Vacating Plats 
	3.10 	Replatting Without Vacating a Preceding Plat 
	3.11 	Procedure for Subdivisions Where Future Resubdivision is Indicated 
	3.12 	Amending Plats 
	3.13 	Correction of Errors in Approved but Unrecorded Plats 
	3.14 	Variances 
	3.15 	Enforcement, Violations and Penalties 
	3.16 	Fees 
Article 4: Platting Procedures 
	4.1 	Pre-Application Conference 
	4.2 	Minor Plats 
	4.3 	Preliminary Plats 
	4.4 	Final Plats 
	4.5 	Forms 
Article 5: Assurance for Completion and Maintenance of Improvements 
	5.1 	Improvements and Subdivision Improvement Agreement 
	5.2 	Inspection of Improvements 
	5.3 	Escrow Deposits for Lot Improvements 
	5.4 	Deferral or Waiver of Required Improvements 
	5.5 	Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy 
	5.6 	Consumer Protection Legislation and Conflicts of Interest Statutes 
Article 6: Requirements for Improvements, Reservations, and Design 
	6.1 	General Improvements 
	6.2 	Lot Improvements 
	6.3 	Streets 
	6.4 	Drainage and Storm Sewers 
	6.5 	Water Facilities 
	6.6 	Sewerage Facilities 
	6.7 	Sidewalks 
	6.8 	Utilities 
	6.9 	Public Uses 
	6.10 	Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities 
	6.11 	Nonresidential Subdivisions 
	6.12 	Storm Water Pollution Prevention Measures 
Article 7: Off-Site Improvements 
	7.1 	Purpose 
	7.2 	Determination of Pro Rata Share 
 
ARTICLE 1
Legal Foundation 
 
Section 1.1 - Preamble 
1.1.1 These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision Development Ordinance of the City of Santa Fe. 
1.1.2 It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Santa Fe to consider the subdivision of land and its subsequent development to be subject to control by the City pursuant to its general plans for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the City. These regulations have been developed in accordance with a comprehensive planning process to provide for the City's orderly growth and development. 
1.1.3 Land shall not be subdivided unless it is of such character that it can be used safely for its intended purpose, without endangering health or causing peril from fire, flood or other menace; and land shall not be subdivided until such public facilities and improvements which are required, are in place, or proper provision has been made for necessary improvements such as drainage, water, sanitary sewer, transportation facilities, and other municipal services. 
1.1.4 Existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to the intent of and be properly related to the policies of the City of Santa Fe's general plans for such public improvements and the capital improvements program of the City. It is intended that this Ordinance shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the City's general plans for streets, alleys, parks, drainage facilities, and public utility facilities; including all other related sections of the Santa Fe Municipal Code.  
Section 1.2 - Purpose 
The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential, commercial, and industrial uses, and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public purposes will determine to a large degree the conditions of health, safety, economy, and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality of these conditions is of public interest. This Ordinance and the standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use makes provisions for adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities, and other needs, to insure the development and maintenance of a healthy, attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and protection of its human and natural resources. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the City's comprehensive planning process to promote orderly growth and development.  
Section 1.3 - Legal Authority 
This Ordinance is adopted in accordance with and pursuant to Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, and the Charter of the City of Santa Fe, Texas.  
Section 1.4 - Jurisdiction 
This Ordinance shall apply to all land within the city limits of Santa Fe, Texas, and to all land within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction as authorized pursuant to the terms of the Texas Local Government Code. 
ARTICLE 2
Definitions  
Section 2.1 - General Definitions 
For the purpose of these regulations, words used in the present tense include the future tenses; words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular, except where the natural and obvious construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "may" is not discretionary unless the context in which it is used indicates otherwise. The word must and shall are mandatory in every instance. For purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as hereinafter defined. It should be noted that the definitions contained in Article 2, of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance are incorporated as a part of this Ordinance by this reference thereto. 
2.1.1 Abut/Abutting : To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line or border. This term implies a closer proximity than the term "adjacent." 
2.1.2 Access : A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance and exit to a property. 
2.1.3 As-Built Plans : A set of detailed plans and documents specifying how public improvements required by a Final Plat were actually constructed. 
2.1.4 Base Flood : The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, most commonly called the 100 year flood, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
2.1.5 Construction Plan : The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirement of this ordinance and the Municipal Code. 
2.1.6 Dedication : The grant of an interest in property to the public for public use and benefit. 
2.1.7 Deed : A legal document conveying ownership of real property. 
2.1.8 Deed Restriction : See Restrictive Covenant. 
2.1.9 Density : The average number of housing units per unit of land generally expressed as "dwelling units per acre." 
2.1.10 Developer : The legal or beneficial owner(s) of land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary interest in such land. Also, any person, developer, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined. 
2.1.11 Development : The subdivision of land; any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, conversion, or enlargement of any structure; and any mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
2.1.12 Easement : A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner to and for the use of the public, a corporation or other persons, for a designated part of his property, and for a specified purpose. 
2.1.13 Engineering Design Standards : The specifications and standards for the construction of public improvements as provided by the City of Santa Fe. 
2.1.14 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) : The unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the City outward for a distance of one (1) mile. 
2.1.15 Flood Fringe : The area, other than the stream channel and floodway, which occupies the remainder of the 100 year floodplain, and receives shallower waters and less velocities, as defined by the FEMA. 
2.1.16 Floodplain : The floodplain is made up of three (3) parts, the stream channel, the floodway and the flood fringe, as defined by the FEMA. 
2.1.17 Floodway, Regulatory : The flood corridor of a river or other watercourse that is reserved in order to discharge the 100 year flood, as defined by FEMA. 
2.1.18 Functional Street Classification System : A hierarchical circulation system for the safe and efficient operation of vehicles which provides for the gradation in function from access to movement. The functional street classifications are expressway, major arterial, minor arterial, collector, and local. 
2.1.19 Improvement : Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate. 
2.1.20 Individual Sewage Disposal System : A septic tank, seepage tile-sewage disposal system, or any other approved on-lot sewage treatment device. 
2.1.21 Lot of Record : A lot which is a part of an approved plat, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the Galveston County Clerk. 
2.1.22 Minor Plat : A plat of land which includes four (4) or fewer lots, and which does not necessitate the extension of streets or municipal facilities. 
2.1.23 Off-Site : Any real property not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
2.1.24 Off-Site Improvements : Any utility, paving, grading, drainage, structure, or modification of topography which is, or will be located on property not within the boundary of the property to be developed. 
2.1.25 Planning Commission : Wherever the term Planning Commission is used, it shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.1.26 Plat, Final : A map of a land subdivision prepared according to applicable laws of the State of Texas and ordinances of the city and county having the necessary affidavits for filing, dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land. 
2.1.27 Plat, Preliminary : A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail according to these regulations to indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision. 
2.1.28 Private Utility : A business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequences and need, such as electricity, gas, transportation or communications. 
2.1.29 Professional Engineer : An engineer registered to practice in the State of Texas. 
2.1.30 Public Improvement : Any improvement, facility or service together with its associated public site, right-of-way or easement necessary to provide transportation, drainage, public or private utilities, parks or recreational, energy or similar essential services. 
2.1.31 Remaining Capacity : As used in calculating subsequent user tap fees: the total capacity minus (a) capacity of minimums, or (b) capacity required to serve the area being developed which are in excess of minimums. 
2.1.32 Reserve Strip : A narrow, linear strip of property, usually separating a parcel of land and a roadway or easement, that is characterized by limited depth which will not support development and which will prevent access to the roadway or easement from the land adjacent to the reserve strip. 
2.1.33 Restrictive Covenant : A contractual restriction on the use of land, usually set forth or referred to in the deed. Such covenants usually run with the land and are binding upon subsequent owners of the property. 
2.1.34 Replat : A change in a recorded plat which does not require the vacation of the preceding plat. 
2.1.35 Service Area : A specific area representing the maximum limits served by a particular utility. 
2.1.36 Sidewalk : A paved surface area usually paralleling and separated from the roadway, used as a pedestrian-way. 
2.1.37 Site Plan : A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and all other information required by this Ordinance. 
2.1.38 Stream Channel : The area of the floodplain which carries the normal flow of the watercourse. 
2.1.39 Subdivider : See "developer". 
2.1.40 Subdivision : The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more parts for the purpose of sale or of building development. Said term also includes the resubdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land. 
2.1.41 Subdivision, Unrecorded : A plat which has been approved by a city or county, but has not been recorded with the Galveston County Clerk. 
2.1.42 Subsequent User : A developer who uses utilities which have been installed by others. Also one who represents a specific area included in the service area for which the utility was intended to serve. 
2.1.43 Vacated Plat : A plat which is vacated through the procedures described herein, and is made legally void. 
2.1.44 Variance : A deviation from the required norm that may be granted following certain procedures specified herein. 
ARTICLE 3
Administration  
Section 3.1 - Responsibility 
3.1.1 Primary Responsibility for Enforcement : The Development Officer shall be the designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance. The City Manager or a designee of the City Manager shall serve in this capacity. The Development Officer may also serve as the staff advisor to the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, city staff, and citizens relating to the administration, interpretation, implementation, and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.1.2 Duties : The Development Officer shall have the following duties: 
A. The Development Officer shall have the power to make inspections of construction sites, buildings and premises to carry out the duties prescribed herein. 
B. The Development Officer shall examine all building permit applications and shall certify that the proposed construction, moving, alteration, or use complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C. The Development Officer shall certify all Certificates of Occupancy prior to their issuance. 
D. The Development Officer shall investigate alleged violations of this Ordinance, and shall conduct a visual inspection of all uses within the City. If a violation or suspected violation is found, enforcement efforts shall be undertaken by the Development Officer. 
E. The Development Officer shall perform such other duties as assigned by the City Manager relating to the administration, interpretation, implementation, and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.  
Section 3.2 - Plat Approval Required 
3.2.1 This chapter shall govern all subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe and within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), as defined herein, and pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code. 
3.2.2 No land shall be subdivided within the corporate limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the municipality until: 
A. Approval of the preliminary and final plat has been obtained from the Planning Commission; 
and 
B. The approved final plat has been filed with the Galveston County Clerk. 
3.2.3 No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of this Ordinance, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with this chapter. 
3.2.4 The City of Santa Fe shall not serve or connect any land with water or sewer service unless the project or site is in full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance.  
Section 3.3 - Interpretation 
3.3.1 Generally : In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
3.3.2 Conflict with Public and Private Provisions: 
A. Public Provisions : This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of this ordinance imposes a restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of this ordinance or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law; whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall prevail. 
B. Private Provisions : This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant any other private agreement or restriction. Where the provisions of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Where the provisions of private easements, restrictions or covenants impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this ordinance, or the determinations of the Planning Commission or the municipality in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this ordinance, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this ordinance or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall govern. However, it is not the intent of this chapter that the enforcement of such private provisions be the responsibility of the City of Santa Fe.  
Section 3.4 - Amendments 
3.4.1 For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general welfare, the Planning Commission may from time to time make recommendations to the City Council to amend the provisions imposed by this ordinance. The Planning Commission shall review these regulations two (2) years after the date of adoption and every two (2) years thereafter, to determine the need for periodic updates and amendments. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Planning Commission and City Council in the manner prescribed by law.  
Section 3.5 - Conditions Related to Community Goals 
3.5.1 The regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is a valid exercise of the police power delegated by the State of Texas to the City of Santa Fe. The developer shall comply with reasonable conditions established by the Planning Commission for the design, dedication, improvement, and use of the land so as to conform the project to the developmental goals of the community at large.  
Section 3.6 - Platting Required 
3.6.1 The owner of a tract of land located within the corporate limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Santa Fe, who divides the tract into two (2) or more parts must have a plat of the subdivision prepared for review, approval and recording pursuant to this Ordinance. Such division of a tract includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. 
3.6.2 All contiguous land which is intended to be sold or developed, and which is under the ownership of the applicant, shall be included on the preliminary plat. 
3.6.3 If the applicant intends to subdivide a portion of his/her property for the purposes of sale or development, and the balance of the property is to remain undeveloped or unimproved, such remaining portion is not required to be included on the preliminary plat, unless the general plans of the City of Santa Fe require the dedication of right-of-way for street, drainage or other purposes on such property.  
Section 3.7 - Building Permits 
3.7.1 The owner of an unplatted tract of land located within the city limits who makes application for a building permit on such unplatted tract, shall cause the tract to be platted in conformance with this chapter before the permit can be issued. This provision shall only apply to the following classifications of building permits: 
A. A building permit for a new structure, except that a building permit for an accessory structure defined herein, for a single family residential use shall be exempt from the platting requirement; 
B. A building permit for the renovation, remodeling or expansion of an existing structure which increases the gross floor area by twenty-five (25) percent or more; 
C. A building permit for the renovation, remodeling or expansion of an existing residential structure that results in the land use of such structure to be changed to a nonresidential use; 
D. A permit for the placement of a manufactured home or other structure.  
Section 3.8 - Certification Regarding Compliance with Platting Requirements 
3.8.1 Certificate : Upon the approval of a final plat by the Planning Commission or the approval of a minor plat by the Development Officer, and after the filing of the plat with the Galveston County Clerk, the Development Officer shall issue the subdivider a certificate stating that the plat has been reviewed and approved by the City of Santa Fe. 
3.8.2 Platting Determinations : On the written request of an owner of land within the city's corporate limits or its ETJ, the Development Officer, acting on behalf of the Planning Commission, shall make the following determinations regarding the owners land: 
A. Whether a plat is required under this ordinance for the land; 
and 
B. If a plat is required, whether one has been prepared and whether it has been reviewed and approved by the city. 
3.8.3 The owners request shall identify the land that is the subject of the request by its legal description. The Development Officer shall make the above determination within twenty (20) days after the date the request is received, and shall issue the certificate within ten (10) days after the date the determination is made.  
Section 3.9 - Vacating Plats 
3.9.1 Generally : The owners of land covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all owners of lots in the plat. 
3.9.2 Procedures : A request for a plat vacation shall be made on the forms provided by the City, with the required signature(s) and acknowledgments. The vacation shall be considered by the Planning Commission in the manner prescribed for the original plat. Once the request for vacation has been approved by the Planning Commission, an Order to Vacate shall be signed by the officers of the Planning Commission responsible for the signing of plats, and submitted to the Galveston County Clerk for filing. If the plat being vacated is located outside of the city limits, the vacation must also be approved by the Galveston County Commissioners Court prior to its submittal to the Galveston County Clerk. The Galveston County Clerk shall write legibly on the vacated plat the word "Vacated" and shall enter on the plat a reference to the volume and page at which the vacating instrument is recorded. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat has no effect.  
Section 3.10 - Replatting Without Vacating a Preceding Plat 
3.10.1 Generally : A replat of a subdivision or part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat: 
A. Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
B. Is approved, after a public hearing on the matter at which parties in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be heard, by the Planning Commission; and 
C. Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. 
3.10.2 Procedures : A replat shall be submitted, reviewed and considered by the Planning Commission in the manner prescribed in this ordinance for a subdivision. However, in addition to these requirements, a replat shall be subject to the public notice requirements of Section 212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code if any lot in the preceding plat was limited to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot. Section 212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code has been reprinted in the Appendix of this ordinance, along with the administrative procedures for the processing of replats. 
3.10.3 Utilities : The relocation and/or abandonment of any utilities shall be the responsibility of the developers and shall be provided for concurrently with the vacation procedure. The cost of any such relocation and/or abandonment shall be borne by the developer.  
Section 3.11 - Procedure for Subdivisions Where Future Resubdivision is Indicated 
3.11.1 Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one (1) or more lots containing more than one (1) acre of land, and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the Planning Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of utilities and adjacent streets. Provisional easements providing for the future opening of such streets and utility extensions may be made a requirement of the plat. Such easements will become effective at the time the parcel in question is resubdivided.  
Section 3.12 - Amending Plats 
3.12.1 The Planning Commission may approve and issue an amending plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is solely for one or more of the purposes set forth in Section 212.016 of the Local Government Code. Section 212.016 of the Local Government Code has been reprinted in the Appendix of this Ordinance. Notice, a hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat.  
Section 3.13 - Correction of Errors in Approved but Unrecorded Plats 
3.13.1 A final plat which has been approved by the Planning Commission but not recorded with the Galveston County Clerk, which is found to contain an insignificant error, may be corrected by the applicant, upon approval by the Development Officer. This procedure shall allow for the correction of scrivener's errors, clerical errors, or typographical errors. Other minor corrections, such as the addition, deletion or relocation of easements shall be allowed, subject to the approval of the Development Officer. Such corrected plats may be approved and signed by the Planning Commission officers responsible for the signing of plats, upon the recommendation of the Development Officer.  
Section 3.14 - Variances 
3.14.1 Generally : Where the Planning Commission finds that an unnecessary and extraordinary hardship would result from strict adherence to this ordinance and the purposes of this ordinance may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, the Planning Commission may recommend the approval of variances to this ordinance to the City Council. Variances may be granted so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variances shall not have the effect of violating the intent and purpose of this ordinance. Furthermore, the Planning Commission shall not recommend approval of variances to the City Council unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
A. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare, be injurious to surrounding property, or violate the intent and purpose of the regulation; 
B. The granting of the variance is not based on a hardship which is self-imposed; 
C. The hardship is not based solely on the cost of complying with the regulation; and 
D. The hardship is based on circumstances which are unique to the property for which the variance is sought, and not circumstances common to other properties. 
3.14.2 Conditions : In recommending approval of variances to the City Council, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this ordinance. 
3.14.3 Procedures: 
A. Application : An application for any variance shall be submitted in writing to the Development Officer on forms provided by him. The variance application shall include the following: 
1. A completed variance application form; 
2. The appropriate fee, as specified in Appendix A, of this ordinance; 
3. A copy of the deed to the subject property; 
4. A letter describing the reasons and/or hardship for the request, stating fully the grounds for the variance and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner; and, 
5. A plot plan of the subject property. 
B. Public Hearings and Notices : Each variance request shall be considered at a public hearing before the Planning Commission. Notice of such public hearing shall be required as follows: 
1. Newspaper : Due notice, in the form provided by the Development Officer, of a variance public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper, in the legal classified advertisements section, at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date. 
2. Mail : Due notice, in the form provided by the Development Officer, of a variance public hearing shall also be given by mail to all owners of property located within two hundred (200) feet of the affected property; required mailings must be made at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date. 
3. Cost : The preparation of the notice of public hearing and required mailing list shall be the responsibility of the Planning Department. 
C. Planning Commission Action : The Planning Commission shall either recommend approval or denial of the variance to the City Council. The Planning Commission's action shall be entered into the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting, specifying the reason(s) which justified the recommendation of approval or denial of the variance. In the event of a recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission the applicant shall have seven (7) days in which to notify the Development Officer in writing that appeal to the City Council shall be processed; otherwise, the denial shall become final. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Sec. 2)  
Section 3.15 - Enforcement, Violations and Penalties 
3.15.1 Generally : 
A. It shall be the duty of the Development Officer to enforce this ordinance and to bring to the attention of the City Attorney or other appropriate authority any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
B. No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such a parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and filed with the Galveston County Clerk. 
C. The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease with the intent of evading these regulations, shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements contained in this ordinance. 
D. No building permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations. Nor shall the City of Santa Fe serve or connect any land with water or sewer service if such land has been subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations. 
3.15.2 Violations and Penalties : Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any part of this ordinance shall be subject to the penalties pursuant to the City Code, as amended. 
3.15.3 Civil Enforcement : Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of this ordinance, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises, and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.  
Section 3.16 - Fees 
3.16.1 The fees to be charged for preliminary and final subdivision review, subdivision filing, variance processing, and any other fees required by this ordinance, shall be charged in accordance with a schedule provided by the Development Officer. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Sec. 3) 
ARTICLE 4 
Platting Procedures  
Section 4.1 - Pre-Application Conference 
4.1.1 Prior to the submission of any preliminary plat (other than a minor plat) a pre-application conference shall be required. The pre-application conference shall be held with the Development Officer prior to the submittal of a preliminary plat. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to discuss the owner/developer's intentions for the development, and the features of the site.  
Section 4.2 - Minor Plats 
4.2.1 Whenever a tract of land is to be platted, subdivided or resubdivided into four (4) or fewer lots, the subdivision may be exempted from the procedural provisions of formal planning commission plat approval, and may be approved administratively, through the minor plat process. 
A. Purpose and Intent : The purpose of the minor plat process is to allow for a more efficient approval process for plats of four (4) or fewer lots. The classification of a subdivision as a minor plat shall not be construed as a waiver of any other requirement of this Ordinance, or any other ordinance or statute pertaining to the platting of property. 
B. Minor Plat Defined : A minor plat shall be defined as a plat of a tract of land which includes four (4) or fewer lots, which also meets the following conditions: 
1. Each lot of the subdivision shall have frontage on an existing public street, and shall not necessitate the creation of any new street, or the extension of any existing street; and 
2. The subdivision shall be served by existing municipal or W.C.I.D #8 utilities of adequate capacity, and shall not necessitate the extension of any municipal or W.C.I.D #8 utilities, except for the installation of service lines to the individual lot(s) from existing mains of adequate capacity or by wells and sewage systems approved by the Galveston County Health District. 
C. Application Procedures : The submittal of an application for a minor plat shall be made to the Development Officer. The applicant shall submit the completed application form, provided in the Appendix of this Ordinance, and two (2) copies of a preliminary and final plat; or in the case of a one (1) lot single family residential subdivision, two (2) copies of a final plat only. The applicant shall also submit a title search, current to within sixty days (60) of application, certifying to at least the following concerning the title to the land: A statement of records examined and date of examination; description of the property in question, including a metes and bounds description of the tract; name of the fee owner as of the date of examination, and the date, file number, date of filing, and volume and page of any lienholders; and general description of any easement or fee strips granted along with the file number, date of filing, and volume and page of recording. The application fee, as specified on a schedule to be provided by the Development Officer, is due at the time the plat is submitted. 
D. Minor Plat Contents : 
1. The preliminary plat shall meet the requirements of this Article, and the requirements of any other ordinance or statute governing the subdivision of land in the City of Santa Fe. 
2. The final plat shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance and any other ordinance or statute governing the subdivision of land. 
3. The certificate of approval (See Form #1 at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) by the Development Officer shall be placed on the final plat. 
E. Review Procedure : The Development Officer shall review the proposed minor plat to insure compliance with all appropriate requirements. The Development Officer may submit the subdivision plat to other City departments and/or other agencies for review and comment, as deemed necessary. Within seven (7) working days after the date of application, the minor plat shall be returned to the subdivider with written analysis and commentary. 
F. Approval Process : Upon completion of plat review by the Development Officer, and the correction of the plat by the applicant, the applicant shall submit the items listed below within ten (10) working days after the date of application: 
1. Two white background prints of the corrected preliminary plat, and the copies of the original submittal with Development Officer analysis and commentary (if applicable); 
2. Two (2) reproducible mylars of the final plat, and the copies of the original submittal with Development Officer analysis and commentary; 
3. Five (5) true to scale copies of the final plat; 
4. Tax certificates stating that no taxes are delinquent against the property; and 
5. The appropriate filing fees, as specified in the Appendix of this Ordinance. 
If the items listed above are not submitted within ten (10) days after the date of application the minor plat application shall be considered null and void. The Development Officer may approve a minor plat. The Development Officer may, for any reason, elect to forward the minor plat to the planning commission for review and approval. The Development Officer shall not disapprove a minor plat but shall be required to refer any minor plat which he refuses to approve to the planning commission, within thirty (30) days after the date of application. 
6. The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally, or disapprove a minor plat. 
G. Other Requirements : 
1. A subdivision shall not be processed as a minor plat if its approval would require the granting of a variance. 
2. Land subdivided through the minor plat process shall not be resubdivided or replatted by amendment or otherwise for a period of one (1) year from the approval of the original minor plat, unless it is approved by the planning commission. 
3. Whenever a minor plat includes one (1) or more lots containing more than one (1) acre of land, and where there are indications that such lots may eventually be resubdivided, the Development Officer may refer the plat to the planning commission. 
4. For purposes of keeping the Planning Commission and the general public informed of platting activity, the regular monthly Planning Commission agenda shall include an agenda item reporting all minor plats processed during the preceding month. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Secs. 4, 5)  
Section 4.3 - Preliminary Plats 
4.3.1 The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for submission to the planning commission for all subdivisions, except for a one (1) lot single family residential land use subdivision. 
4.3.2 The preliminary plat must meet all requirements specified by this article before the planning commission may commence preliminary plat review. A plat not meeting all of the requirements may be submitted, provided that subdivider presents with the plat a written request for specific variances, and enumerates in detail the reasons thereof, in conformance with Section 3.14 Variances, of these regulations. 
4.3.3 Application Procedures: The submittal of an application for a preliminary plat shall be made to the Development Officer. The applicant shall submit three (3) white background prints of the preliminary plat to the Development Officer at least twenty-four (24) days prior to the meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered. The preliminary plat application and fees, which are listed in the Appendix of this Ordinance, are due and payable at the time of the preliminary plat submittal. The applicant shall also submit a title search, current to within sixty days (60) of application, certifying to at least the following concerning the title to the land: A statement of records examined and date of examination; description of the property in question, including a metes and bounds description of the tract; name of the fee owner as of the date of examination, and the date, file number, date of filing, and volume and page of any lienholders; and general description of any easement or fee strips granted along with the file number, date of filing, and volume and page of recording. 
4.3.4 The Development Officer shall review the preliminary plat and coordinate its review with the appropriate city departments and other agencies. The plat shall then be returned to the applicant with written analysis and commentary. Upon completion of plat review by the Development Officer, the applicant shall submit nine (9) white background prints and the copies of the original submittal with Development Officer's analysis and commentary to the Development Officer ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting. 
4.3.5 General Requirements for Preliminary Plats : 
A. The preliminary plat and all supporting maps shall be prepared in pen or pencil at a minimum scale of one hundred (100) feet to an inch on one or more 24" × 36" sheets. If more than one (1) sheet is required, they shall be match-line sheets. An index sheet of the same dimensions, or a map insert showing the entire subdivision, shall accompany the preliminary plat. Plats in which all lots contain a net area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet may be drawn to a scale of two hundred (200) feet to the inch on one or more 24 inch by 36 inch sheets. The preliminary plat and all supporting maps shall be legible, show the map scale, a north arrow and the date of preparation. At the discretion of the Development Officer, deviations from the requirements of this subsection as to scale, and only as to scale, may be allowed. 
B. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the registered engineer or surveyor preparing the plat that he has, to the best of his ability, designed the subdivision in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan or other general plans of the City of Santa Fe, with which he is completely familiar, and in accordance with the ordinances and regulations governing the subdivision of land, except where a variance is requested in writing and the reasons for which are clearly stated. 
C. A public hearing shall be conducted by the Planning Commission prior to consideration of a preliminary plat. Due notice of a public hearing shall be published in the legal classified advertisements section of a Santa Fe area newspaper. Notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the plat will be reviewed. Notice shall also be given to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the subdivision. Notice may be submitted via regular U.S. postal service. 
4.3.6 Preliminary Plat Contents : The preliminary plat shall provide the following information for the area within the subdivision and for a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond the subdivision boundaries: 
A. A title block, including subdivision name, block(s), lot(s), acreage, name of city, county and state, and the location and description of the property referenced to the original legal description. The subdivision name shall not duplicate any existing subdivision name. 
B. The name, address and signature of the legal owner(s) of the property included in the proposed subdivision. If the applicant is not the legal owner, a statement of the agent's authority and interest shall be submitted with the application. Such statement, which shall be signed by the legal owner(s). (See Form #2 at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
C. The name, address and signature of the registered surveyor responsible for preparing and designing the plat and surveys. If public improvements are involved, the name, address and signature of the registered engineer responsible for designing such improvements shall also be provided. 
D. A location map at a scale of not more than one thousand (1000) feet to the inch, showing existing streets, subdivisions, and general land uses in the area surrounding the site. 
E. The scale, north arrow, and date of original and all revisions. 
F. The location, dimension, right-of-way width, paving width, and name of all existing or proposed streets, alleys, railroads, and other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract. 
G. The location and dimensions of any existing structures, fences, paved areas, cemeteries or burial grounds, and other existing features within the proposed subdivision. Insignificant temporary improvements which will be removed during development may be omitted, except that all existing buildings, whether temporary or permanent, shall be shown. 
H. The location of any existing or abandoned landfills, dump sites, hazardous waste dump sites, or any inventories of hazardous materials. 
I. The location of any watercourses, water bodies, flood hazard areas, significant tree masses, slopes, or other natural features within the area to be subdivided. 
J. Topographic information showing existing contours based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), with intervals not to exceed one (1) foot, and such contour lines to be no more than one hundred (100) horizontal feet apart. 
K. The location and dimensions of the subdivision's boundaries; and the existing and proposed blocks lots, setback lines, and easements, including the square footage of the lots. In lieu of providing the square footage of each lot, a statement may be placed on the plat which certifies that all lots meet the appropriate lot size requirements. 
L. The locations, sizes and other appropriate descriptions of the following existing utility facilities: 
1. Water mains, service connections and any special structures such as wells, elevated storage tanks and pump stations; 
2. Sanitary sewer mains, service connections and any special structures or facilities such as lift stations, septic systems, lagoons, oxidation ponds and package plants; 
and 
3. Storm water drainage mains, channels, retention or detention ponds, and other major drainage facilities, including the area in acres served by such facilities; and special structures such as dams, spillways, dikes or levees. 
M. The approximate locations, sizes, and other appropriate descriptions of the following proposed utility facilities: 
1. Water trunk mains, connections to city facilities, and special structures such as elevated storage tanks and pump stations; 
2. Sewer trunk mains, connections to city facilities, and special structures and facilities such as lift stations, lagoons, oxidation ponds and package plants. Additional information concerning such special structures and facilities may be required by the Development Officer of Water/Wastewater prior to approval by the planning commission; 
and 
3. Storm water drainage mains, channels, retention or detention ponds, and other major drainage facilities, including the approximate area in acres served by such facilities; special structures such as dams, spillways, dikes or levees; and the location of the regulatory floodplain upon completion of the proposed improvements, along with an engineering report on the downstream flood impacts. 
N. The location of all existing or abandoned oil or gas wells, oil or gas pipelines and other appurtenances associated with the extraction, production and distribution of petroleum products, and all related easements on the site or on immediately adjacent property. Such facilities shall be in conformance with any oil and gas regulation ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. 
O. Conditions on immediately adjacent property that have a direct impact on the proposed development. Any proposed supplemental transportation systems, showing the layout and dimensions of walkways, sidewalks, jogging trails, bike trails, horse trails, and other related improvements. 
P. The approximate location, dimension and area of all parcels of all land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public use, or for the common use of property owners in the proposed subdivision. 
Q. The functional classification (as defined by the City of Santa Fe) of every street within or adjacent to the subdivision, based on the proposed design. The appropriate term (expressway, primary arterial, secondary arterial, collector or local) shall either be placed directly on each street, or a list of the streets in the subdivision, with their corresponding functional classifications, shall be placed on the plat. 
R. The names of the owners of all parcels abutting the subject property, with deed references. If property abutting the subject property is in a platted subdivision, it may be referenced by the plat reference rather than individual deed references. 
S. The proposed land use for all lots. The designations to be used when indicating land use on a plat shall be defined by the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance, and are as follows: 
AR 	Agricultural Residential 
R-1 	Single-Family Residential 
R-2 	Multi-Family Residential 
R-3 	Multi-Family Residential 
MH 	Manufactured Housing 
NC 	Neighborhood Commercial 
HC 	Highway Commercial 
AU 	Adult Uses 
LM 	Light Manufacturing 
TR 	Transportation Zone 
 
Planned Unit Development projects as defined by Section 4.12 of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance shall be identified by the letters "PUD". 
T. The following statistical data: 
1. The total number of gross acres; 
2. The total number of lots; 
3. The number of dwelling units, the acreage, and the gross residential density, by housing type; 
4. A statement, confirmed by engineering analysis, that the existing utility mains serving a proposed subdivision are adequate. Upon receipt of a preliminary plat, the Development Officer shall review the proposed development. The Officer shall determine whether further study shall be required to assess the development's impact on the existing water/wastewater systems. If the Development Officer determines that further study is necessary to confirm the adequacy of the existing mains to serve the new development, the plat shall be marked, identifying the point from which the developers engineer shall be required to confirm by analysis the adequacy of the existing system to serve the proposed development. 
U. City plat file number, as assigned by the Development Officer during initial plat review. 
4.3.7 Planning Commission Action on Preliminary Plats : 
A. Approval Process : The planning commission shall make its determination to approve, approve conditionally or disapprove a preliminary plat within thirty (30) days after the plat submittal deadline on which the plat is presented to the Development Officer. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be signed by the planning commission chairman, attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider within ten (10) days after the determination is made. The reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of these regulations, other applicable regulations, and/or the general plans of the City of Santa Fe, with which the plat does not conform. On conditionally approving a plat, the planning commission may require submission of a revised preliminary plat. 
B. Effective Period : The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year. A final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission for final plat approval, and substantial construction shall have commenced, within one (1) year from the date of Planning Commission approval of the preliminary plat. If a final plat has not been submitted for approval and substantial construction has not commenced within such time, the preliminary plat shall be deemed null and void, unless the planning commission approves an extension of time. A formal request for an extension and the reasons thereof must be submitted in writing prior to the one (1) year deadline date. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Secs. 6—8)  
Section 4.4 - Final Plats 
4.4.1 The subdivider shall prepare a final plat for submission to the planning commission for all subdivisions. 
4.4.2 The final plat shall meet all requirements specified by this article, and the subdivider shall submit all required documents as specified by this article before the final plat may be placed on the agenda of the planning commission. 
4.4.3 A final plat not meeting all the requirements of these regulations may be submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a written request for specific variances and enumerates in detail the reasons thereof in conformance with Section 3.14, Variances, of this ordinance. 
4.4.4 A final plat must be in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat in order to be heard by the planning commission. A revised preliminary plat shall be required if the final plat deviates from the approved preliminary plat, and such deviations are considered by the Development Officer to be substantial. Changes which may be considered to be substantial include the following: 
A. Change in typical lot dimensions; 
B. Changes resulting in higher density; 
C. Changes in the traffic circulation network; 
D. Changes in drainage patterns; 
E. Changes in relationship between uses of land; and 
F. Land use in general. 
4.4.5 Whenever a subdivision necessitates the installation and dedication of public streets, drainage facilities, water mains, sanitary sewer mains, and/or other public subdivision improvements, construction plans shall be required. Construction plans shall be submitted to the Development Officer at the time of final plat submittal. Construction plans shall be in conformity with the approved preliminary plat. Construction plans shall be reviewed and approved prior to final plat review by the Planning Commission. 
4.4.6 Application Procedures: The applicant shall submit three (3) white background prints of the final plat to the Development Officer at least twenty-four (24) days prior to the meeting at which the final plat is to be considered. The additional items required for replats with public notice, as described in the Appendix of this Ordinance, shall be submitted along with the final plat. The final plat application and fee, as listed in the Appendix of this Ordinance, is payable at this time. 
4.4.7 The Development Officer shall coordinate final plat review with appropriate city departments and other agencies. The plat shall then be returned to the applicant with written analysis and commentary. Upon completion of plat review by the Development Officer, the applicant shall submit nine (9) white background prints of the final plat and the copies of the original submittal with Development Officer analysis and commentary to the Development Officer, ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting. 
4.4.8 In no case shall permanent public improvements commence until submission and approval of construction plans and specifications have been given by the Development Officer, and the final plat has been approved by the planning commission. 
4.4.9 Final plat, General Requirements : 
A. The final plat shall be prepared as a black-line mylar. The final plat shall be drawn at a minimum scale of one hundred (100) feet to an inch from an accurate survey on one (1) or more sheets. For the purposes of submitting copies of the final plat in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance, the final plat may either be drawn on eighteen (18) inch by twenty-four (24) inch sheets or twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheets. The drawing surface of the plat shall have a binding margin of two (2) inches at the left side of the plat, a margin of not less than one (1) inch at the right side, and a margin of not less one-half (½) inch at the top and bottom. If more than one (1) sheet is required, they shall be match-line sheets. An index sheet of the same dimensions, or a map insert showing the entire subdivision, shall accompany the final plat. At the discretion of the Development Officer, deviations from the requirements of this subsection as to scale, and only as to scale, may be allowed. 
B. Plats in which all lots contain a net area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet may be drawn to a scale of two hundred (200) feet to the inch on one (1) or more twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheets. If more than one (1) sheet is required, an index sheet of the same dimensions or a map insert showing the entire subdivision must be filed with the final plat. At the discretion of the Development Officer, deviations from the requirements of this subsection as to scale, and only as to scale, may be allowed. 
4.4.10 Final Plat Contents : The final plat shall provide the following information: 
A. A title block, including subdivision name, block(s), lot(s), acreage, name of city, county and state, and the location and description of the property referenced to the original legal description. 
B. The name, address, telephone number and signature of the legal owner(s) of the property included in the proposed subdivision. 
C. The name, address, telephone number and signature of the registered surveyor responsible for preparing and designing the plat and surveys. If public improvements are involved, the name, address, telephone number and signature of the registered engineer responsible for designing such improvements shall also be provided. 
D. A location map at a scale of not more than one thousand (1000) feet to the inch, showing existing streets, subdivisions, and general land uses in the area surrounding the site. 
E. The scale, north arrow, and date of original and all revisions. 
F. The proposed land use for all lots. The designations to be used when indicating land use on a plat are defined by the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance, and are as follows: 
AR 	Agricultural Residential 
R-1 	Single-Family Residential 
R-2 	Multi-Family Residential 
R-3 	Multi-Family Residential 
MH 	Manufactured Housing 
NC 	Neighborhood Commercial 
HC 	Highway Commercial 
AU 	Adult Uses 
LM 	Light Manufacturing 
TR 	Transportation Zone 
 
Planned Unit Development projects as defined by Section 4.12 of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance shall be identified by the letters "PUD". 
G. The location and description of all permanent survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision shall be referenced. 
H. The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified. 
I. The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands, with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names. 
J. The lines, including centerlines, of all proposed street rights-of-way, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings. 
K. The lines, including center lines, of all proposed alleys. Where the length or direction of an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines, the length and bearing shall be given. 
L. The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be properly located. 
M. The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right angles, the angle value may be omitted. 
N. The outline of any property, other than street rights-of-way or easements, which is offered for dedication to public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings with the area marked "Public" numbered consecutively throughout each block, with addresses of all lots. 
O. The location of all building setback lines, and easements for public services or utilities, with dimensions showing their location. 
P. The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection and central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns. Distance measured along curves shall be arc lengths. 
Q. The following note shall be placed on all final plats where access to arterial and/or expressway streets has been limited: "ACCESS PROHIBITED." The lots and area affected by such limitation shall be clearly indicated. 
R. The following note shall be placed on all private drives, private access facilities, and private common areas: "ALL MAINTENANCE OF THIS AREA SHALL BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PROPERTY OWNERS OF THE SUBDIVISION THROUGH THE (Name of Subdivision) PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION." The affected areas shall be clearly indicated. 
S. The applicant shall place the following note on the city's certified copy of the final plat containing areas within the regulatory floodplain as designated within the most current FEMA Study Report: "FLOOD HAZARD AREA. THIS AREA HAS BEEN DESIGNATED AS SUBJECT TO INUNDATION BY THE BASE FLOOD." The affected area, according to the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), shall be clearly indicated, along with the panel number and the date of the FIRM. 
T. An accurate metes and bounds description of the subdivision. Location and description of monuments, which shall be placed in conformance with Section 6.1.5, of this ordinance. 
U. Forms #3 through #7 (See the FORMS pages at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) shall be shown on the mylar of the final plat: 
V. The following restriction, condition and covenant running with the land shall be noted on any plat of a subdivision for which approval is sought which either in part or its entirety is located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city. Such notation shall be made as shown on Form #8 (See Form #8 at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
W. The following statistical data: 
1. The total number of acres; 
2. The total number of lots; 
3. The number of dwelling units, the acreage, and the gross residential density, by housing type; 
4. The number of lots and acreage allocated to commercial and industrial uses including the square footage of commercial and industrial structures; 
5. The acreage allocated to parks and common residential use; 
6. The acreage allocated to common open space; and 
7. The lineal footage of proposed public local, collector and arterial streets. 
X. City Plat File Number, as assigned by the Development Officer during initial plat review. 
Y. Standard plat notes (See Form #11 at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
4.4.11 Phasing of Final Plats : Where only a portion of an approved preliminary plat is submitted for final plat approval, a final plat of the remaining area may be submitted at any time within five (5) years of the date of preliminary plat approval. If the final plat for the remaining area does not conform substantially with the approved preliminary plat, the remaining area of the preliminary plat shall be deemed null and void. If a final plat of the remaining area has not been submitted within the five (5) year time period, the portion of the preliminary plat for which no final plat has been submitted shall be deemed null and void. However, if at least one phase of the preliminary plat has received final plat approval, its public improvements have been completed, and it has been filed in accordance with these regulations, an extension to the five (5) year time limit shall be granted by the Development Officer upon request by the developer unless the Development Officer determines that development conditions have substantially changed since the date of preliminary plat approval, in which case the request shall be forwarded to the planning commission. The planning commission may deny the request if it determines that development conditions have substantially changed, and such conditions shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting. A request for the extension must be submitted to the Development Officer prior to the five (5) year deadline date. Such extensions shall be for a period of one (1) year, and may be renewed annually. 
4.4.12 Planning Commission Action on a Final Plat : 
A. Approval Process : The planning commission shall make its determination to either approve or disapprove a final plat within thirty (30) days after the plat submittal deadline on which the plat is presented to the Development Officer. An approved certificate and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over the signature of the Planning Commission Chairperson and Secretary. The Planning Commission shall approve a final plat if it conforms to the following: 
1. The Comprehensive Plan and any general plans of the City of Santa Fe and its current and future streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, and public utility facilities; 
2. The general plans for the extension of the City of Santa Fe and its roads, streets, and public highways within the City of Santa Fe and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), taking into account access to and extension of sewer and water mains and; and 
3. The provisions of these regulations. 
B. Automatic Approval : If no action is taken by the planning commission at the end of the thirty (30) day time period, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. A certificate by the Development Officer as to date of submission of the plat for final approval and failure of the planning commission to act thereon within such time, shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval. 
C. Disapproval : If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be signed by the Planning Commission Chairman and transmitted with the mylar and prints to the applicant. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts of the regulations and plans with which the plat does not comply. 
D. Construction Approvals : Once the final plat has been approved by the planning commission and the construction plans have been approved by the Development Officer, permits may be issued for the construction of the permanent public improvements indicated on the construction plans. 
4.4.13 Approval and Recording of Plats Required : 
A. Deadline to File Plat : No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall be filed in the office of the Galveston County Clerk until it has been approved by the planning commission as required. All final plats shall be filed within one (1) year of the date of acceptance by the planning commission, and no lots shall be sold by full title transfer from any plat until recorded. Failure to record the plat within one (1) year of the date of administrative or commission approval, shall void all approvals thereto, unless an extension is granted by the planning commission. 
B. Issuance of Building Permits : No building permit shall be issued by the City until the Development Officer has received the following items necessary for filing the plat with the Galveston County Clerk: 
1. Two (2) reproducible mylars of the final plat; 
2. Five (5) true to copies of the final plat (prepared after all signatures are on the mylars); 
3. Tax certificates stating that no taxes are delinquent against the property; 
4. A title search or platting letter, current to within sixty days (60) of filing the final plat, certifying to at least the following concerning the title to the land: A statement of records examined and date of examination; description of the property in question, including a metes and bounds description of the tract; name of the fee owner as of the date of examination, and the date, file number, date of filing, and volume and page of any lienholders; and general description of any easement or fee strips granted along with the file number, date of filing, and volume and page of recording. 
5. The appropriate filing fees. 
6. An agreement waiving any claim for damages against the City occasioned by the alteration by the subdivider of the surface of any portion of existing streets and alleys. Said agreement to be required of the subdivider shall be as shown in Form #9. (See Form #1 at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
C. Additional Documents Necessary to File the Plat : The final plat, as approved by the planning commission for the purpose of constructing streets, utilities and other commission required improvements to the subdivision, shall not be recorded in the Office of the Galveston County Clerk until such time as the requirements in this section have been met. The following requirements shall be met and tendered with a letter of transmittal to the Development Officer two (2) working days prior to the filing of the plat with the Galveston County Clerk: 
1. A certificate, signed by the subdivider's registered engineer, declaring that all infrastructure improvements have been completed and are in compliance with the submitted and approved construction plans; as shown on Form #10. (See Form #10 at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
2. A reproducible set of as-built plans. Such as-built plans shall be accompanied by an estimate and quantity sheet indicating quantities for streets, drainage and utility construction along with all structural appurtenances to be dedicated to the public as part of the proposed subdivision. 
3. If applicable, a maintenance bond, as required by the City of Santa Fe. 
D. Filing of plat : 
1. It shall be unlawful for a subdivider or his agent to sell or lease lots in a subdivision unless the City has filed the final plat in the Office of the Galveston County Clerk. 
2. Prior to the actual construction of the subdivision and the dedication of public improvements, the City may file the final plat with in the Office of the Galveston County Clerk if the subdivider follows the process described in Article 5 of this Ordinance, and if that process has been approved by the Planning Commission. 
3. Within two (2) business days of receipt and approval of all documents necessary to file a final plat, the Development Officer shall file such plat with the Galveston County Clerk. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the city until such time as the final plat has been filed. After the plat has been filed, the Development Officer shall issue to the subdivider a certificate stating that the plat has been reviewed and approved by the City of Santa Fe. 
FORMS 
FORM #1: Development Officer's Approval of a Minor Plat 

Approved this _______ day of 19___, as a minor plat, by the Development Officer of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, as authorized by the City of Santa Fe Code, and Section 212.0065 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
Development Officer 

 
FORM #2: Authorization to Subdivide Statement 

I (we), the undersigned, being the legal owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, hereby designate (print name of agent) as my (our) agent, duly authorized to act on my (our) behalf in matters pertaining to the platting of this property. 
     Owner(s) 

 
  
FORM #3: Surveyor's Statement 

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That I _______, do hereby certify that I made an actual and accurate survey of the platted land, and that the corner monuments shown on the foregoing plat were properly placed under my personal supervision, in accordance with the Subdivision and Development Ordinance of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
   Signature of Surveyor 
Texas Registration Number 
 
FORM #4: Statement of Approval by the Santa Fe Planning Commission 

Approved this _______ day of 19___, by the Santa Fe Planning Commission of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
      Chairperson 
        Secretary 
 
FORM #5: Certificate of Ownership and Dedication 

THE STATE OF TEXAS, COUNTY OF Galveston 
This is to certify that I (we), [name(s) of owner(s)], am (are) the legal owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, being the tract of land as conveyed to me (us) by deed dated and recorded in Volume, Page, of the Deed Records of Galveston County, Texas, and designated herein as the (Subdivision Name) in the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
FURTHER, I (we), the undersigned, do hereby DEDICATE to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements, and public places shown on this plat for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. 
      Owner(s) 
All signatures shall be acknowledged by a Notary Public. 

 
FORM #6: Replatting Statement 

If the plat is a replat under Section 212.015 or 212.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the following paragraph shall be added to the Certificate of Ownership and Dedication: 
FURTHER, [(we), the undersigned, do hereby certify that this replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. 

 
FORM #7: Lien Holders Statement 

I (we), [Name(s) of mortgagee(s)], owner(s) and holder(s) of a lien (or liens) against the property shown on this plat, said lien(s) being evidenced by instrument of record in Volume _______, Page _______, of the Deed Records of Galveston County, Texas, do hereby in all things subordinate our interest in said property to the purposes and effects of said plat and the dedications and restrictions shown herein to said plat. Further, I (we) hereby confirm that I am (we are) the present owner(s) of said lien(s) and have not assigned the same nor any part thereof. 
    Lienholder(s) 
Note: All lienholder signatures shall be acknowledged by a Notary Public. 

 
FORM #8: Statement of Restrictions, Conditions, or Covenants Running with the Land 

RESTRICTIONS, CONDITION AND COVENANT 
RUNNING WITH THE LAND 
This plat has been approved by the City of Santa Fe pursuant to the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) powers in effect on the approval date with the following restriction, condition and covenant which is hereby agreed to by the developer of this subdivision as well as any other present property owner in said subdivision. In the event the undersigned developer or any person, 
firm or corporation who shall acquire property in this subdivision subsequent to this date, shall request additional improvements to bring such subdivision standards required within the corporate limits of the city or up to greater standards than are required for a subdivision in the ETJ of the city, then one hundred (100) percent of the cost of such improvements shall be borne by the then property owners of said subdivision and this obligation regarding the cost of additional improvements to said property of this subdivision shall be considered a restriction, condition, and covenant running with the land of all property or properties in said subdivision to bind the then owners of the property in said subdivision. Any future conveyance of property in this subdivision shall reference a statement in said conveyance setting out the aforementioned restriction, condition and covenant running with the land. 

 
FORM #9: Waiver of City's Liability Statement 

THE STATE OF TEXAS, COUNT OF GALVESTON 
In accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, said in consideration of the approval of (Name of Subdivision) Subdivision, (Name of Owner) does hereby waive any and all claims for damages against the City of Santa Fe, Galveston County, Texas, occasioned by the establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface of any portion of existing streets and alleys to conform to the grades established in the above-named subdivision. 
      Owner(s) 

 
FORM #10: Engineer's Statement of Accuracy and Compliance 

I (we), (Name of Surveyor or Firm), an individual or firm offering engineering services to the public, have (has) been designated by the owner(s) to design and prepare plans and specifications for the physical improvements to the subdivision known as (Name of Subdivision), located in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
The undersigned certifies that such person has reviewed the as-built drawings, reports of test results and inspections, the accompanying engineering documents and certifications. Engineering computations have been made to adjust and/or confirm the capacities of the as-built drainage system and the adequacy of the physical improvements (and are available for physical examination in the offices of the City of Santa Fe upon request) to assure that the minimum requirements of the applicable sections of the City Code of the City of Santa Fe have been achieved. 
The undersigned further recommends that the subdivision known as (Name of Subdivision), be approved and accepted by the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
Signature of Engineer       Date    
Texas Registration   
Firm Name       
Business       
City       State   Zip Code  

 
Form #11: Standard plat notes. 
1.  Buildings, fences and other structures shall not be erected in City of Santa Fe or Galveston County Drainage District No. 1. rights-of-way or drainage easements. Permanent structures are prohibited in utility easements except surface parking lots, drives and non-permanent landscaping. 
2.  The detention and drainage facilities are to be maintained by the property owner(s) or Property Owner(s) Association. 
3.  No building permit shall be issued for any lot within this subdivision until a detention and drainage plan has been approved by the Galveston County Drainage District No. 1 or the City of Santa Fe. 
4.  Additional drainage easements may be required at the time a drainage plan is submitted to Galveston County Drainage District No. 1. for approval. 
5.  Plantings, flower beds, other landscaping or fill materials are not permitted in side lot drainage swales or drainage/detention easements. Maintenance of side lot drainage swales or detention easements are the responsibility of the property owner. 
6.  All lot drainage will be Type A, lot drains from back to front, unless otherwise approved by the Galveston County Drainage District No. 1 or the City of Santa Fe and shown on the approved drainage plan. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Secs. 9—14) 
ARTICLE 5
Assurance for Completion and Maintenance of Improvements  
Section 5.1 - Improvements and Subdivision Improvement Agreement 
5.1.1 Completion of Improvements : Before the final subdivision plat is signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the Planning Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the Development Officer, all the street, sanitary and other public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in these regulations, specified in the final subdivision plat and as approved by the Planning Commission, and to dedicate those public improvements to the City of Santa Fe, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements. 
5.1.2 Subdivision Improvement Agreement and Guarantee: 
A. Agreement : The Planning Commission in its sole discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approval of the final subdivision plat and, as an alternative, permit the applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement by which the subdivider covenants to complete all required public improvements no later than two (2) years following the date on which the Chairman of the Planning Commission signs the final subdivision plat. The applicant shall covenant to maintain each required public improvement for a period of one (1) year following the acceptance by the Planning Commission of the dedication of that completed public improvement and also shall warrant that all required public improvements will be free from defect for a period of two (2) years following the acceptance by the Planning Commission of the dedication of the last completed public improvement. The subdivision improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions agreed to by the applicant and the Planning Commission. 
B. Covenants to Run : The subdivision improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the subdivider. The subdivision improvement agreement shall be adopted by the Planning Commission, and when necessary, the Planning Commission, pursuant to applicable Texas and Santa Fe laws and shall be recorded in the Office of the County Clerk of Galveston County. 
C. Security: Whenever the Planning Commission permits an applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement, it shall require the applicant to provide a letter of credit or cash escrow as security for the promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement. Either security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements, including lot improvements. The issuer of the letter of credit or the escrow agent, as applicable, shall be acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
1. Letter of Credit : If the applicant posts a letter of credit as security for promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the credit shall (1) be irrevocable; (2) be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods in Section 5.1(2)(a); and (3) require only that the government present the credit with a sight draft and an affidavit signed by the Santa Fe Municipal Attorney attesting to the City of Santa Fe's right to draw funds under the credit. 
2. Cash Escrow : If the applicant posts a cash escrow as security for promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the escrow instructions shall provide: (1) that the subdivider will have no right to a return of any of the funds except as provided in section 5.2 (2)(b); and (2) that the escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to the City of Santa Fe whenever the Santa Fe Municipal Attorney presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the City of Santa Fe's right to receive funds whether or not the subdivider protests that right. 
If and when the City of Santa Fe accepts the offer of dedication for the last completed required public improvement, the City shall execute a waiver of its right to receive all but twenty-five percent (25%) of the funds represented by the letter of credit or cash escrow if the subdivider is not in breach of the subdivision improvement agreement. The residual funds shall be security for the subdivider's covenant to maintain the required public improvements and its warranty that the improvements are free from defect. 
5.1.3 Temporary Improvement : The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the Planning Commission and shall maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the Planning Commission: Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the City of Santa Fe a separate subdivision improvement agreement and a letter of credit or cash escrow in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, which agreement and credit or escrow shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
5.1.4 Costs of Improvements : All required improvements shall be made by the developer, at its expense, without reimbursement by the City of Santa Fe or any improvement district except that, as may be allowed under Texas law, the developer may form or cause to be formed a special district or districts to construct and finance the construction of required public improvements excluding lot improvements on individual lots. If the subdivider does form or cause to be formed a special district for the purposes identified in this section, the City of Santa Fe shall not release the subdivider from its obligations under any subdivision improvement agreement nor shall the City release any security, in whole or in part, until the special district has sold bonds or otherwise certifies to the City of Santa Fe that it has an absolute right to raise revenues sufficient to construct, maintain, and warrant the quality of the required public improvements. 
5.1.5 Failure to Complete Improvement : For subdivisions for which no subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the Planning Commission in the resolution approving the plat, the preliminary plat approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and security has been posted and required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the City of Santa Fe may then: (1) declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; (2) suspend final subdivision plat approval until the improvements are completed and record a document to that effect for the purpose of public notice; (3) obtain funds under the security and complete improvements itself or through a third party; (4) assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete improvements in the subdivision; (5) exercise any other rights available under the law. 
5.1.6 Acceptance of Dedication Offers : Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by the Santa Fe City Council. The approval of a subdivision plat by the Planning Commission, whether preliminary or final, shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the City of Santa Fe of any street, easement, or park shown on the plat. The Planning Commission may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Sec. 15)  
Section 5.2 - Inspection of Improvements 
5.2.1 General Procedure and Fees : The Development Officer shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the City of Santa Fe an inspection fee based on the estimated cost of inspection, and where the improvements are completed prior to final plat approval, the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission unless the inspection fee has been paid at the time of application. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City of Santa Fe and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the Development Officer finds upon inspection that any one or more of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the City of Santa Fe's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for properly completing the improvements. 
5.2.2 Release or Reduction of Security: 
A. Certificate of Satisfactory Completion : The City Council shall not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce the amount of any security posted by the subdivider until the Development Officer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until (1) the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the City of Santa Fe, through submission of a detailed "as-built" survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Planning Commission, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision, and (2) a title search, current to within sixty (60) days of submission, has been completed and furnished to and approved by the City of Santa Fe Attorney and (3) the Developer has signed and submitted a certificate to the Development Officer, in a form as approved by the City of Santa Fe Attorney attesting that the improvements have been completed, are ready for dedication to the City of Santa Fe, and are free and clear of any and all mechanic's and material men's liens and encumbrances. Release of Lien Certificates may also be required. Upon such approval and recommendation the City Council shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. 
B. Reduction of Escrow Funds and Security : If the security posted by the subdivider was a cash escrow, the amount of that escrow shall be reduced upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall a cash escrow be reduced below twenty-five per cent (25%) of the principal amount. Funds held in the escrow account shall not be released to the subdivider, in whole or in part, except upon express written instructions of the Santa Fe City Manager. At the end of the maintenance and warranty periods, all escrow funds, if any, shall be released to the subdivider. If the security provided by the subdivider was a letter of credit, the City of Santa Fe shall execute waivers of the City of Santa Fe's right to draw funds under the credit upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall waivers be executed that would reduce the security below twenty five percent (25%) of its original amount. 
(Ordinance No. 24-2001 of September 27, 2001; Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Sec. 16)  
Section 5.3 - Escrow Deposits for Lot Improvements 
5.3.1 Acceptance of Escrow Funds : Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any lot improvements required by the subdivision regulations cannot be performed, the Development Officer may issue a certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety, or general welfare upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the City Manager for the cost of the lot improvements. The subdivision improvement agreement and security covering the lot improvements shall remain in full force and effect. 
5.3.2 Procedures on Escrow Fund : All required improvements for which escrow moneys have been accepted by the Development Officer at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the subdivider within a period of nine (9) months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the improvements have not been properly installed at the end of the time period, the Development Officer shall give two (2) weeks written notice to the developer requiring it to install the improvements, and if they are not then installed properly, the Development Officer may request the City Council to proceed to contract out the work for the installation of the necessary improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. At the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow moneys are being deposited with the Development Officer, the developer shall obtain and file with the Development Officer prior to obtaining the certificate of occupancy a notarized statement from the purchaser or purchasers of the premises authorizing the Development Officer to install the improvements at the end of the nine-month period if the improvements have not been duly installed by the subdivider. 
5.3.3 Maintenance of Improvements : The developer shall be required to maintain all required public improvements on the individual subdivided lots if required by the City Council, until acceptance of the improvements by the City Council. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the City of Santa Fe, the City may on twelve (12) hours notice effect emergency repairs and charge those costs to the developer. Following the acceptance of the dedication of any public improvement by the City of Santa Fe, the City may, in its sole discretion require the subdivider to maintain the improvement for a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Secs. 17, 18)  
Section 5.5 - Deferral or Waiver of Required Improvements 
5.5.1 The Planning Commission may defer or waive at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or nonexistence of connecting facilities. Any determination to defer or waive the provision of any public improvement must be made on the record and the reasons for the deferral or waiver also shall be expressly made on the record. 
5.5.2 Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to defer the construction of any improvement required under these regulations because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or nonexistent connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his pro-rata share of the costs of the future improvements to the City of Santa Fe prior to signing of the final subdivision plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission, or the developer may execute a separate subdivision improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred improvements upon demand of the City of Santa Fe.  
Section 5.6 - Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy 
5.6.1 When a subdivision improvement agreement and security have been required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the required public improvements and the acceptance of the dedication of those improvements by the City of Santa Fe, as required in the Planning Commission's approval of the final subdivision plat. 
5.6.2 The extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupants and by police and fire equipment prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. The developer shall, at the time of the offer of dedication, submit moneys in escrow to the City of Santa Fe in a sum determined by the City Manager for the necessary final improvement of the street. 
5.6.3 No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent (10%) of lots in a subdivision, or of ten percent (10%) be less than two (2), for the final two (2) lots of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the Planning Commission for the subdivision have been fully completed and the City of Santa Fe has accepted the developer's offer(s) to dedicate the improvements.  
Section 5.7 - Consumer Protection Legislation and Conflicts of Interest Statutes 
5.7.1 No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted or issued to a developer if its authorized agent has violated any federal, Texas or local law pertaining to (1) consumer protection, or (2) real estate land sales, promotion, or practices; or (3) any applicable conflicts-of-interest legislation with respect to the lot or parcel of land which is the subject of the permit or certificate, until a court of competent jurisdiction so orders. 
5.7.2 With respect to any lot or parcel of land described in the immediately preceding section, if a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been granted or issued, it may be revoked by the City of Santa Fe until a court of competent jurisdiction orders otherwise, provided that in no event shall the rights of intervening innocent third parties in possession of a certificate of occupancy be prejudiced by any such revocation. 
5.7.3 Any violation of a federal, Texas, or local consumer protection law, including, but not limited to: the Postal Reorganization Act of 1970; the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1970; the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act; the Truth in Lending Act; the Uniform Commercial Credit Code; or any conflicts of interest statute, law, or ordinance shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to all of the penalties and proceedings as set forth in this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 6
Requirements for Improvements, Reservations, and Design  
Section 6.1 - General Improvements 
6.1.1 Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations . In addition to the requirements established in these regulations, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations: 
A. All applicable statutory provisions. 
B. The City of Santa Fe zoning ordinance, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions. 
C. The Official Comprehensive Plan, and Capital Improvements Program of the City of Santa Fe, including all streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the Comprehensive Plan as adopted. 
D. The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the Galveston County Health Department and/or appropriate state or sub-state agencies. 
E. The rules of the Texas Department of Transportation if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
F. The standards and regulations adopted by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer and all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the City of Santa Fe. 
G. All pertinent standards contained within the planning guides published by the applicable regional or metropolitan planning commission or Metropolitan Council of Governments. 
H. The rules and guidelines established by the United States Postal Service for centralized mailbox delivery. 
I. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above laws, regulations, guidelines, and policies as well as the purposes of these regulations. 
J. The Subdivider shall bear the cost of all engineering review, approval and consulting fees associated with the subdivision approval process. An estimate of such costs will be provided to the Subdivider prior to application acceptance. Costs accrued, exceeding this estimate, shall be payable before acceptance of the improvements by the City. Unused funds will be returned to the Subdivider within 60 days of a final accounting of cost; no interest on unused funds shall be paid during this period. No construction permits shall be issued for any improvements of property within the subdivision until all accounts have been settled to the satisfaction of the City. Accounts that cannot be reasonably settled because of unforeseen events or conditions may be presented to City Council; Council may defer payment, cancel the debt or make such other arrangement that it deems to be in the public interest. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 1) 
6.1.2 Adequate Public Facilities . No preliminary plat shall be approved unless the Planning Commission determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the Planning Commission, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities by possible uses of said subdivision. Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy will include streets, sewerage, and water service. 
1.  A traffic impact analysis shall be required when more than one entrance to the proposed development is required by the Santa Fe Fire Marshal. Any engineering review expenses shall be charged to the developer before final plat submittal. 
2.  Letters of Correctness are required from utility companies indicating development acceptability including water, sewer, electric, gas and cable and must be included with the plat application. 
A. Periodically the City Council will establish by resolution, after public hearing, guidelines for the determination of the adequacy of public facilities and services. To provide the basis for the guidelines, the Planning Commission must prepare an analysis of current growth and the amount of additional growth that can be accommodated by future public facilities and services. The Planning Commission must also recommend any changes in preliminary plat approval criteria it finds appropriate in the light of its experience in administering these regulations. 
B. The applicant for a preliminary plat must, at the request of the Planning Commission, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities and services by possible uses of said subdivision. 
C. Comprehensive Plan Consistency Required . Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the City of Santa Fe comprehensive plan and all applicable capital improvements plans. 
D. Water . All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. Exception: see Section 6.5, Water Facilities. 
E. Wastewater . All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. Exception: see Section 6.6, Sewerage Facilities. 
F. Storm-water Management . Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The City of Santa Fe may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
G. Streets . Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation; shall be property related to the comprehensive plan; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. 
H. Extension Policies . All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. The City of Santa Fe may require the applicant of a subdivision to extend off-site improvements to reach the subdivision or oversize required public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of plat approval. 
I. Future Utility Easements . When the provisions of this ordinance do not require the connection of the subdivision to existing utility systems the subdivider shall, in any event, create accommodations for future utilities as follows: 
1. Provide dedicated utility easements for the installation of domestic water, sanitary sewer, storm water, gas, power, communications and other services similarly distributed to the community. Such easements shall be coordinated with dedicated streets, lot configurations, reserves, drainage and other significant site features to permit installation of such utilities at a future date. Special emphasis shall be given to connecting links with anticipated utility systems external to the subdivision, provisions for looping and double feed, lift and pumping stations sites, access by heavy equipment, and service connections to property beyond the current subdivision. 
2. No engineering is required to be performed by the subdivider but the city may reserve a reasonable time to plan and engineer the easements parameters. The city shall submit an easement plan to the subdivider within 90 days of the rejection of the plat submittal if such rejection is based on this paragraph. 
3. The plat shall clearly state that permanent structures are prohibited in utility easements except surface parking lots, drives and non-permanent landscaping. The minimum easement width shall be ten (10) feet except that an easement may lie astride and parallel to a property line in which event the minimum easement on each adjoining lot shall be not less than eight (8) feet. Where easements are placed in mandatory yard setbacks, (re: Zoning Ordinance), and such minimum yards are less than the above utility easement widths, such utility easements may be reduced to the mandatory yard width. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 2) 
6.1.3 Self-imposed Restrictions . If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning Ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference to those restrictions may be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the Planning Commission may require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds in a form to be approved by the City Attorney. 
6.1.4 Plats Straddling Municipal Boundaries . Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in another city, the Planning Commission may request assurance from the City of Santa Fe Attorney that access is legally established, and from Development Officer that the access street is adequately improved, or that a guarantee has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access street. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. 
6.1.5 Monuments . The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required in these regulations and as approved by a registered land surveyor. 
A. Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections, angle points of curve and block corners. They shall be spaced so as to be within sight of each other, the sight lines being contained wholly within the street limits. 
B. The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be recorded in the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than thirty (30) inches in length, not less than four (4) inches square or five (5) inches in diameter, and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded; or by iron rods or pipes at least thirty (30) inches long and two (2) inches in diameter. These monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line and at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line, and at all angle points along the meander line, those points to be not less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of any river or stream, except that when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed in the side line of the street. 
C. All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be recorded in the field by like monuments as described above. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at a point where a curve changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line. 
D. The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be recorded in the field by iron pipes at least thirty (30) inches long and seven-eighths ( 7/8 ) inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least thirty (30) inches long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream lot line, with a meander line established not less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
E. All monuments required by these regulations shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be removed by frost. 
F. All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time the Planning Commission recommends approval of the final plat. 
6.1.6 Character of the Land . Land that the Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features that will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the Planning Commission, upon recommendation of the Development Officer, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve any danger to public health, safety, and welfare. 
6.1.7 Subdivision Name . The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Planning Commission shall have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined during sketch plat approval. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Sec. 19)  
Section 6.2 - Lot Improvements 
6.2.1 Lot Arrangement . The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and Galveston County Health Regulations, and in providing driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved street. 
6.2.2 Lot Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the Planning Commission may require that those lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and these regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. The lot width on corner lots shall be increased to reflect the increase in the side building setbacks. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ordinance No. 07-2007 of March 8, 2007) 
6.2.3 Lot Orientation . The lot line common to the street right-of-way shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and a similar line across the street. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear line does not abut the side line of an adjacent lot. 
6.2.4 Double Frontage Lots and Access to Lots . 
A. Double Frontage Lots . Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
B. Access from Major and Secondary Arterials . Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary street. Where driveway access from a major or secondary street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Planning Commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street. Where possible, driveways shall be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major and secondary arterials. 
6.2.5 Soil Preservation, Grading, and Seeding . 
A. Soil Preservation and Final Grading . No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plat and the lot pre-covered with soil with an average depth of at least four (4) inches which shall contain no particles more than two (2) inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least four (4) inches of cover on the lots and at least four (4) inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
B. Lot Drainage . Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
C. Lawn-Grass Seed and Sod . Lawn seed, sod, or plugs shall be required for each lot in a residential subdivision. 
6.2.6 Debris and Waste . No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of those items and materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. No items and materials as described in the preceding sentence shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of any subdivision improvement agreement or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. 
6.2.7 Water Bodies and Watercourses . If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The Planning Commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a City of Santa Fe responsibility. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum area of a lot required under the Zoning Ordinance may be satisfied by land that is under water. Where a watercourse separates the useable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, of design approved by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer.  
Section 6.3 - Streets 
6.3.1 General Requirements 
A. Frontage on Improved Streets . No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing street as shown on the comprehensive plan, or unless such street is: 
1. An existing state, county, or township highway; or 
2. A street shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the County Recorder of Deeds' office. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the highway rules, regulations, specifications, or orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under these subdivision regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these subdivision regulations. Wherever the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing street frontage, the street shall be suitably improved as provided above. 
3. Where vehicular traffic loads resulting from the subdivision exceed the existing capacity of access roads, such roads shall be improved by upgrading pavement, increasing street width, or both, and shall be improved from the subdivision to the nearest existing public road capable of handling the imposed traffic. Costs for such improvements shall be shared based upon a Rough Proportionality Study performed by a qualified traffic engineer selected by the city. The costs and procedures shall be in accordance to Texas Local Government Code Section 212.904. 
4. Fire and Emergency access; Where residential development contains 30 or more dwelling units on a single street, a secondary emergency access will be required as specified in the adopted International Fire Code. Access plans must be approved by the Santa Fe Fire Marshal. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 3) 
B. Grading and Improvement Plan . Streets shall be graded and improved and conform to the City of Santa Fe construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval. 
C. Classification . All streets shall be classified as arterials, collectors, or local streets. In classifying streets, the City of Santa Fe shall consider projected traffic demands after 20 years of development. 
D. Topography and Arrangement . 
1. Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local streets shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many building sites as possible at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. 
2. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established by the Comprehensive Plan. 
3. All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
4. Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
5. The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern is discouraged, and the use of curvilinear streets, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
6. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Planning Commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracks. 
7. In business and industrial developments, the streets and other access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
E. Blocks 
1. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, rail streets, or waterways. 
2. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed two thousand two hundred (2,200) feet or twelve (12) times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, nor be less than four hundred (400) feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collector streets shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length. 
3. In long blocks the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. 
4. Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required by the Planning Commission through the center of blocks more than eight hundred (800) feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the Planning Commission for prospective use. 
F. Access to Primary Arterials : Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the Planning Commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
1. The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the primary arterial, and screening shall be provided in an eight foot (8') landscape easement along the rear property line of such lots. 
2. A series of U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the primary arterial. 
3. A marginal access or service street (separated from the primary arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access at suitable points). 
G. Street Names . Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other street names in the municipality so as not to cause confusion. A street which is (or is planned as) a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to determine street names. Street names will be verified by 911 services for uniqueness. 
H. Street Regulatory Signs . All street and traffic control signs shall be installed by the developer, at developer's expense, before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any structure. Street name signs shall be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be approved by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer. 
I. Street Lights . Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with design and specification standards approved by the City of Santa Fe. The subdivider shall install and shall prepay the estimated costs attributable to street lighting for a period of three years. 
J. Reserve Strips . The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to the street. 
K. Construction of Streets and Dead-end Streets . 
1. Construction of Streets . The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and where the continuation is in accordance with the City of Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a dead-end street, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T-or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. The Planning Commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
2. Dead-end Streets (Permanent) . Where a street does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the Planning Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than fifty (50) feet. However, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with City of Santa Fe construction standards and specifications. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
6.3.2 Design Standards 
A. General : In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, sanitation, and street-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties. Street design and construction standards shall be adopted annually by the Planning Commission and shall be provided to the public by the Development Officer. 
1. Residential developments with 30 units or more shall have an access plan approved by the Santa Fe Fire Marshal. 
B. Street Surfacing and Improvements: After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the developer shall surface or cause to be surfaced streets to the widths prescribed in these regulations. All surfacing shall be of a character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the Planning Commission, City of Santa Fe Development Officer, or City Council and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. Street design and construction standards shall be adopted bi-annually by the Planning Commission and shall be provided to the public by the Development Officer. 
C. Right-of-Way Width and Paving: The minimum right-of-way width is dependent on the type of street, either arterial, collector or local. 
1. Arterial streets require a right-of-way width minimum of 80 feet up to 120 feet; recommended pavement width 60 feet to 100 feet. 
2. Collector streets require a right-of-way width minimum of 60 feet up to 70 feet; recommended pavement of 28 feet to 49 feet 
3. Local streets require a minimum of 60 feet of right-of-way; minimum of 29 feet of pavement. 
D. Excess Right-of-Way: Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to-one. 
E. Railstreets and Limited Access Highways: Railstreet rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
1. In residential districts a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railstreet right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structure on this land is prohibited. 
2. In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railstreet right-of-way shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance from the railstreet right-of-way to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
3. When streets parallel to the railstreet right-of-way intersect a street which crosses the railstreet right-of-way at grade, they shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
F. Intersections: 
1. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission. 
2. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. 
3. Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) local streets shall be at least twenty (20) feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
4. Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent (2%) rate at a distance of sixty (60) feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
5. Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance. 
6. The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be three percent (3%) or less. 
G. Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the City of Santa Fe. The sharing expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the Planning Commission, will be fixed by special agreement between the City Council and the applicant. The cost of bridges that do not solely benefit the developer shall be charged to the developer pro rata based on the percentage obtained by dividing the service area of the bridge into the area of the land being developed by the subdivider. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 4) 
6.3.3 Road Dedications and Reservations . 
A. New Perimeter Streets : Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Planning Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within its own subdivision boundaries. 
B. Widening and Realignment of Existing Streets . Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Comprehensive Plan Official Map, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at its expense those areas for widening or realignment of those streets. Frontage roads and streets as described above shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at its own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations when the applicant's development activities contribute to the need for the road expansion. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance whether the land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee simple or an easement is granted to the City of Santa Fe. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Secs. 20—23)  
Section 6.4 - Drainage and Storm Sewers 
6.4.1 General Requirements : The Planning Commission shall not approve any plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and flood water runoff channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed according to methods as approved by the Planning Commission, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. Storm drainage systems shall conform to the provisions of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance for storm water detention. Design criteria shall be as set out in the City of Santa Fe Engineering Design Specifications and the Galveston County Drainage District #1 Criteria Manual, January 2020 edition. Small projects meeting city design standards and city design criteria may be exempted from detention requirements in whole or in part. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 5) 
6.4.2 Nature of Storm Water Facilities : 
A. Location . The applicant may be required by the Planning Commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications. 
B. Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers . 
1. Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to the specifications of the Development Officer. However, in subdivisions containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved out-fall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the Development Officer. 
2. If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer and the Planning Commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by a public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the subdivision improvement agreement required for the subdivision plat. 
C. Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas : A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. Development Officer shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Ordinance. 
D. Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas : The City of Santa Fe Development Officer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. City of Santa Fe drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the expansion of the existing downstream drainage facility. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 
E. Areas of Poor Drainage : Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is subject to flooding, the Planning Commission may approve such subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of the subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood plain, as determined by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer. The plat of the subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width that shall be sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or placed in the overflow zone. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the Development Officer. The Planning Commission may deny subdivision approval for areas of extremely poor drainage. 
F. Flood Plain Areas : The Planning Commission may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property that lies within the flood plain of any stream or drainage course. These flood plain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps, except at the discretion of the Planning Commission. 
G. Detention Basins and Facilities: 
1.  Maintenance of private detention basins and facilities shall be the responsibility of the Property Owner(s) or Home Owners Association. Evidence of the maintenance agreement shall be required at time of final plat approval. 
2.  A minimum four-foot high fence is required around a detention basin with slopes that are greater than 2:1 or have a vertical wall. 
(Ordinance No. 30-2007 of December 13, 2007, Sec. 1) 
6.4.3 Dedication of Drainage Easements : 
A. General Requirements : When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage-way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
B. Drainage Easements : 
1. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
2. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
3. The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by a drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses to a distance to be determined by the Planning Commission. 
4. Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedures nor for computing the area requirement of any lot. 
5. Drainage easements and drainage access easements shall be provided for all drainage structures and systems. Drainage easements shall not be combined with utility easements. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 6)  
Section 6.5 - Water Facilities 
6.5.1 General Requirements : 
A. When a public water main is not accessible, the developer shall take necessary action to extend or create a water-supply district for the purpose of providing a water-supply system capable of providing for domestic water use and fire protection. 
B. When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of state or local authorities. All water mains shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter for residential development and at least eight (8) inches in diameter for commercial development. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 7) 
C. Water main extensions shall be approved by the Development Officer. 
D. The location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating, all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be borne by the developer and included in the subdivision improvement agreement and security to be furnished by the developer. 
6.5.2 Individual Wells and Central Water Systems . 
A. Where a public water system is not available and in the discretion of the Planning Commission, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in a manner so that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the Galveston County Health Department for its approval and individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the Galveston County Health Department, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and the Harris-Galveston County Subsidence District. Approvals shall be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to final subdivision plat approval along with documentation regarding maintenance and ownership for any central water system. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 8) 
B. If the Planning Commission requires that a connection to a public water main be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements prior to receiving final plat approval for future water service. Performance or cash bonds may be required to ensure compliance. 
(Ordinance No. 15-2007 of May 24, 2007) 
6.5.3 Fire Hydrants . Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions located within a water utility district per adopted International Fire Code and agreement with the water utility district. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and within 300 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the applicable fire protection unit. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. Outside an existing water district, the developer shall provide a fire protection system using alternative methodologies (ponds, pools, fire pumps, storage tanks or similar systems) as approved by the Santa Fe Fire Marshal. Minor Plats are exempt from using alternative methodologies. 
(Ordinance No. 08-2020 of April 23, 2020, Sec. 9)  
Section 6.6 - Sewerage Facilities 
6.6.1 General Requirements : The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the City of Santa Fe construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed and approved in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the City of Santa Fe. 
6.6.2 High-Density Residential and Nonresidential Districts : Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by the Development Officer. No individual disposal system or treatment plants (private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the installation of laterals in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines of the City of Santa Fe. 
6.6.3 Low- and Medium-Density Residential Districts : Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows: 
A. When a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible, the applicant shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision. 
B. When public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible but will become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed fifteen (15 years), the applicant may choose one of the following alternatives: 
1. Central sewerage system with the maintenance cost to be assessed against each property benefitted. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer mains; or 
2. Individual disposal systems, provided the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
C. When sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will not become available for a period in excess of fifteen (15) years, the applicant may install sewerage systems as follows: 
1. Medium-Density Residential Districts . Only a central sewerage system may be constructed. No individual disposal system will be permitted. Where plans exist for a public sewer system to be built, for a period in excess of fifteen (15) years, the applicant shall install all sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
2. Low-Density Residential District : Individual disposal systems or central sewerage systems shall be used. 
6.6.4 Mandatory Connection to Public Sewer System : If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the owner of the property shall be required to connect to the sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system. 
6.6.5 Individual Disposal System Requirements : If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance and percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the Development Officer and the results submitted to the Galveston County Health Department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the Development Officer. 
6.6.6 Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers : 
A. General Guidelines : These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances when considered justified by the Planning Commission. 
B. Design Factors : Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning regulations and the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented below should be adequate in each case for the particular type of development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area using the following criteria: 
Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers 
Land Use Categories 	Unit Design Flows 
One and Two-Family Dwellings 	.02 cubic feet per second 
(c.f.s.)/acre 
Apartments 	
 One and Two Story 	.02 c.f.s./acre 
 Three through Six Story 	.03 c.f.s./acre 
Commercial 	
 Small Stores, Offices, & Miscellaneous 	.02 c.f.s./acre 
 Shopping Centers 	.02 c.f.s./acre 
 High Rise 	As directed by the Development Officer 
Industrial 	As directed by the Development Officer 
 
These design factors shall apply to watersheds of 300 acres or less. Design factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and smaller than 1,000 acres shall be computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the applicable design factor for an area of 300 acres to a design factor of .01 c.f.s./acre for an area of 1,000 acres unless otherwise directed by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer. Design factors for watersheds larger than 1,000 acres shall be .01 c.f.s./acre unless otherwise directed by the Development Officer. 
C. Maximum Size : The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the Development Officer. 
D. Minimum Size : No public sewer shall be less than eight (8) inches in diameter. 
E. Minimum Slope : All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities when flowing full of not less than 2.0 feet per second. All velocity and flow calculations shall be based on the Manning Formula using an N value of 0.013. The design slopes shall be evenly divisible by four (4). The slopes shall be minimum for the size indicated. Exceptions to these minimum slopes shall be made at the upper end of lateral sewers serving under thirty (30) houses. 
Minimum Slopes for Sewer Size Indicated 
Sewer Size in Inches 	Minimum Slope (feet per 100 feet) 
9 	.33 
10 	.25 
12 	.20 
15 	.15 
16 	.11 
21 	.09 
24 	.08 
 
F. Alignment : All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer. 
G. Manhole Location : Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all changes in grade, size, or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances not greater than 500 feet for sewers 15 inches and smaller, and 500 feet for sewers 18 inches in diameter and larger. 
H. Manholes : The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches except where required to match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer, but in no case shall the diameter be less than forty eight (48) inches. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by the City of Santa Fe Development Officer. Inside drop manholes will require special considerations; however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less than that indicated above. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the smaller sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. The minimum drop through manholes shall be 0.2 feet. 
I. Sewerage Locations : Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements on private property, access shall be to all manholes. A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End lines shall be extended to provide access from street or alley right-of-way when possible. Imposed loading shall be considered in all locations. Not less than six (6) feet of cover shall be provided over the top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or three (3) feet in all other areas. 
J. Cleanouts and Lampholes : Cleanouts and lampholes will not be permitted. 
K. Water Supply Interconnections : There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply sources and structures. 
L. Relation of sewers to Water Mains : A minimum horizontal distance of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten (10) feet in each direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be required when the water main is at least two (2) feet above the sewer.  
Section 6.7 - Sidewalks 
6.7.1 Required Improvements : 
A. Sidewalks are required for all roads when curbs and gutters are provided. 
B. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement right-of-way of all streets. 
C. Sidewalks shall be improved as required in Section 6.3(2)B of these regulations. 
D. All required sidewalks shall be a minimum five feet in width, shall lie generally parallel with the property line and shall be placed fully on the right-of-way approximately one (1) foot from the right-of-way line. Alternatives to this configuration may be approved by the Development Officer, but in no case shall the sidewalks be installed less than two (2) feet from the curb in residential zones. 
E. Wheel chair accessible ramps shall be installed at all intersections and at all crosswalks and shall be configured in accordance with city specifications. 
F. Mid-block crosswalks and ramps shall be provided when the block length exceeds six (600) feet and wherever public walking, jogging, biking and bridle trails cross streets. The Development Officer shall determine when such devices are required under this provision. 
G. The installation of sidewalks may be deferred until completion of the improvements on the adjoining lot; however, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for such improvements until the required sidewalks are installed and approved by the city. 
6.7.2 Pedestrian Accesses : The Planning Commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the streets to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby streets, perpetual unobstructed easements at least twenty (20) feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Sec. 24)  
Section 6.8 - Utilities 
6.8.1 Location : All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Whenever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except when existing on public streets and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the Planning Commission, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary use. 
6.8.2 Easements : 
A. Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities (private and municipal) and such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties. 
B. When topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.  
Section 6.9 - Public Uses 
6.9.1 Recreation Areas, City Facilities and Streetscapes: 
A. Purpose and Authority: The City of Santa Fe has considered the projected growth in population and development within the municipality and determined that park and recreational facilities are needed to accommodate such growth as stated in the Comprehensive Plan and Parks Master Plan. Increased population growth also affects the city's general appearance by affecting the physical condition of streetscapes, neighborhoods, public spaces and business districts. The purpose of this Section is to ensure that there will be sufficient support of existing Community Parks or the creation of new, drug-free Neighborhood Parks which will meet the demand and needs of future residents for open space and parks. Support is also needed to beautify and improve the general appearance of the City as it grows. 
The regulations contained in this Section have been adopted under the authority of the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212 - Municipal Regulations Of Subdivision And Property Development, Chapter 51 - General Powers of Municipalities, and the Home Rule Charter of the City of Santa Fe. 
The City of Santa Fe has Community Parks which service the entire municipality. These parks require continued improvements to meet the needs of a growing population. As new residential units are permitted, a Community Park fee will be assessed for each unit. This per unit price shall be established by City Council, incorporated in the master permit fee schedule, and revised from time to time as needed by the City Council with a recommendation from the Parks Board. Community Park fees shall be held in reserve and used solely for the improvement and maintenance of existing and future Community Parks as well as city beautification projects that create a pleasant community appearance. 
(Ordinance No. 06-2014 of September 11, 2014) 
B. Neighborhood Park requirements: Drug-free Zone Neighborhood Parks are encouraged within individual developments. Drug-free Neighborhood Parks are intended for recreation and are open to the public. Certain playground equipment is required and must include three (3) or more separate apparatus intended for the recreation of children, such as slides, swing sets, and teeterboards. Community Park fees shall be fully mitigated with the development of a Neighborhood Park when minimum requirements are met. 
1.  Additional minimum amenities. 
A Neighborhood Park must have minimum amenities in order to get full Community Park fee credit (in addition to playground equipment, provide two (2) out of the following): 
a)  Covered pavilion 
b)  Hike/bike/walking trail 
c)  Hard surface court - basketball or tennis 
d)  Ball field - soccer, baseball or football 
e)  Picnic tables (one (for each 10,000 sq. ft.) 
f)  Park benches (one for each 7,500 sq. ft.) 
g)  Lighting 
2.  Pocket Parks are allowed within phased subdivisions so long as an overall park plan is submitted and meets minimum amenities. Minimum size of pocket park one-quarter (¼) acre. 
3.  A Neighborhood Park must front on a public road with at least forty (40) feet of frontage. 
4.  A Neighborhood Park must be recommended by the Parks Board and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission before a final plat is approved for the first phase of a subdivision. 
5.  Neighborhood Parks must be maintained by the Home Owners Association. Documentation must be provided at time of final plat submittal. 
6.  Trees required: 
a)  One eight-foot tall, two-inch caliper tree, measured four (4) feet above ground level, (developer's choice) per twenty-five hundred (2,500) sq. ft. of park area. 
b)  Existing trees of above minimum size can be used to meet tree requirements. Documentation required showing location and size of existing trees used to meet requirements 
7.  Construction of Neighborhood Park must be completed before building permits are issued. 
8.  Neighborhood Park areas shall be marked on preliminary and final plat as "Reserved for park and/or Recreational purposes." 
C. Other Recreation Reservations: The provisions of this section are minimum standards. None of the paragraphs above shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in addition to the requirements of this section. 
D. Alternative Procedure—Money in Lieu of Land : Where, with respect to a particular subdivision, the reservation of land required pursuant to this section does not equal the percentage of total land required to be reserved in Section 6.9(l)A, the Planning Commission shall require, prior to final approval of the subdivision plat, that the applicant deposit with the City Council a cash payment in lieu of land reservation. Such deposit shall be placed in a Neighborhood Park and Recreation Improvement Fund to be established by the City Council. The deposit shall be used by the City of Santa Fe for improvement of a neighborhood park, playground, or recreation area including the acquisition of property. The deposit must be used for facilities that actually will be available to and benefit the persons in the subdivision for which payment was made and be located in the general neighborhood or subdivision. The Planning Commission shall determine the amount to be deposited, based on the following formula: two hundred dollars ($200) multiplied by the number of times that the total area of the subdivision is divisible by the required minimum lot size of the zoning district in which it is located, less a credit for the amount of land actually reserved for recreation purposes, if any, as the land reserved bears in proportion to the land required for reservation in Section 6.9(l)(a), but not including any lands reserved through density zoning. 
E. Applicability to Land Utilizing Average Density . Any subdivision plat in which the principle of average density of flexible zoning has been utilized shall not be exempt from the provisions of its section, except as to such portion of land which is actually dedicated to the City of Santa Fe for park and recreation purposes. If no further area, other than the area to be reserved through averaging, is required by the Planning Commission, the full fee shall be paid as required in Section 6.9(l)(d). If further land is required for reservation, apart from that reserved by averaging, credit shall be given as provided by Section 6.9(l)D. 
F. Other Recreation Reservations : The provisions of this section are minimum standards. None of the paragraphs above shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in addition to the requirements of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 24-2007 of September 13, 2007; Ordinance No. 03-2008 of January 24, 2008, Secs. 1, 2; Ordinance No. 08-2008 of April 10, 2008, Secs. 1, 2) 
6.9.2 Other Public Uses : 
A. Plat to Provide for Public Uses : Except when an applicant utilizes planned unit development or density zoning in which land is set aside by the developer as required by the provision of the Zoning Ordinance, whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a school, recreation uses [in excess of the requirements of Section 6.9L, or other public use as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan or any portion thereof, the space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into its sketch plat. After proper determination of its necessity by the Planning Commission and the appropriate City of Santa Fe official or other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such site and a determination has been made to acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into the preliminary and final plats. 
B. Referral to Public Body : The Planning Commission shall refer the sketch plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and report. The Planning Commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency 30 days for reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition. 
C. Notice to Property Owner : Upon a receipt of an affirmative report, the Planning Commission shall notify the property owner and shall designate on the preliminary and final plats that area proposed to be acquired by the public body. 
D. Duration of Land Reservation : The acquisition of land reserved by a public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within twelve (12) months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a sketch plat of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed 12 months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and the freeing of the property for development in accordance with these regulations.  
Section 6.10 - Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities 
6.10.1 General : Existing features that would add value to residential development or to the City of Santa Fe as a whole, such as trees, as herein defined, watercourses and historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of grade. The sketch plat shall show the number and location of existing trees as required by these regulations and shall further indicate all those marked for retention and the location of all proposed shade trees required along the street side of each lot as required by these regulations. 
6.10.2 Shade Trees Planted by Developer : 
A. As a requirement of subdivision approval the applicant shall plant shade trees on the property of the subdivision. Such trees are to be planted within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way of the road or streets within and abutting the subdivision, or, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, within the right-of-way of such streets. One (1) tree shall be planted for every forty (40) feet of frontage along each road unless the Planning Commission, upon recommendation of the Santa Fe Development Officer, shall grant a waiver. The waiver shall be granted only if there are trees growing along the right-of-way or on the abutting property which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, comply with these regulations. 
B. New trees to be provided pursuant to these regulations shall be approved by the Santa Fe Development Officer and shall be planted in accordance with the regulations of the City. The trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter (measured twelve (12) inches above ground level) of not less than two (2) inches. Only indigenous long-lived shade trees, acceptable to the Planning Commission, shall be planted. 
6.10.3 Shade Tree Easement and Dedication : The preliminary plat and final plat shall reserve an easement authorizing the City of Santa Fe to plant shade trees within ten (10) feet of the required right-of-way. No street shall be accepted for dedication until the City of Santa Fe shall inform the Planning Commission and the City Council that compliance, where necessary, has been made with these regulations. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Secs. 25, 26)  
Section 6.11 - Nonresidential Subdivisions 
6.11.1 General : If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to the land shall make provision as the Planning Commission may require. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the Planning Commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the Planning Commission, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance. 
6.11.2 Standards : In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
A. Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
B. Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
C. Special requirements may be imposed by the City of Santa Fe with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
D. Special requirements may be imposed by the City of Santa Fe with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water drainage. 
E. Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
F. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential areas.  
Section 6.12 - Storm Water Pollution Prevention Measures 
6.12.1 General : The City of Santa Fe, as an operator of a small MS4 (municipal separate storm sewer system - MS4), is required to reduce the discharge of pollutants to water of the State and the United States to the "maximum extent practicable" to protect water quality. 
The City of Santa Fe is required to develop, implement, and enforce a program to reduce pollutants in runoff from construction activities disturbing greater than or equal to one acre (including smaller sites that are part of a greater common plan of development). The City of Santa Fe also requires construction site operators to implement erosion and sediment control Best Management Practices (BMPs) and to control waste. 
6.12.2 Requirements for developers : Any subdivision with development disturbing one or more acres shall provide the following measures prior to any soil disturbance, clearing, grading, or excavation to manage storm water pollution during and after development. 
A. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). 
1. Using the guidelines found in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permits for Storm Water Discharges from Construction Activities, prepare a SWPPP. 
2. Certify the SWPPP and file a Notice of Intent (NOI) with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under the TPDES General Permit TXR150000, if required by the State. Individual permits may also be applied for from TCEQ. 
3. Send a copy of the NOI and the SWPPP to the City of Santa Fe, the local MS4 operator. 
4. A copy of the SWPPP shall be kept on the construction site at all times. 
5. The SWPPP must be approved by TCEQ before construction can begin. 
B. Erosion and sediment control Best Management Practices (BMPs) during and post-construction. 
1. Minimize the extent and duration of disturbance surface stabilization using BMPs such as: 
•  Mulching, 
•  Preserving Natural Vegetation, 
•  Recontouring, 
•  Permanent Seeding, 
•  Riprap, 
•  Sodding, 
•  Surface Roughening, 
•  Temporary Gravel Construction Access, 
•  Temporary Seeding, 
•  Topsoiling, 
•  Erosion Control Compost, 
•  Erosion Control Blanket, 
•  Runoff Diversion, 
2. Utilize runoff conveyance measures such as: 
•  Grass-Lined Channel or Swale, 
•  Hardened Channel, 
•  Interceptor Swale, 
•  Temporary Slope Drain, 
•  Paved Flume, 
•  Runoff Diversion Dike. 
3. Utilize outlet protection on storm water facilities: 
•  Level Spreader, 
•  Outlet Stabilization Structure. 
4. Utilize sediment traps and barriers: 
•  Block and Gravel Drop Inlet Protection, 
•  Excavated Drop Inlet Protection, 
•  Fabric Storm Drain Inlet Protection, 
•  Sediment Basin, 
•  Rock Dam, 
•  Sediment Fence/Straw Bale Barrier, 
•  Sediment Trap, 
•  Sand Filter System, 
•  Sod Drop Inlet Protection, 
•  Vegetated FilterStrip, 
•  Filter Berm (rock, sandbag, compost, mulch), 
•  Filter Sock (compost or mulch), 
•  Brush Barrier, 
•  Wetlands, 
•  Wet Basin, 
•  Extended Detention Basin. 
5. Utilize stream protection measures: 
•  Streambank Stabilization, 
•  Streambed Stabilization, 
•  Temporary Stream Crossing. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2010 of April 8, 2010, Sec. 27) 
ARTICLE 7
Off-Site Improvements  
Section 7.1 - Purpose 
7.1.1 Purpose : This article is intended to ensure a pro rata share allocation of the costs for off-site improvements necessitated by new development.  
Section 7.2 - Determination of Pro Rata Share 
7.2.1 Definition and Principles : As a condition of final subdivision or site plan approval, the Planning Commission may require an applicant to pay a pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary circulation improvements and water, sewerage drainage facilities and other improvements, including land and easements, located off-tract of the property limits of the subdivision or development but necessitated or required by the development. "Necessary" improvements are those clearly and substantially related to the development in question. The Planning Commission shall provide in its resolution of approval the basis of the required improvements. The capacity and design of proposed improvements shall be based upon the circulation plan element and utility service plan element of the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. The proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities within a related or common area shall be based on the following criteria. 
A. Cost Allocation : 
1. In cases where off-tract improvements are necessitated by the proposed development, and where no other property owner(s) receive(s) a special benefit thereby, the applicant may be required at his sole expense and as a condition of approval to provide and install such improvements. 
2. Proportionate Allocation : 
a. Where it is determined that properties outside the development will also be benefitted by the off-tract improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of the cost of such improvements to the developer: 
b. Allocation Formula : 
1) Sanitary Sewers: The applicant's proportionate share of distribution facilities including the installation, relocation, or replacement of collector, trunk, and interceptor sewers, and associated appurtenances shall be computed as follows: 
a) The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall be based on the standards in Article 6.6 of this ordinance; 
b) The City Engineer or Planner shall provide the applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated peak hour flows as well as capacity limits of the affected sewer system; 
c) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity to accommodate the applicant's flow given existing and reasonably anticipated peak-hour flows, the pro rate share shall be computed as follows: 
Total Cost of 		Capacity of 
enlargement or 		enlargement or 
improvement 		improvement 
		(gas. Per day) (gpd) 
_______ 	= 	_______ 
Developer's Cost 		Development-generated 
gallons per day to be 
accommodated by the 
enlargement or 
improvement 
 
Water Supply : The applicant's proportionate share of water distribution facilities including the installation, relocation, or replacement of water mains, hydrants, valves, and associated appurtenances shall be computed as follows: 
a) The capacity and the design of the water supply system shall be based on standards specified in Article 6.5 of this ordinance; 
b) The City Engineer or Planner shall provide the applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated capacity limits of the affected water supply system in terms of average demand, peak demand, and fire demand; 
c) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity as defined above to accommodate the applicant's needs, the pro rate shall be computed as follows: 
Total cost of 		Capacity of enlargement 
enlargement or 		or improvement 
improvement 		(peak-hour traffic) 
_______ 	= 	_______ 
Developer's cost 		Development peak-hour 
traffic to be accommodated 
by the enlargement or 
improvement 
 
3) Roadways : The applicant's proportionate share of street improvements, alignment, channelization, barriers, new or improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not covered elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets, and other associated street or traffic improvements shall be as follows: 
a) The City Engineer or Planner shall provide the applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated future peak-hour flows for the off-tract improvement; 
b) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity as defined above, the pro rata share shall be computed as follows: 
Total cost of 		Capacity of enlargement 
enlargement or 		or improvement 
improvement 		(peak-hour traffic) 
_______ 	= 	_______ 
Developer's cost 		Development peak-hour 
traffic to be accommodated 
by the enlargement or 
improvement 
 
4) Drainage Improvements : The applicant's proportionate share of storm water and drainage improvements including the installation, relocation, or replacement of storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, improved drainage ditches and appurtenances, and relocation or replacement of other storm drainage facilities or appurtenances shall be determined as follows: 
a) The capacity and design of the drainage system to accommodate storm water runoff shall be based on the standards specified in Article 6.4 of this ordinance, computed by the developer's engineer and approved by the City Engineer. 
b) The capacity of the enlarged, extended, or improved system required for the subdivision and areas outside of the developer's tributary to the drainage system shall be determined by the developer's engineer subject to approval of the City Engineer. The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by the developer's engineer and the estimated cost of the enlarged system calculated by the City Engineer. The pro rata share for the proposed improvement shall be computed as follows: 
Total cost of enlargement 		Capacity of 
or improvement 		enlargement 
		(total capacity 
		expressed in cubic 
		feet per second) 
_______ 	= 	_______ 
Developer's cost 		Development-generated peak 
rate of runoff expressed in 
cubic feet per second to be 
accommodated by the 
enlargement or improvement 
 
D. Escrow Accounts : Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be undertaken at some future date, the moneys required for the improvement shall be deposited in a separate interest-bearing account to the credit of the City of Santa Fe until such time as the improvement is constructed. If the off-tract improvement is not begun within two (2) years of deposit, all moneys and interest shall be returned to the applicant.  
CHAPTER 9 - TRAFFIC CODE 
 
SECTION 1: - ADOPTION OF UNIFORM ACT 
The Santa Fe City Council hereby adopts the Texas Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, known as Article 6701d of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as heretofore and hereafter amended, and ordains that such act shall be in full force and effect upon all streets, roads, alleys, and thoroughfares within the city.  
SECTION 2: - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
A.  TEXAS MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES ADOPTED 
All traffic control devices including signs, signals, and markings on pavement and curbs used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city, shall conform with the 2006 Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. All traffic control devices so erected shall be official traffic control devices of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(Ordinance No. 10-2009 of July 9, 2009) 
B.  THROUGH STREETS 
The city hereby designates certain streets as through streets. The designated through streets for the City of Santa Fe are described in Traffic Control Device Inventory-Schedule I on file in the office of the city secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporation in this chapter as if set out at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the city secretary at all times. Whenever any ordinance modification of this city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the city to place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such street is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of a through street and a heavily traveled street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either, or both of said streets as may be determined by the city upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
C.  FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS 
The city hereby designates certain intersections to be controlled by four-way stop signs. The designated four-way stop intersections for the City of Santa Fe are described in Traffic Control Device Inventory-Schedule II on file in the office of the city secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter as if set out at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the city secretary at all times. 
D.  SPECIAL HAZARD INTERSECTIONS CONTROLLED BY STOP SIGNS 
The city hereby designates certain special hazard intersections to be controlled by stop signs. The designated special hazard intersections for the City of Santa Fe to be controlled by stop signs are described in Traffic Control Device Inventory-Schedule III on file in the office of the city secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter as if set out at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the city secretary at all times. 
E.  SPECIAL HAZARD INTERSECTIONS CONTROLLED BY YIELD SIGNS 
The city hereby designates certain special hazard intersections to be controlled by yield signs. The designated special hazard intersections for the City of Santa Fe to be controlled by yield signs are described in Traffic Control Device Inventory-Schedule IV on file in the office of the city secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter as if set out at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the City Secretary at all times. 
(Ordinance No. 18-79 of November 8, 1979) 
F.  SCHOOL ZONES 
The City hereby designated the following school zones: 
(1)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 7:00 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 1:45 p.m.-4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days are established on Warpath Avenue from State Highway 6 north to 6th Street. 
(Ordinance No. 04-87 of June 11, 1987) 
(2)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 8:00 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days are established on Avenue S from FM 1764 North to 41/2 Street. 
(Ordinance No. 14-91 of December 12, 1991) 
(3)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 7:00 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 1:45 p.m.-4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days is hereby established on 6th Street from FM 1764 east to Avenue Q ½. 
(4)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 7:00 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 1:45 p.m.-4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days is hereby established on Avenue S from 6th Street north to FM 1764. 
(Ordinance No. 07-94 of August 18, 1994; Ordinance No. 20-2009 of September 24, 2009, Sec. 1) 
(5)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 1:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days is hereby established on Avenue T from State Highway 6 south to 6 th Street. 
(6)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days is hereby established on Maple from Tower Road west to the city limits. 
(Ordinance No. 01-2008 of January 10, 2008) 
(7)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days is hereby established on Maple Street from Tower Road east to North Elm Street. 
(Ordinance No. 12-2009 of August 13, 2009) 
(8)  A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days is hereby established on Walker Street from Shouse Road to Avenue S, a distance of approximately 0.4 miles. 
(Ordinance No. 20-2009 of September 24, 2009, Sec. 2) 
G.  U-TURNS AND ONE-WAY STREETS 
The city hereby designates the following location where U-Turns are prohibited: 
1.  Warpath Avenue from Hwy. 6 to 6th Street. 
2.  The city hereby prohibits left turns in the northbound direction on Avenue S between Walker Street and 4 ½ Street during school days, Monday through Friday, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(Ordinance No. 05-94 of May 12, 1994; Ordinance No. 20-2008 of September 25, 2008, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 11-2009 of August 13, 2009, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 06-2012 of January 26, 2012, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 02-2013 of January 10, 2013, Sec. 1) 
H.  DUTY TO OBEY INSTRUCTIONS OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of this section, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. No provision of this section for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violation, if at the time and place of the alleged violations, an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.  
SECTION 3: - SPEED LIMITS 
A.  NO PERSON TO DRIVE VEHICLE ON ANY STREET AT A SPEED GREATER THAN IS REASONABLE AND PRUDENT 
No person shall drive a vehicle on any street in the city limits of Santa Fe at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and it shall be the duty of all persons to use due care. No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe on any street at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed limit, or in any alley at a greater speed than fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
B.  SPEEDS GREATER OR LESS THAN THIRTY (30) MILES PER HOUR TO BE DETERMINED BY ENGINEERING AND/OR TRAFFIC INVESTIGATION 
Whenever the City shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation that the thirty (30) miles per hour speed limit hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place, or upon any part of the street or highway, the City shall, upon authorization by the City Council by appropriate ordinance, establish such speed limit as shall be effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersection or other place or part of the highway or street. 
C.  NO PERSON TO DRIVE AT SUCH SLOW SPEED AS TO IMPEDE NORMAL MOVEMENT OF TRAFFIC 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law, or at the direction of a police officer. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers and, in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with the direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor. 
D.  SPEED LIMITATIONS NOT APPLICABLE TO EMERGENCY VEHICLE RESPONDING TO EMERGENCY CALL 
Speed limitations set forth in this section shall not apply to an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or when used in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, and the driver thereof sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle, and/or when such emergency vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle. This provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
E.  SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED FOR CERTAIN DESCRIBED STREETS 
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of Article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, the following prima facie speed limits hereafter indicated for vehicles are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling in both directions upon the named streets and highways, or parts thereof, described as follows, and any speed in excess of the limits set forth in this section shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is neither reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful: 
(Ordinance No. 18-79 of November 8, 1979) 
(1)  State Highway 6 
(a)  RESERVED 
Editor's note— Subsection (a) deleted by Ordinance No. 17-99 of 7/8/99. 
(b)  RESERVED 
Editor's note— Subsection (b) deleted by Ordinance No. 15-99 of June 10, 1999) 
(c)  RESERVED 
(d)  RESERVED 
(e)  RESERVED 
Editor's note— Subsections (c) and (d) deleted by Ordinance No. 17-99 of July 8, 1999 
(f)  Along State Highway 6 from the west city limits to 475 feet west of Jackson Street, a distance of approximately 2.200 miles, fifty five miles per hour (55 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 03-2001 of January 11, 2001) 
(g)  Along SH 6 from 475 feet west of Jackson Street to the east city limits, a distance of 3.185 miles, forty-five miles per hour (45 mph). 
(h)  Along SH 6 a school speed zone from 740 feet east of FM 1764 to 100 feet west of Avenue Q ½, a distance of 0.450 miles, thirty miles per hour (30 mph) when flashing. 
(Ordinance No. 06-92 of August 19, 1992) 
(i)  Along State Highway 6 a school speed zone from the west limit of the City of Santa Fe east to twenty six (26) feet west of Morning Glory Road, a distance of approximately 0.060 miles, 35 mph, when flashing. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than two hundred dollars ($200). 
(Ordinance No. 12-99 of May 27, 1999) 
(j)  Along SH 6 a school speed zone, from N. Elm Rd. to 170 feet west of Scott Ave, a distance of approximately 0.200 miles, the speed limit shall be thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) when flashing. 
(Ordinance No. 16-2013 of September 12, 2013, Sec. 1) 
(2)  FM 646 
(a)  Along FM 646 from the north City limit of City of Santa Fe to the 1,056 feet north of FM 1764 a distance of approximately 1.457 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty-five miles per hour (55 mph). 
(b)  Along FM 646 from 1056 feet north of FM 1764 to the centerline of SH 6 a distance of approximately 1.510 miles, the speed limit shall be forty-five miles per hour (45mph). 
(c)  Along FM 646 from the centerline of SH 6 to 1161 feet south of 25 th Street a distance of approximately 0.6000 miles, the speed limit shall be "35 mph". 
(d)  Along FM 646 from 1161 feet south of 25 th Street to south City limit of City of Santa Fe a distance of approximately 0.6000 miles, the speed limit shall be "50 mph". 
(Ordinance No. 11-84 of September 13, 1984; Ordinance No. 26-2003 of September 25, 2003, Sec. 1; Ordinance No. 04-2006 of February 23, 2006, Sec. 1) 
(3)  FM 1764 
(a)  Along FM 1764 from SH 6 to the eastern city limits of Santa Fe, a distance of approximately 3.258 miles, the speed limit shall be fifty miles per hour (50 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 18-79 of November 8, 1979; Ordinance No. 19-2001 of July 26, 2001; Ordinance No. 05-2018 of June 26, 2018, Sec. 1) 
(b)  Along FM 1764 a school zone, from a point 760 feet west of the centerline of Avenue G ½ to a point 270 feet east of the centerline of Avenue G ½, a distance of approximately 0.195 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 MPH when flashing. 
(Ordinance No. 04-2020 of March 26, 2020, Sec. 1) 
(4)  Gl/2 Street 
On Gl/2 Street north of FM 1764 from FM 1764 to its end the speed limit shall be fifteen miles per hour (15 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 05-88 of April 14, 1988) 
(5)  Cemetery Road 
On Cemetery Road from Pine Street north to the city limits shall be forty miles per hour (40 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 07-90 of April 12, 1990) 
(6)  Triple Bar Estates 
Within Triple Bar Estates subdivision on A Bar Drive, B Bar Drive, C Bar Drive, C Bar Circle, D Bar Drive, E Bar Drive, and F Bar Drive (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 16-94 of December 8, 1994) 
(7)  20th Street 
On 20th Street east of Avenue L (15 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 10-96 of June 27, 1996) 
(8)  Twin Drive East (20 mph). 
(9)  Vista Real (15 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 18-2006 of December 14, 2006) 
(10)  23 rd St. 
East of Avenue M (20 mph). 
(11)  Within SF Trails Subdivision (20 mph). 
(12)  Within Castle Estates Subdivision (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 17-2000 of July 27, 2000) 
(13)  3 rd St. (20 mph). 
(14)  Henkel St. (20 mph). 
(15)  Bob White 
Off Avenue T (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 02-2001 of January 11, 2001) 
(16)  Poplar St. (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 12-2001 of May 24, 2001) 
(17)  Numerous dead end streets (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 05-2002 of March 14, 2002) 
(18)  Within Center Park Subdivision on Kent Lane, Preston Drive and Jana Drive (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 27-2007 of Aug. 23, 2007) 
(19)  Avenue F (south of 7th Street) (20 mph). 
Avenue F (north and south of FM 1764) (20 mph). 
Avenue E (south of 7th Street) (20 mph). 
Avenue E ½ (north and south of FM 1764) (20 mph). 
Giles Rd. (20 mph). 
Longmire (20 mph). 
Derrick (20 mph). 
Shirley Lane (20 mph). 
Stroud Court (20 mph). 
4 ½ Street (east of Bruce Hall) (20 mph). 
Avenue J (south of 4th Street to dead end) (20 mph). 
Milam Circle (20 mph). 
Thaman Rd. (15 mph). 
Marion Lane (15 mph). 
Ponderosa (15 mph). 
Harriett Lane (20 mph). 
Wagner Lane (15 mph). 
Bethel Court (20 mph). 
Christie Lane (20 mph). 
Lynn Lane (20 mph). 
Penny Lane (20 mph). 
Shouse Road (north of 4th Street) (20 mph). 
Washington (20 mph). 
Mt. Vernon (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 15-2008 of Aug. 14, 2008) 
(20)  Avenue M between FM 646 N and 6th Street (20 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 25-2009 of November 12, 2009) 
(21)  Along Algoa Friendswood Road, on that portion that is within the city limits, forty-five miles per hour (45 mph). 
(Ordinance No. 11-2013 of July 11, 2013)  
SECTION 4: - NO-PARKING ZONES 
A.  DESIGNATED AREAS 
(1)  Portions of Warpath 
There is hereby designated a no-parking zone on that portion along the east side of Warpath, formerly known as a portion of Avenue T, nine hundred seventy-four (974) feet from the centerline of SH 6 at its intersection with Warpath to a point three hundred fifty (350) feet south of 6th Street, a distance of six hundred seventy (670) feet. No vehicle may park within the limits herein defined at any time between the hours of 7:00-9:00 a.m. and 2:00-4:30 p.m. on school days only. The chief of police is hereby directed to install signs designating said no parking zone along the street in the locations as given herein. 
(Ordinance No. 18-79 of November 8, 1979) 
(2)  Runge Park 
There is hereby designated a no parking zone along the following streets in the Runge Park area: along 8th Street from Peck Street to Terry Street, north and south side; along Terry Street from 8th Street to Park Street, east and west side. The street superintendent is hereby directed to install signs designating said no-parking zones along the streets in the locations as given herein. 
(Ordinance No. 03-94 of April 14, 1994; Ordinance No. 03-2004 of January 8, 2004) 
(3)  Portion of 22nd Street 
There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along 22nd Street from Avenue M to Avenue L, south side. The chief of police is hereby directed to install signs designating said no-parking zones along the streets in the locations as given herein. 
(Ordinance No. 10-90 of June 14, 1990) 
(4)  Portion of Sixth Street 
(a)  There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along Sixth Street from FM 1764 to Warpath south side, and on the north side from FM 1764 East for a distance of 540 feet. The chief of police is hereby directed to install signs designating said no-parking zone along the street in the location as given herein. 
(Ordinance No. 01-93 of January 14, 1993) 
(b)  There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along the south side of Sixth Street from Avenue M to Avenue L. The Street Superintendent is hereby directed to install signs designating said no-parking zone along the street in the location as given herein. 
(Ordinance No. 05-95 of April 13, 1995) 
(5)  Portion of 24th Street 
There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along the north and south side of 24 th Street from Avenue O to Avenue N and along the east and west side of Avenue O from 24 th Street south to the city limits. The street superintendent is hereby directed to install signs designating said no-parking zones along the streets in the locations as given herein. 
(Ordinance No. 02-93 of February 11, 1993; Ordinance No. 15-2000 of June 22, 2000) 
(6)  There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along east side of Terry Street from Park Street south a distance of 130 feet and along the south side of Park Street from Terry Street east a distance of 360 feet. The Street Foreman is hereby directed to install signs designating said no-parking zones along the streets in the locations as given herein. 
(Ordinance No. 04-97 of March 27, 1997) 
(7)  There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along the west side of Jackson Street from Beriton to 5 th Street. 
(Ordinance No. 15-2004 of June 10, 2004) 
(8)  There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along the north side of 11 th Street from the furthest west end of 11 th Street east to FM 646 North. 
(Ordinance No. 15-2004 of June 10, 2004; Ordinance No. 16-2004 of July 8, 2004) 
(9)  There is hereby designated a no-parking zone along the north side of Beriton Street from Peck to Jackson. 
(Ordinance No. 17-2004 of July 8, 2004) 
B.  IN AND ALONG STREETS, ROADS, OR HIGHWAYS 
(1)  No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, in any traffic lane of any street, road, or highway within the City of Santa Fe, Texas, when it is practical to stop, park, or leave such vehicle out of such traffic lane. 
(2)  No person shall stop, park, or leave unattended any abandoned or inoperable vehicle upon any street, road, or highway right-of-way, whether it be the paved portion thereof, the shoulder thereof, or unimproved portion of said right-of-way in the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to any driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such manner and such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping, parking, or temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. 
(4)  No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle within no-parking zones when so signed. The chief of police of the City of Santa Fe is hereby authorized to designate no-parking zones within fifty feet (50') of any intersection when the traffic hazards at such intersection require in the public safety that such no-parking zones be so designated. In pursuance thereof, the chief of police before signing any no-parking zones shall first obtain the consent of the City Council and such no-parking zones shall be set out and designated on an addendum to this Section, giving the location and date of approval by the City Council. 
C.  WHEN ANY POLICE OFFICER FINDS A VIOLATION 
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon any public right-of-way, whether on the main-traveled roadway, the shoulder thereof, or any other portion of the said right-of-way in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to remove such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage or wrecking yard designated by the Chief of Police of the City of Santa Fe, Texas.  
SECTION 5: - VEHICLES APPROACHING SCHOOL BUSES 
A.  WORDS AND PHRASES USED IN THIS SECTION 
Every word and phrase used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meaning ascribed to them in Article 6701d of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended or hereafter amended. 
B.  WHEN VEHICLES APPROACHING SCHOOL BUS SHALL STOP 
The driver of a vehicle or motorcycle, upon any street or highway within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, approaching a school bus from any direction, receiving and/or discharging passengers, shall bring such vehicle or motorcycle to a full stop, and the operator of such vehicle or motorcycle shall not start up or attempt to pass in any direction until the said school bus vehicle has finished receiving and/or discharging its passengers. 
C.  SCHOOL BUS MARKINGS 
Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight inches (8") in height. When a school bus is being operated upon a street or highway within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for any purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from school, all markings thereon indicating "school bus" shall be covered. 
D.  AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT DEVICES ON SCHOOL BUSES 
1.  Definitions. 
(a)  In this article School bus has the same meaning as in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code 541.201 (Vehicles). 
2.  Applicability; adjudication. 
(a)  This article applies to the part of an independent school district that is in the full purpose limits of the city of Santa Fe Texas. 
(1)  The Santa Fe Independent School District has installed a system on a school bus that is capable of producing a recorded image depicting the license plate attached to the front or the rear of a motor vehicle that passes the school bus in violation of this article; 
(2)  The Santa Fe Independent School District's board of trustees has adopted procedures that provide, at a minimum, the following protections for the owner of any vehicle who is cited for a violation of this article: 
a.  Prior to proceeding with a civil action for the collection of any fine, the video of the violation must be reviewed by an independent and impartial person who is not affiliated with the entity that owns or installed the camera ("reviewing person"), and the decision whether to proceed with a civil action must not have any financial impact upon the reviewing person; 
b.  The reviewing person must make a written finding that there is probable cause to believe a motor vehicle passed a school bus when the stop arm was activated, and that the motor vehicle had sufficient time to stop after the arm was activated; 
c.  The reviewing person must establish written proof of the ownership of the motor vehicle; 
d.  Written notice of the alleged violation must be mailed to the owner of the motor vehicle not later than the thirtieth day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred at: 
1.  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of Motor Vehicles; or 
2.  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas Department of Motor Vehicles. 
e.  The notice of violation must contain: 
1.  A description of the violation alleged; 
2.  The location where the violation occurred; 
3.  The date and time of the violation; 
4.  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
5.  The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
6.  A copy of a recorded image of the violation limited solely to a depiction of the area of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
7.  The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable; 
8.  The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil penalty and a statement that the person incurs a late payment penalty if the civil penalty is not paid or imposition of the penalty is not contested within that period; 
9.  A statement that the owner of the vehicle in the notice of violation may elect to pay the civil penalty by mail sent to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication hearing; 
10.  Information that informs the owner of the vehicle named in the notice of violation: of the owner's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person in an administrative adjudication hearing; that imposition of the civil penalty may be contested by submitting a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing before the expiration of the period specified under subdivision viii; and that failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner is an admission of liability and a waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty; and 
11.  A point of contact, including phone number and email address, for the office or person designated by the school district to provide information and answer inquiries from those persons who have been issued a citation. 
f.  A notice of violation is presumed to have been received on the fifth day after the date the notice is mailed; 
g.  The person cited must be provided a reasonable opportunity to contest by appeal the citation of the alleged violation in person, by mail, and through an attorney, including the ability to provide proof that the person did not own the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation; 
h.  Independent and impartial hearing examiners ("hearing examiner") who are not affiliated with the entity that owns or installed the camera and are qualified to practice law must be appointed by the school district, and the determination whether a violation occurred must not have any financial impact upon the hearing examiner; 
i.  The cited person shall have at least thirty (30) days to appeal a citation from the date that they received notice, and the hearing examiner must have the ability to extend this time period upon a showing of good cause; 
j.  All persons who testify at the hearing shall testify under oath, and the person cited shall have the right to produce evidence and call witnesses; 
k.  At the hearing, the hearing examiner must find by a preponderance of the evidence that the person cited owned the vehicle at the time of the violation, that the violation occurred, and that there are no facts or circumstances establishing any reasonable justifications or excuses for any violation; 
l.  Upon expiration of the time for appeal, collection efforts may not be commenced without proof that the person cited received actual notice of the citation; and 
m.  No arrest warrant may be issued for a violation of the article, the violation may not appear on a person's driving record, and any outstanding fines may not be reported to a collection agency. 
(3)  The Santa Fe Independent School District's board of trustees enters a finding in its minutes that the process adopted by the school district under this section satisfies constitutional due process requirements. 
(b)  A school district covered by this article may establish any procedure reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose of this article, including, without limitation, citation of a violator, a process for adjudication in person or by mail, the appointment of hearing examiners, the standard of proof, the administration of oaths, the production of evidence or the attendance of witnesses, deadlines for responding to notices and citations, and a process for the payment of a fine. 
(c)  The procedure created by a school district under this section may not create a duty or responsibility to a city officer or employee, assign a duty to a city officer or employee, or create an expense or obligation for the city. 
(d)  A school district that establishes automated traffic enforcement procedures and collects fines pursuant to this ordinance shall: 
(1)  File an annual report, in June of each year on a form approved by the city manager's office, to provide information related to enforcement under this ordinance; 
(2)  File quarterly reports in September, December, March and June, to provide geo-location information to identify geographically the location of citations; and 
(3)  Designate and maintain a current point of contact, including phone number and email address, for the office or person designated by the school district to provide information and answer inquiries regarding this process. 
3.  Civil offense created. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle that is operated in violation of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.066 (Passing a School Bus; Offense) by passing a stopped school bus displaying the visual signals required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.701(c) (Additional Equipment Requirements for School Buses and Other Buses Used to Transport School children) commits a civil offense and is liable for a civil fine. 
(b)  Each violation is a separate civil offense. 
(c)  If the reviewing person, based upon the recording equipment installed on a school bus, determines that a motor vehicle has been operated in violation of this article, the motor vehicle is presumed to have been operated in violation of this article, and the school district may charge the owner of the vehicle the fine as provided by this article. 
(d)  A defense to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.066 (Passing a School Bus; Offense) is a defense to the civil offense created by this section. 
(e)  This article does not create a criminal offense. 
4.  Fine. 
(a)  The fine for an offense under this article shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(b)  The Santa Fe Independent School District may assess to a person who is liable for a fine under this article an additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine, if: 
(1)  The person fails to timely respond to a citation or appeal the citation under this article, and if 
(2)  The person fails to timely pay a fine assessed against the person under this article. 
(c)  The council finds that the purpose of this article is to obtain compliance, and to provide for the safety of school children, and not to raise revenue for the city. The city further finds that the fines collected under this article serve the municipal public purpose of enhancing traffic safety compliance with respect to school buses. Accordingly, the city assigns a fine collected for a violation of this article to the school district on whose behalf the school bus that recorded the violation was operated. 
(d)  A fine under this article is payable directly to the school district or the district's assignee. The fine may be used by the school district only to enhance student safety. 
(Ordinance No. 02-2019 of April 11, 2019, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 6: - UNLAWFUL TO DISOBEY LAWFUL ORDERS OF POLICE OFFICERS 
A.  TRAFFIC REGULATION 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, direction, or signal (visual or audible) of any police officer vested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. 
B.  UNLAWFUL TO FLEE FROM POLICE OFFICER; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF FLEEING 
It shall be unlawful for any driver to flee or attempt to flee from a police officer who orders, directs, or signals with all proper indicia (red light and/or siren) to stop such driver. The fact that a driver flees or attempts to flee from a police officer who orders, directs, or signals with all proper indicia (red light and/or siren) to stop such driver and necessitates a high speed chase or pursuit along the public streets of the city shall be prima facie evidence that it was willfully done, and the fact a high speed chase or pursuit was necessitated to stop such driver shall be prima facie evidence that such driver was attempting to flee from such police officer.  
SECTION 7: - RATIFICATION OF EXISTING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified, and declared to be official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. 
(Ordinance 18-79 of November 8, 1979)  
SECTION 8: - JUNKED VEHICLES 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
The following terms whenever used or referred to in this section shall have the following respective meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  City shall mean the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(2)  Police Department shall mean the police department of the city. 
(3)  Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert the motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles. 
(4)  Junked Vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined in Section 1, Chapter 42, General Laws, Acts of the 41st Legislature, 2nd Called Session, 1929 (Article 6701d-11, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) which is inoperative and which does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate and which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded, or which remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than forty-five (45) days. 
(Subsection A(4) amended by Ordinance No. 08-86 of June 12, 1986) 
(5)  Motor Vehicle means any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act. 
B.  JUNKED VEHICLES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the state, by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the municipalities in the State of Texas, and such vehicles are therefore, declared to be a nuisance. 
C.  UNLAWFUL TO CREATE OR TO MAINTAIN SUCH NUISANCE 
It shall be unlawful for any individual, company or corporation to leave or permit to remain upon public or private property (except as hereinafter provided), within the City of Santa Fe, Texas, any junked vehicle or parts or portion thereof, for any period of time in excess of ten (10) days. 
D.  NOTICE BY CHIEF OF POLICE OF THE CITY; PUBLIC HEARING 
(1)  Whenever it is brought to the attention of the chief of police of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, that a nuisance, as defined herein, exists on private property in the City of Santa Fe, the chief of police shall give or cause to be given, in writing, a ten (10) day notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days; and further that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of said ten-day period, said notice to be mailed by certified mail with a five (5) day return receipt requested to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return. 
(2)  Whenever it is brought to the attention of the chief of police of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, that a nuisance, as defined herein, exists on public property in the City of Santa Fe, the chief of police shall give or cause to be given, in writing, a ten (10) day notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days; and further that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of said ten-day period, said notice to be mailed by certified mail with a five (5) day return receipt requested to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the public premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return. 
(Subsection D(1) and (2) amended by Ordinance No. 08-86 of June 12, 1986) 
(3)  A public hearing shall be had prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance, the same should be held before the municipal judge of the City of Santa Fe, when such hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. Any resolution or order requiring the removal of the vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(Subsection D(3) is added by Ordinance No. 08-86 of June 12, 1986) 
E.  ORDER BY MUNICIPAL JUDGE 
(1)  After the hearing is held by the judge of the municipal court of the City of Santa Fe, as herein provided, if said municipal judge finds that such a nuisance as herein defined exists, he shall order the owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located to remove such junked vehicle within ten (10) days after said order is given to such owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any such person to whom such order is given to fail or refuse to comply therewith and to remove such junked vehicle within the time provided by said order. 
F.  DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF THE PREMISES 
In the event the owner or occupant of the premises does not request a hearing as hereinabove provided, it shall be his duty to comply with the provisions of the notice given him and to abate such nuisance within ten (10) days after the date of the receipt of such notice. 
G.  VEHICLES NOT TO BE MADE OPERABLE 
After a vehicle has been removed in accordance with or under the terms and provisions of this section, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
H.  NOTICE TO TEXAS HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT 
Notice shall be given to the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation within five (5) days after the date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part. 
(Subsection H amended by Ordinance 08-86 of June 12, 1986) 
I.  WHERE SECTION DOES NOT APPLY 
This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junk yard. 
J.  ADMINISTRATION OF SECTION 
The administration of this section shall be by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the City of Santa Fe, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. 
K.  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE 
Within ten (10) days after notice has been delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises on which a junked vehicle is located if a hearing is not requested, or if a hearing is requested, within ten (10) days after an order requiring the removal of such junked vehicle has been served upon or delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located, the chief of police of the City of Santa Fe or members of the police department of the city, acting under the direction of the chief of police, and if said nuisance has not been abated; shall remove or cause to be removed the vehicle which was the subject of such notice to a suitable city storage area designated by the mayor of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. Such vehicle shall be stored in such storage area for a period of not less than ten (10) days during which period any party owning or claiming any rights, title, or interest therein shall be entitled to claim possession of same by the payment to the City of Santa Fe, Texas, the actual cost to the city of abating such nuisance. The chief of police may in such cases, if he deems it necessary, require such person to post bond of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) conditioned that such person will not use said vehicle to create another nuisance in the City of Santa Fe. 
L.  SALE OR DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES 
When any junked vehicle has remained in the storage area provided in subsection K hereof, for not less than ten (10) days, it shall be the duty of the chief of police of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, to dispose of same by removal to a scrap yard or by sale to any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. 
M.  PROCEEDS OF SALE; DEMOLITION 
(1)  Out of the proceeds of same the chief of police shall pay for the cost of removal and storage, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto (either owner or lienholder). 
(2)  If there is not a bid or offer for the junked vehicle, the chief of police may dispose of same by causing it to be demolished or removed to a place provided by the city council, or by permitting it to be removed by a demolisher who is willing to do so for the benefit of the junk or parts he can salvage. 
N.  CHIEF OF POLICE MAY DELEGATE 
Wherever the chief of police is charged with the enforcement of this section, he may delegate said authority to any regularly salaried employee of the police department of the City of Santa Fe. 
O.  PURVIEW OF THIS SECTION 
It is not intended by this section to make provisions pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles as that term is defined by the "Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act." 
(Ordinance 9-79, sections 10-24, of July 12, 1979)  
SECTION 9: - VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES, NATURAL GASOLINE OR FLAMMABLE, CORROSIVE, OR TOXIC CHEMICALS 
A.  Every semi-trailer, truck, or other vehicle transporting liquefied petroleum gases, natural gasoline or flammable, corrosive, or toxic chemicals in bulk form or the fumes thereof, whether common carrier or not, shall have their movements confined in the City of Santa Fe to the streets or highways hereinafter designated. 
B.  Such semi-trailer, trucks, or other vehicles transporting such material and products set forth in subsection A hereof, shall be confined to movement within the City of Santa Fe to Farm to Market Road 1764, State Highway 6, and Farm to Market Road 646 North, and Farm to Market Road 646 South. 
C.  Any semi-trailer, trucks, or other vehicles transporting the materials or products set forth in subsection A hereof, shall not be parked at night on any highway, road, street, or alley within the city, except in an emergency, and in no event shall any such semi-trailer, truck, or other vehicle be parked closer than fifty feet (50') to any building within the City of Santa Fe, Texas, whether parked on a public highway or road or not, except when making deliveries as provided in subsection D hereof, or when such buildings are used for servicing such semi-trailers, trucks, or other vehicles. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to semi-trailers, trucks, or other vehicles carrying the materials or products set forth in subsection A hereof, which are then being used to carry such materials or products to outlets within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, or for the purpose of conducting business. 
(Ordinance No. 10-82 of May 25, 1982)  
SECTION 10: - TRUCK TRAFFIC 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings given herein: 
(1)  City shall mean the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(2)  Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(3)  Truck shall mean any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, and whose payload rating is over one (1) ton. 
(Ordinance No. 08-83 of September 20, 1983) 
B.  LOAD LIMITS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck on any public street or right-of-way in the city, other than on state highways which has a gross weight in excess of 50,000 pounds unless permitted by the city to do so. In the event a permit is required, an indemnity bond may be required to be posted with the city to cover possible damage to its streets, bridges, culverts or drainage easements, which may be damaged by the moving of said excessive weight loads over and along these streets. 
The indemnity bond of no less than $25,000.00 shall remain in force and effect for ninety (90) days from the initial execution date of the permit. The amount of the bond shall be determined by guidelines established by the street supervisor with reasonable consideration of the type of vehicle, the amount of excess weight, the distance to be traveled on the streets and the conditions of the streets to be traveled. 
C.  OVERSIZE/OVERWEIGHT PERMIT 
The permit clerk may issue a permit under the direction of the street supervisor for the travel of trucks over city streets within the city with loads in excess of the load limits provided in subsection B, but only when it is impossible or impractical to reduce the weight of the load or use a truck is capable of hauling the load within the prescribed limit. Such permit shall be issued for only one (1) trip by each truck. The street supervisor shall determine the route of travel of said truck and the amount of bond, if any, but the amount shall not be less than $25,000.00. The permit shall specify the date of the trip, the license plate number of the truck and the route of travel. A permit fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for the issuance of such permit shall be paid to the permit clerk by the applicant prior to issuance. 
(Ordinance No. 04-86 of May 8, 1986) 
D.  TRUCK ROUTES 
All trucks shall confine their travel within the city to the following streets or highways or parts thereof: 
(1)  FM 1764 
(2)  FM 646 south 
(3)  State Highway 6 
Each of such truck routes shall be clearly marked "truck route" at its intersection with the city limits, at each intersection with other truck routes, and at such other locations along its course as shall be deemed necessary by the city's Street Superintendent to adequately designate it for truck travel. 
(Ordinance No. 13-2007 of May 10, 2007) 
E.  LOADING AND UNLOADING 
In the event that a truck must completely or partially load and/or unload at a point which does not lie on a designated truck route, the truck may proceed to and from such points of loading and/or unloading, providing that the truck follows the shortest route from a designated truck route to and from each point of loading or unloading or otherwise as may be specified by the street supervisor. 
F.  EXCEPTIONS 
This section shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city; 
(2)  City vehicles. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city upon any street in the city; 
(3)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon detours established by the street supervisor, provided such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which detour is established; 
(4)  Local operations. Any truck travelling to and from its base of operation or storage not located on a designated truck route of the city; 
(5)  The operation of any truck by a resident in transit between his or her home and place of employment. 
G.  ENFORCEMENT OF SECTION; MAPS; WEIGHING 
The city secretary shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted. The maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary and shall be made available to the public. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any truck to proceed to any public or private scale available for purpose of weighing and determining whether this section has been complied with. Upon such weighing, if it is determined that the truck so weighed is in excess of the load limit, then the cost of such weighing shall be immediately due and payable by the operator of such truck and such truck may be lawfully detained by the police department until such charge has been paid. In the event that the weight of such truck is not in excess of the load limit, any charges for weighing shall be paid by the city. Any charge for weighing under the terms of this subsection shall be in addition to any fine imposed for a violation of its provisions. 
H.  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SECTION 
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon conviction. 
(Ordinance No. 08-83 of September 20, 1983)  
SECTION 11: - NO WAKE. 
A.  NO WAKE ON FLOODED STREET 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or a boat on a flooded street, highway, alley, or parking lot, whether publicly or privately owned, in such manner as to increase the level of flood waters to a level which causes, or could be reasonably expected to cause, damage to other vehicles, adjacent real property, or improvements located on adjacent real property. 
B.  DEFENSE 
It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation under "A" above that the operator of the motor vehicle or boat was operating same during a bona fide public emergency necessitating the use of speed otherwise in violation hereof. 
C.  PENALTY 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day in which any violation shall occur, or each occurrence of any violation, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ordinance No. 01-2003 of January 9, 2003)  
SECTION 12: - SKATEBOARDS AND SKATES RESTRICTED. 
A.  DEFINITIONS: 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Skateboard. Any device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, consisting of a short, oblong board with four (4) or more wheels, typically ridden in a standing position. 
Skates. A shoe, boot, or attachment with inline wheels located along its sole, or with a pair of small wheels located on the ends, use for gliding along a hard surface. 
B.  SKATEBOARDING AND SKATING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS. 
1.  No person upon skates or riding by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any public roadway, public sidewalk, or any other publicly-owned property within the boundaries of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, in areas where such conduct is posted as prohibited. 
2.  No person upon skates or riding by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle, or similar device shall enter, go, travel, or skate in, on, or along the sides, walls, linings, or aprons of any storm sewer, storm drain, drainage outfall, drainage ditch channel, or drainage ways within the boundaries of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
3.  No person upon skates or riding by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any private property which skateboarding or skating has been prohibited by the owner of the property or the agent having control of such property, as indicated by a posted sign prohibiting such skateboarding or skating. 
C.  RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
These regulations may be enforced by any public safety personnel, including but not limited to code enforcement officers and law enforcement personnel. 
D.  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. 
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, fined in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, Code of Ordinances, Section 5, General Penalty for Violations of Code. Each violation shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ordinance No. 01-2007 of January 11, 2007, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 13: - USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONES IN SCHOOL ZONES 
A.  DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
1.  "Engaging in a call" shall mean talking into, dialing, or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not include holding a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone. 
2.  "Hands-free mobile telephone" shall mean a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone or part of the motor vehicle, by which the user engages in a call without the use of either hand, or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person, whether or not the use of either hand or prosthetic device or aid is necessary to activate, deactivate, on initiate a function of such telephone. 
3.  "Hand-held mobile telephone" shall mean a mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one hand or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person. 
4.  "Immediate proximity" shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone but shall not require physical contact with such operator's ear. 
5.  "Mobile telephone" shall mean a device used for wireless telephone service and shall include a personal digital assistant for data or telecommunication services other than voice. 
6.  "Personal Digital Assistant" shall mean a device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides for data communication other than by voice. 
7.  "Wireless telephone service" shall mean two-way real time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication service. 
(Ordinance No. 25-2008 of November 13, 2008, Sec. 1) 
B.  RESTRICTIONS. 
1.  Use of a hand-held mobile telephone is prohibited while operating a motor vehicle in a school zone on official school days during the hours the school zone is in effect. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a school zone on official school days during the hours the school zone is in effect and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand-held mobile telephone use are posted in place while using a hand-held mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send, or read messages or data. 
3.  An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of, the operator's ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section. 
(Ordinance No. 25-2008 of November 13, 2008, Sec. 1) 
C.  EXEMPTIONS. 
This subsection shall not apply to: 
1.  The use of a hand-held mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating an emergency situation, including but not limited to, an emergency response operator, a hospital, a physician's office, a health clinic, a public safety department, or other emergency service provider; 
2.  Any law enforcement, public safety or police officer, emergency services official, first aid, emergency medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety official in the performance of duties arising out of and in the course of his or her employment as such; or 
3.  The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner. 
(Ordinance No. 25-2008 of November 13, 2008, Sec. 1) 
D.  LIABILITY. 
The violation of this section is a strict liability offense. 
(Ordinance No. 25-2008 of November 13, 2008, Sec. 1)  
SECTION 14: - GOLF CARTS 
A.  APPLICABILITY 
1.  The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to golf carts operated upon a public street within the City of Santa Fe, Texas. Golf carts are not permitted on a public street where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour, except to cross an intersection. 
2.  The operation of golf carts is not subject to the provisions of this section under the following circumstances: 
a.  the use and operation of golf carts at golf courses, private clubs, or on private property with the consent of the owner; 
b.  the use and operation of golf carts within gated or limited access communities unless the streets of the community are dedicated for public use and maintained by the City; 
c.  the use and operation of golf carts in connection with a parade, festival, or other special event provided the consent of the sponsor is obtained and provided such vehicle is only used during such event; 
d.  the use and operation of golf carts by the City of Santa Fe on official police business or the use of golf carts by City personnel for official business on City-owned or City-leased property. 
B.  DEFINITIONS 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver/Operator means the person driving and having physical control over the golf cart. 
Driver's License means an authorization issued by the State for the operation of a motor vehicle. 
Golf Cart shall have the meaning assigned by the Texas Transportation Code, Section 502.001, as amended, and means a motor vehicle commonly referred to as a golf cart and designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf course. The vehicle must have an attainable top speed not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles. Specifically excluded from this definition are those motorized conveyances commonly referred to as ATVs, four-wheelers, mules, gators, and design-altered golf carts which have been altered to allow them to travel at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour. 
Owner means the person holding title to the golf cart. 
Parking Area means those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
Sidewalk means the portion of a street that is between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line and intended for pedestrian use. 
Street means a public roadway of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that: (a) has a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less; or (b) provides for no more than two lanes of vehicular traffic per direction; or (c) is not designated by either the State or Federal highway system. 
C.  OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS 
1.  All drivers of golf carts shall hold a valid driver's license and shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using or operating a golf cart on the authorized streets and parking areas of the City. A golf cart may not be used in a reckless or negligent manner. 
2.  Golf carts shall not be operated on any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, jogging path, park trail, or any location normally used for pedestrian traffic except for official police business or City of Santa Fe personnel conducting a required job function directly related to their assigned duties. 
3.  All golf carts are entitled to full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any golf cart of the full use of a lane. 
4.  The driver of a golf cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
5.  No driver shall operate a golf cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
6.  The driver of a golf cart with a current and valid Texas driver's license may not operate a cart on a street having a posted speed greater than 35 miles per hour, except the driver may cross a multi-lane or a federal, county, or state route only at an intersection controlled by an official traffic control device which stops traffic from all directions. 
7.  The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided on the golf cart. The operator and all occupants shall be seated upon the seat of the golf cart and no part of the body of the operator or occupant shall extend outside the perimeter of the golf cart while the golf cart is being operated. 
8.  The operator of a golf cart shall ensure that children are properly seated while a cart is in motion and the operator shall not permit any occupant of the cart to ride in the lap of any occupant while the cart is in motion. No person younger than six (6) years of age may be transported in a golf cart unless restrained by a safety belt restraint. 
9.  Golf carts may only be parked in the same manner and at the same places designated for the parking of motor vehicles. The stopping, standing, or parking of golf carts in areas where parking is not allowed or in any place that impedes the flow of traffic is prohibited. Golf carts shall not park within any space designated for disabled persons unless a current disabled parking placard is displayed and the person to whom the placard was issued is operating or being transported by the cart. 
10.  Golf carts may not be used for the purpose of towing another cart, trailer, or vehicle of any kind, and may not tow an object or person, including a person on roller skates, roller blades, skateboard, bicycle, or similar object. 
11.  Golf carts shall not be operated during inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other condition, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet. This restriction does not apply to golf carts operated on private property. 
D.  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT 
1.  A golf cart must be equipped with the following minimum equipment, as mandated by Texas Transportation Code Section 551.404(b), as amended, and as required by the City of Santa Fe, Texas: 
a.  Operational headlamps (white lights mounted on each side of the front of the cart); 
b.  Operational tail lamps (red lights mounted on each side of the rear of the cart); 
c.  Side reflectors (2 front - amber in color, and 2 rear - red in color); 
d.  Operational brakes (capable of stopping the cart within 50 feet at a speed of 25 miles per hour); 
e.  Operational parking brake (activated by the cart driver's muscular effort or spring action, designed to operate continuously once applied, and capable of adequately holding the cart on any grade under all loading conditions); 
f.  Rearview mirror(s) (capable of a clear, unobstructed view of at least 200 feet to the rear); 
g.  Slow-Moving-Vehicle emblem (a triangular sign having a reflective surface designed to be clearly visible in daylight or at night from the light of standard headlamps at a distance of at least 500 feet, mounted base down on the rear of the vehicle at a height from three (3) feet to five (5) feet above the road surface, and maintained in a clean, reflective condition); and 
h.  Horn (must be audible for a distance of 200 feet). 
2.  All required equipment shall meet Texas and Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and shall be maintained in good working condition. 
E.  GASOLINE CARTS 
1.  Every motorized cart powered by gasoline shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation and meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or including any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened with brackets or hangers which are designed for the particular purpose of fastening motorized cart exhaust systems. 
c.  The engine and powered mechanism of every motorized cart shall be so equipped, adjusted, and tuned so that the exhaust is in good working order. 
d.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart to operate or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer is rendered unserviceable by removal, alteration, or which interferes with its operation. 
F.  PERMIT REQUIRED 
1.  No person shall operate, cause to be operated, or allow the operation of a golf cart on a public roadway unless a valid permit has been issued for that golf cart or otherwise allowed by law. A permit is not required for golf carts owned or leased by the golf course and used entirely on the golf course or crossing from one section of a golf course to another section of the same course. A permit is not required for a privately owned golf cart used entirely on the golf course or crossing from one section of a golf course to another section of the same course. No golf cart exempted from permitting under this section may be operated on a public roadway for any other purpose. 
2.  Application for a permit authorizing the operation of a golf cart shall be made by a person who owns, leases, or otherwise uses a golf cart. Such application shall be made in writing to the chief of police or his designee on a form designated for that purpose. On such application shall be set forth the following: 
a.  The application shall include the name, address, telephone number, and state driver's license number, if applicable, of the permit holder. 
b.  The application shall include a statement that the permit holder and any user shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Santa Fe, Texas for any and all civil liabilities associated with said registration and waives any and all rights to sue or allow subrogation by insurance company. 
c.  The application shall include the street address where the golf cart is kept, including the particular suite or apartment number, if applicable. 
d.  The application shall include any business name used for the premises where the golf cart is kept. 
e.  The application shall include year, make, model, color, vehicle identification number or serial number if no V.I.N. has been issued to the golf cart, electric or gasoline. 
f.  The application shall include the signature of the Golf Cart Owner/Applicant, signifying the agreement to the terms and conditions of the permit. 
g.  The motorized cart shall be inspected by a person(s) and at a location designated by the chief of police to ensure compliance with requirements of this article before the issuance of a permit. 
h.  The permit shall be permanently affixed on the left side of the cart in such a manner that it is clearly visible from 50 feet. The permit must not be damaged, altered, obstructed, or otherwise made illegible. The permit holder shall apply for replacement permit and pay all applicable cost associated with the issuance and inspection of the cart. 
i.  The permit is not transferable and shall only be placed upon the cart for which it was issued. 
j.  A permit issued to a motorized cart shall become invalid if the motorized cart is altered in any manner that fails to comply with any requirement of this section. 
3.  Permits/stickers are valid for a period of two years. The following fees shall apply: 
a.  Inspection by police department: $50.00 (includes permit/sticker). 
b.  Re-inspection by police department: $10.00 (if a cart fails the initial inspection). 
4.  The permit holder shall notify the Santa Fe Police Department within ten (10) working days if the motorized cart transfers ownership or the address of the normal storage location has changed. The information shall be submitted on a form designated by the chief of police. 
5.  Lost or stolen permit/stickers are the responsibility of the owner. A police report must be filed in the event of a lost or stolen permit/sticker. If no record can be found of a previous application, nor the receipt of a permit/sticker, the chief of police may direct the applicant to reapply and also remit any and all fees necessary before a replacement permit/sticker is issued. 
6.  Any person who operates a cart and fails to receive and properly display a City of Santa Fe permit/sticker will be in violation of this section in addition to all applicable state laws. 
7.  A permit may be revoked at any time by the chief of police or designee if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway or streets within the City of Santa Fe or the motorized cart fails to comply with the requirements of this section. For purposes of this section, the commission of any of the violations described in Section C, Operational Regulations, constitutes evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the streets within the City of Santa Fe. 
G.  LIABILITY 
1.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the City of Santa Fe, Texas, for any injuries to persons, pets, or property which may result from the use and operation of a golf cart by an authorized driver. 
2.  Owners are fully liable, responsible, and accountable for the actions of any individual that they provide permission to use, operate, and drive said golf cart, both on personal and/or city and public properties. This described liability responsibility especially applies to personal injuries and property damage resulting from golf cart drivers who are minors under the age of 21 with or without a current and valid Texas driver's license. 
H.  PENALTIES 
1.  Any person who violates any of the terms of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
a.  Traffic violations for which the owner and/or driver of the golf cart may be subject to pursuant to state law; and 
b.  A misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for each day a violation continues to be an offense. 
(Ordinance No. 01-2018 of January 11, 2018, Sec. 1) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 01-2018 set out the above provisions as a new § 9.13. To avoid duplication of section numbering, and with the concurrence of the city, these provisions have been included as § 9.14 as herein set out above.  
CHAPTER 10 - UTILITIES 
 
SECTION 1: - PIPELINES, LAYING OR REPLACING OF 
A.  DEFINITION OF TERMS 
All terms used herein shall be taken in their ordinary signification except the following: 
(1)  Commodity means any substance capable of being transmitted through a pipeline which is, or may become, flammable, toxic, or otherwise hazardous to human, animal, or plant health and/or life. 
(2)  Pipeline means a line of pipe with pumps, valves, and control devices for conveying a commodity or commodities. 
(3)  Shut-off Valve means any device installed in a pipeline and used to stop the conveyance of a commodity or commodities through a pipeline. 
B.  PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person, firm, or corporation shall lay any pipeline, nor shall an existing pipeline be entirely replaced, across, or along and under the public streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, public squares, and/or public places within the City of Santa Fe, unless and until a permit has been obtained for such pipeline under the terms of this section. 
(Ordinance 17-79 of October 11, 1979) 
C.  BOND REQUIRED 
(1)  In the event that the city shall issue a permit under the provisions of this section, the applicant therefor shall post a satisfactory corporate obligation commercial or cash bond with the city council conditioned to secure the city against all loss, damage, or injury of any kind which may result to the city by reason of the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, extension, or laying of the pipeline. The amount and type of such bond shall be based upon the location of such pipeline, the length of such line, and the potential hazards involved by reason of such construction. 
(2)  Said bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city secretary and remain in force and effect and on deposit for at least a period of one (1) year from completion of construction, and in addition the bond will be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay off fines, penalties, and other assessments imposed upon provisions, and conditions of this section and the ordinance granting the permit, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city, which may be disturbed or damaged by reason of the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, extension, or laying of the pipeline, to their former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and will, after completion, grade, level, and restore said property to the same surface condition, as nearly as possible, as existed when pipeline work first commenced; and that the permittee will indemnify and hold the City of Santa Fe harmless form any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit, including the payment of any expenses incurred by the city for reasonable attorney's fees for representation of the city for any legal action which may be filed by either party hereto by reason of seeking or recovery of damages to the city as aforesaid. If at any time, the city council shall deem any permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permitted to make an additional cash bond. If after completion of construction, permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this section, and the ordinance granting the permit, the permittee may apply to the city council for a refund of said bond. 
(Ordinance 11-95 of October 26, 1995) 
D.  TRUNK LINE PERMIT-TO BE GRANTED BY ORDINANCE; DEPTH OF PIPES 
A permit to lay or construct a trunk pipeline across or along and under any street or streets in the city shall only be granted by ordinance which shall state the streets across or along and under which the pipeline is to be laid and shall state with particularity the point or points at which the pipeline will cross or run along and under any such street. No such permit will be granted nor any such ordinance passed unless so much of the entire pipeline as is proposed to be laid through or under any undeveloped or unplatted area within the limits of the city is to be buried and laid to a depth of at least four feet (4') measured between the top of the line and the natural surface of the ground; provided, that at any point or points where such line is to cross or run along and under an existing street or streets and/or any proposed street which has been designated on the master plan for the City of Santa Fe or the official city map of the City of Santa Fe, said line must be buried to a depth of at least six feet (6') measured between the top of the line and the natural surface of the ground and encased. Provided further, if at any particular point or points the city council recommends that a greater or lesser depth be required, if known and reasonable facts presented show that the recommendation is prudent and reasonable, such permit will not be granted except upon agreement by the permittee to comply with such required depth. 
E.  LOCATION OF OIL, GAS, CHEMICAL, AND PETROLEUM PRODUCT PIPELINES WITH STREETS, ALLEYS, AND PUBLIC PLACES 
(1)  All oil, gas, chemical, or petroleum product pipelines, which shall be constructed within the streets, alleys, and other public places in the City of Santa Fe, Texas, shall be located wholly not less than four feet (4') below the surface of the ground, and twelve inches (12") from any water main, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or other subsurface structure, when traversing such water main, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or other subsurface structure. 
(2)  All oil, gas, chemical, or petroleum product pipelines shall be located wholly not less than four feet (4') from the outside extremity of any other oil, gas, chemical, or petroleum product pipeline except when both pipes are encased. If both pipes are encased they may be located wholly not less than twelve inches (12") from the outside extremity of each pipeline. 
(3)  All oil, gas, chemical, or petroleum product pipelines shall be located wholly not less than four feet (4') from the outside extremity of any water main or sanitary sewer main when constructed parallel to such water main or sewer main. 
(4)  No oil, gas, chemical, or petroleum product pipeline shall be constructed within sixteen feet (16') of a building or structure designed or built for human habitation. 
(5)  All oil, gas, chemical, or petroleum product pipelines constructed within the City of Santa Fe, Texas, shall be so constructed that a cutoff valve is installed within one hundred feet (100') of each city limit line location. These valves shall be constructed in the pipeline in a manner that permits isolation of the city from other facilities in the event of an emergency. 
F.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; SUBMITTING PLANS; REPORT TO COMMISSION 
Any person desirous to construct any trunk pipeline across or along and under any street within the limits of the city shall first submit to the city council a plan accurately showing the proposed location, course, and alignment of the proposed pipeline, accompanied by a written application for the passage of an ordinance as hereinabove provided, which application shall show (unless the same are sufficiently shown on the plan) the time, manner, means and methods of the proposed construction, the particular commodity proposed to be transported through such line, and the maximum pressure and maximum temperature under which the same may be pumped or otherwise caused or permitted to flow through any and all of the particular portions of the line. Such plan, which shall consist not only of the plan but also of a suitable alignment map as drawn for the applicant for its own records, shall accurately show the location of all existing streets, all proposed streets designated on the master plan for the City of Santa Fe or on the official map of the City of Santa Fe across or along and under which the pipeline is intended to be laid. Two (2) copies thereof and of the application shall be presented to the city engineer. The city engineer shall report to the city council upon his examination of such application and plans (including such changes in the plans as the applicant may have made upon his suggestion) with his recommendations as to the granting or denying of the application. He shall, in his report and recommendation, state whether the depth or depths at which it is proposed to be laid through undeveloped or unplatted areas is, to the extent economically feasible, consistent with the probable location of and opening of future streets and the probable laying of water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer lines incident to such probable future development. 
G.  PERMIT FEES 
Every such ordinance granted for the carrying of trunk pipelines under city streets shall provide that the permittee pay to the city an initial permit fee in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and shall further provide for the payment of an annual fee thereafter in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year, payable annually in advance each year that said pipeline is in operation, on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of the ordinance granting such permit. 
H.  CONDITIONS IMPOSED BY ORDINANCES; SAVING CITY HARMLESS, REFILLING DEPRESSIONS, REPAIRING STREETS 
An ordinance granting any permit shall require the permittee to save the city harmless from liability for injury or damage to any person or persons or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair, or removal of any part or all of such pipeline within the right-of-way of any street of the city, whether existing at the time such ordinance is passed or thereafter dedicated or otherwise coming into existence; and shall require the permittee to pay to the city all damages caused to the city or any of its agencies by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair, or removal of such pipeline or any part thereof. Such ordinance shall further require the permittee to refill all excavations made by it within the right-of-way of any unimproved (unpaved) street, whether existing at the time such ordinance is passed or thereafter dedicated or otherwise coming into existence, in the construction, operating, maintaining, or removing of such pipeline or any part thereof; and if after once refilling such excavation the earth within the excavated area settles so as to leave a depression, the permittee shall be required to make further necessary fills from time to time as ordered by the city council. The permittee will be required by such ordinance to repair all portions of any street across or along and under which its such pipeline is laid and place the same in as good a state of repair and condition as they were in at the time the construction, repair, or removal was commenced, such repairs to be to the satisfaction of the city council. Such ordinance shall further require that all such work of repairing or refilling shall be done under plans and specifications approved by the city council and subject to the city council's approval of the completed work; provided, however, no open cuts of paved streets and alleys shall be permitted, and the permittee shall tunnel and bore under said paved streets and alleys; and, provided further, all pipelines laid in public rights-of-way shall be installed in casing. Except in an emergency the permittee shall notify the city council before commencing at any time excavation in any portion of any said unpaved or unimproved street, and shall not wholly close any street, but shall at all times maintain a route of travel along and within such roadway area which shall include any sidewalk area, except in the event of an emergency, it being evident that immediate action is necessary for protection of the public and to minimize property damage and loss of investment, permittee may, at its own responsibility and risk make necessary emergency repairs, notifying the city council and the mayor of this action in writing, as soon as practical. Such ordinance shall also provide that in the event the permittee fails to commence or thereafter to diligently prosecute any repair, refilling, or other work required to be done by it within a reasonable time after being notified to do so by the city council, the city may cause such work to be done at the expense of the permittee and may recover all such expense from the permittee together with all costs and reasonable attorney fees. 
I.  RELOCATION OF LINE 
Each permit granted to an applicant shall provide that any such lines which shall cross or be laid within and along any street or street right-of-way in existence will at any time thereafter be relocated or lowered by the permittee at his cost if found necessary by the city council incident to any future construction or improvement of such street or of any water line, sanitary sewer line, storm sewer line, or other public improvements within such street. In the event it becomes necessary to require such relocation, the city shall give the permittee thirty (30) days written notice of its requirement in this connection, and the permittee shall accomplish the said work at his sole expense within a reasonable time thereafter. 
J.  REGISTRATION OF PIPELINES 
The owner of every pipeline now located across or along and under the public streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, public squares, and/or public places within the City of Santa Fe and the owner of any pipeline constructed, or replaced under a permit hereinafter granted under the terms of this section, shall prepare and file with the city on or before April, 1979, three (3) official scaled, City of Santa Fe, Texas, street maps as currently revised by the city engineer, upon which the owner shall fully delineate the area within the city's corporate limits traversed by the existing or proposed pipeline with the route, distances, and shut-off valve locations clearly and indelibly drawn thereon together with the name and mailing address of the owner and the telephone number of at least one (1) officer or person available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis who can furnish or obtain immediately, information as to the pressure at the point or points of input nearest to the city and the common name of the commodity carried by the pipeline or pipelines of such owner. Immediately upon receipt of said maps the city secretary shall transmit one (1) copy to the city council, one (1) copy to each fire department operating in the city, including volunteer fire departments, and shall retain one (1) copy in the city files. The city secretary shall issue a receipt for each registration filed. Any change in the twenty-four (24) hour contact information must be promptly reported to each fire department in the city. 
K.  PIPELINE SIGNS 
Every pipeline, new or existing, within the corporate limits of the city shall bear at all times, in plain, indelible lettering, signs denoting the ownership of said pipeline, permanently affixed in the pipeline right-of-way. No person, except the owner, or his or its duly authorized agent, shall tamper with or remove any such sign. 
L.  EXCEPTIONS 
Those lands within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, which have been heretofore, or which may hereafter be declared industrial districts by the city council under the Texas Municipal Annexation Act, are wholly occupied by and subject to industrial development and; therefore, pipelines within said lands are excepted from the operation and effect of this section. 
M.  SHUT-OFF VALVE OPERATION; EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION ON OR ACROSS PIPELINES 
No person shall turn off, on, or otherwise operate or tamper with any pipeline shut-off valve within the city's corporate limits unless such person be an employee of the owner or operator of said pipeline or a duly authorized agent of such owner or operator. No person, other than the owner of the pipeline or his or its duly authorized agent, shall excavate over or change the grade of, operate on or construct anything on or across the right-of-way of any pipeline without first notifying the city council and the owner of the pipeline and giving them reasonable opportunity to have an observer present during such activity. 
N.  PENALTIES 
Any violation of any subsection or part of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and such violation thereof during all or any portion of any day shall be a separate offense and misdemeanor; and, upon final conviction, every person, firm, association, corporation, or partnership guilty of such violation shall be fined in accordance with chapter 1, section 5 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ordinance 17-79 of October 11, 1979)  
SECTION 2: - DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE 
A.  DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this section, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Board means the Texas Water Quality Board. 
(2)  Building shall include any house, business, factory, school house, theaters, filling stations, tourist courts, bus stations, taverns, or any other roofed and walled structure, public or private. 
(3)  The County means the Galveston County Building Inspection Department. 
(4)  City means the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(5)  Disposal System shall have the same meaning as the septic tank system. 
(6)  Drain Field means an area in which open joint or perforated piping is laid in gravel-packed trenches or excavations for the purpose of distributing the effluent discharged from a tank used as a part of an individual waste disposal system for absorption into the soil. 
(7)  Health District means the Galveston County Health District. 
(8)  Multiple Dwelling means any structure designed and intended to accommodate more than one (1) family and includes but is not limited to duplex buildings, and apartment buildings. 
(9)  Person means any individual, partnership, firm, public or private corporation, association, trust, estate, political subdivision, or agency, or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
(10)  Official means the director of the Galveston County Health District or his delegated representative. 
(11)  Private Wastewater Facilities means a disposal system which receives wastewater and does not have a discharge permit from the Texas Water Quality Board. It includes but is not limited to a septic tank system. 
(12)  Public Wastewater System means any wastewater system, publicly or privately owned, which has collection and treatment facilities, is available to the general public, and has a Texas Water Quality Board discharge permit. 
(13)  Septic Tank means any covered water-tight tank, designated for the treatment or holding of wastewater, whether aerobic or anaerobic. 
(14)  Septic Tank System shall mean all of the outside plumbing associated with the collection, treatment, and disposal of wastewater including the septic tank and drain field. 
(15)  Subdivision means a subdivision which has been platted and recorded with the county clerk of the county or counties in which the land lies, or which is required by statute to be so platted and recorded; or any four (4) or more contiguous lots or tracts, each of which is less than two (2) acres in size. 
(16)  Toilet means the hopper device for the deposit and discharge of human excreta into a water carriage system. 
(17)  Trailer Parks is any tract or parcel of land maintained, offered, or used for the parking or accommodation of house trailers, house cars, or similar mobile units or any other portable structures designed for use, or which may be used, or which are used for human habitation or living quarters. 
(18)  Wastewater means water carried waste, liquid or solid, organic or inorganic, which includes but is not limited to, human excreta and effluent from slop drains, bathtub drains, shower bath drains, and washing machine drains. 
B.  APPLICABILITY 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all of the area lying in the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
C.  REGULATIONS CONTROLLING THE DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE 
After the effective date of this section, only the following types of wastewater discharge shall be lawful: 
(1)  Wastewater discharged into a public wastewater system operating under a valid waste control order issued by the board. 
(2)  Wastewater discharged into a private wastewater facility permitted in accordance with the regulations contained in this section. 
D.  LICENSING AUTHORITY DESIGNATED TO PERFORM LICENSING AND REGISTRATION FUNCTIONS OF THIS SECTION 
(1)  Powers 
Under the authority of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, the director of the Galveston County Health District shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To enforce all the regulations contained in this section. 
(b)  To make all required inspections and special inspections of all private wastewater facilities located or to be located within the area covered by this section. 
(c)  To collect all fees set by the city necessary to recover all the costs incurred in meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Responsibilities 
The director of the Galveston County Health District shall have the following responsibilities: 
(a)  To make quarterly reports to the city council of the City of Santa Fe on all action taken concerning this section. 
(b)  To perform all the duties necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
E.  GALVESTON COUNTY PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR WASTEWATER FACILITIES 
(1)  Toilets 
Every owner of any building or part thereof occupied by people for any purpose, any part of the day or night, shall provide sanitary toilet accommodations and said accommodations shall be kept and maintained in proper working condition. 
(2)  Disposal System 
All effluent from septic tanks shall be disposed of through a subsurface drainage field designed in accordance with good public health practice. The disposal system shall be sufficient to prevent the pollution of surface soil, the contamination of any drinking water supply, the infection of any flies, cockroaches, or the creation of any other nuisance. 
(3)  Septic Tanks 
All wastewater of any kind shall be disposed of through a septic tank unless otherwise approved by the health district. 
(4)  Wastewater Permit Required 
Every owner of a building or part thereof occupied by people for any purpose, any part of the day or night in the city, which utilizes private wastewater facilities, must have a valid wastewater permit. 
(5)  Compliance with Section 
All private wastewater facilities constructed in the city after the passage of this section shall obtain a wastewater facilities permit in accordance with this section and shall submit all information and permit all inspections required by this section. 
(6)  Requirements for Existing and New Facilities 
Private wastewater disposal facilities existing within the city on the date of the passage of this section are automatically permitted hereunder so long as the system is not shown to be causing water pollution or nuisance conditions. Any new construction or addition to existing facilities must be designed in the manner prescribed by A Guide to the Disposal of Household Sewage published by the Texas State Department of Health and must meet all special design and construction requirements of the health district. 
(7)  Private Wastewater Facilities Requirements 
Any developer, contractor, builder, or other interested person or persons desiring to construct private wastewater facilities in the city, must obtain approval from the Galveston County Health District of the plan for wastewater disposal. He must fulfill the following requirements: 
(a)  Submit two (2) copies of the form entitled "Galveston County Health District Inspection Report of Private Wastewater Disposal System." 
The plot on the above-mentioned form must include size of lot; all structures on lot such as buildings, barns, pens, etc.; size and location of septic tank or other treatment facilities; length and location of absorption field; distance of septic tank from house, property line, well, and absorption field; distance of absorption field from house, property line, well, and septic tank; distance and direction to closest neighboring well from septic tank and absorption field; and distance and direction to closest open water such as ponds, lakes, streams, etc. 
(b)  All plans for the construction of new wastewater treatment facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the health district before any construction of any kind is begun. 
(c)  The private wastewater treatment facility must be designed in the manner prescribed by A Guide to the Disposal of Household Sewage published by the Texas State Department of Health and must meet all special design and construction requirements of the Galveston County Health District. 
(d)  All private wastewater facilities shall be constructed on minimum size lots of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and/or lots of sufficient size that any water well is at least fifty feet (50') from any septic tank and at least one hundred feet (100') from any drain field line and that the drain field line is of a certain length, specified by the health district, unless a percolation test indicates the field line can be shorter and/or the lot must be of sufficient size and shape to meet all the terms and conditions of this section. 
(8)  When Wastewater Permit in Force 
A wastewater permit, for new construction which is covered by the Galveston County Building Regulations, will be automatically in force and valid upon final inspection and approval of materials and construction of the wastewater facilities by the Galveston County Health District and after written verification is submitted to and received by the county from the health district that the wastewater facilities meet all requirements of this section. 
(9)  When Connection to Public Wastewater System Required 
Every owner of a building or part thereof occupied by people for any purpose, any part of the day or night, where a main or lateral sewer of a public wastewater system is laid and maintained within three hundred feet (300') of such building and in such part of a street or alley as lies immediately adjacent to the lot, lots, parcel of land, or premises on which such building or part of a building is located, or when otherwise becomes available, shall connect with the public wastewater system, provided that a schedule of fees for service connections and normal monthly service charges shall be furnished to the city for their approval. 
(10)  Approval of Subdivision Plans for Private Wastewater Facilities 
(a)  Any developer or other interested person desiring to create a subdivision using private wastewater facilities must first show to the Galveston County Health District why it is not feasible to either connect to an existing or planned public wastewater collection and treatment system or establish such a system for the planned development. 
(b)  Any developer or other interested person creating a subdivision using private wastewater facilities must obtain approval from the Galveston County Health District of his plan for wastewater disposal. 
(i)  To obtain approval he must meet all the terms and conditions of this section and he must inform each prospective buyer in writing that the subdivision is subject to all of the terms and conditions of this section; that a permit will be required by private wastewater facilities constructed in the subdivision; and that a wastewater disposal plan has been filed for the subdivision, and that the areas judged suitable for private wastewater facilities have been defined. 
(ii)  If investigation pursuant to this subsection reveals that a lot, section, or any portion of the subdivision is not suitable for the use of private wastewater facilities, the prospective buyer or buyers shall be so notified. 
(11)  Right of Inspection 
Officials of the health district shall have the right and privilege of entering any premises within the county within reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspecting private wastewater facilities after displaying proper identification to an adult occupant of said premises. 
(12)  Permit Revocation 
Any violation of this section will constitute grounds for revocation of the wastewater facilities permit. 
(13)  Written Notice of Revocation 
The wastewater facilities permit will be considered revoked upon a written notice containing reasons for revocation to the property owner or his agent and/or to the occupant of any violation of this section or any state law from any health official of the Galveston Health District. The written notice may be delivered in person by the health official or sent by regular U.S. mail to the property owner or his agent or to the address where the violation occurred. 
(14)  Percolation Test 
The director of the health district or his representative may require, if he deems necessary, a percolation test on any lot or section, or any other previously untested area. The test shall be conducted under the direction of a sanitarian registered by the State of Texas or by any registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Texas. The purpose of such test is to determine the capabilities of the area for absorbing properly all effluent emitted through the drain field. 
(15)  Test Holes 
It shall be the responsibility of the contractor or the property owner to prepare all test holes and provide adequate clean water necessary to conduct the percolation test. 
(16)  Percolation Test Fee 
The county of Galveston County shall be paid a reasonable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to recover the costs of administration and services performed for a percolation test. 
(17)  When Owner Requests Percolation Test 
Any property owner may request that the health district perform a percolation test on his property. When a percolation test is requested, the same fee as stated in paragraph (16) above will be charged and the same responsibilities as stated in paragraph (15) above shall apply. 
(18)  Private Wastewater Systems 
Any person constructing a private wastewater system for anyone other than themselves on any property other than their own must first be registered with the health district. The health district will acquaint the constructors with all the requirements of this regulation. 
(19)  Violations 
Any person constructing a private wastewater system for anyone other than themselves on any property other than their own, who knowingly violates any subsection or paragraph of this regulation may be removed from the register and is subject to all penalties herein. 
F.  INSPECTIONS-GENERAL 
(1)  Private Wastewater Facilities 
The director of the Galveston County Health District or his representative shall inspect every private wastewater facility constructed after the passage of these regulations, for which an application for a building permit has been received by the county. 
(2)  Existing Facilities 
Private wastewater facilities existing on the date of passage of these regulations, which are to be changed and/or the loading increased, whether a county building permit is required or not, shall meet all the requirements of these regulations. 
(3)  Health District Inspections 
The plans for all new wastewater disposal systems shall be submitted to the health district for review before a county building permit will be issued and before construction on the septic tank system is begun. The health district shall examine each plan and the drawings and computations filed therewith to ascertain by such examination whether the design and construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this regulation. 
(4)  Permit Number to be Submitted to Health District 
Any person, firm, or corporation planning to erect, construct, or enlarge, alter, repair, or improve, any building or structure in the applicable jurisdiction or cause the same to be done, and who is required under the Galveston County Building Regulations to first obtain a separate building permit for such building or structures, must obtain said permit and present the permit number to the health district before any inspection of the wastewater facilities construction will be made. 
(5)  Director of Health District May Inspect 
The director of the Galveston County Health District or his representative may inspect at various intervals all materials, constructions, or work and may either approve the materials and that portion of the construction as completed or may notify the permit holder, or his agent, or the owner or his agent, or the person doing the work wherein the same failed to comply with this regulation. 
(6)  When Work Shall be Stopped 
Upon notice from the director of the health district or his representative that the work on any wastewater facility is being done contrary to the provisions of this regulation, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent, to the permit holder or his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which such work may be resumed. 
(7)  Misrepresentations 
The director of the health district or his representative may revoke and/or withhold a permit or approval issued or to be issued under the provisions of this section, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the permit or approval was leased or for any other reason the private wastewater facilities do not meet all the requirements of this section. 
(8)  Other Rules and Regulations 
The director of the Galveston County Health District shall have the power, with the approval of the city, to prescribe and promulgate such rules and regulations not inconsistent with any law of the state, as may be deemed necessary to protect the health and safety of the people and to effectively perform the duties imposed by this section. 
(9)  Special Consideration 
The provisions of this subsection are not intended to prevent the use of any material, or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this regulation, providing any such alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the director of the health district or his representative. The director or his representative may approve any such alternate, provided he finds that the proposed design and/or materials are satisfactory and comply with the provisions of A Guide to the Disposal of Household Sewage published by the Texas State Department of Health, as adopted, and all special requirements of the health district, and that the material, method, or work offered, is for the purpose intended at least the equivalent of that provided in the guide in quality, strength, effectiveness, durability, and safety. The health director may require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding material, method of construction, and/or effectiveness of the system. 
Request for special construction of any material, lot size, method of construction, and/or design not specifically prescribed by this regulation shall be considered each separately and unto itself. This shall include but is not limited to trailer parks and multiple dwellings. 
(10)  Final Inspection 
The property owner or his agent or the person constructing the wastewater facilities or his agent shall notify the health district at least one (1) day in advance of the desired date of the final inspection. All work shall be completed before the final inspection is made except that the septic tank or tanks shall be open and the backfill on the absorption field shall not be applied. 
(11)  Health District Approval Required 
The final inspection by the county or connection of the utility services shall not be made until after the approval of the health district, in the final inspection, as required in the Galveston County Building Regulations. 
(12)  Work to be Completed Within Six (6) Months 
All construction of the septic tank system shall be completed and the final inspection made by the health district within six (6) months of the approval of the septic tank system plans or new plans shall be submitted. 
(13)  Defective Work or Materials 
Final inspection shall not relieve the septic tank system contractor of his responsibility to the owner of the property for any defective work or material. 
G.  FEES 
(1)  Over and Above Building Permits 
Where a building permit is required under the Galveston County Building Regulations to erect, construct, or enlarge, alter, repair, or improve any building or structure, a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) over and above the required building permit fee shall be charged and collected by the county, and said fee shall cover the costs incurred in reviewing and approving the proposed plan and the inspection, provided the facilities meet all requirements of this regulation and no further inspections are required and said fee shall be paid into the general fund of Galveston County. 
(2)  When No Fees Charged 
There shall be no fee charged for any inspection as may be made under subsection F(5) of this section. 
(3)  Additional Inspections 
If after a final inspection is requested, as outlined in subsection F(11), the wastewater system does not meet all the requirements of this section, a notice in writing of the violations shall be given to the owner of the property or his agent, the permit holder or his agent, or to the person doing the work. For each additional inspection, a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be charged until the facilities meet all requirements of this section and each inspection shall be requested as outlined in subsection F(11). 
(4)  Special Inspections 
The county of Galveston County shall be paid a reasonable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to recover the costs of administration and services for the inspection of existing septic tank systems on any property, where an inspection is requested by any person and where the inspection is incidental to the sale of said property. 
(5)  Collection of Fees 
All additional inspection fees as outlined in paragraph (3) above and special inspection fees as outlined in paragraph (4) shall be collected on or before the final inspection. Certified checks, cashier's checks, personal checks, or money orders shall be sent to the Galveston County Health District, 1207 Oak (P.O. Box 939), La Marque, Texas 77568, and shall be made payable to the general fund of Galveston County. 
(6)  Accounting of Permit Fees 
The director of the Galveston County Health District shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, the date, and amount therefor. 
H.  ENFORCEMENT OF THIS ORDER 
(1)  Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any provision of this section has occurred, the City of Santa Fe may institute a suit in district court through its own attorney for injunctive relief or civil penalties or both, as authorized in Section 21.254 of the Texas Water Code, against the person or persons who committed or is threatening to commit the violation. 
(2)  This power may not be exercised by the City of Santa Fe unless a resolution authorizing the exercise of the power is adopted. 
(3)  In a suit brought by the City of Santa Fe under Section 21.254, the Texas Water Quality Board is a necessary and indispensable party. 
I.  EXCEPTIONS 
(1)  A person desiring an exception to any requirement of this section shall file a written statement with the health district stating the nature of the exceptions and the reason the exception should be granted. 
(2)  The health district shall review the request and reply to the applicant in writing within thirty (30) days either granting or denying the request. 
(3)  If the request is denied, the health district shall include in its reply the reasons for denial. 
J.  APPEALS 
A person aggrieved by an action of the health district made pursuant to this section is entitled to appeal to the municipal court of the City of Santa Fe if the following terms and conditions are met: 
(1)  All of the appropriate steps required of the aggrieved person by the terms and conditions of this section have been met. 
(2)  The aggrieved person has made a conscientious effort to resolve his problem with the health district. 
(Ordinance 15-79 of September 13, 1979)  
HOME RULE CHARTER City of SANTA FE, TEXAS 
  
Spanish translation of this document is available at City Hall and the Santa Fe Community Library. 
INDEX 
PREAMBLE OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE 
ARTICLE 1 - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
	Section 1.01 - Form Of Government 
	Section 1.02 - The Boundaries 
	Section 1.03 - City Limits - Extension Of Boundaries 
	Section 1.04 - Contraction Of Boundaries 
ARTICLE 2 - POWERS OF CITY 
	Section 2.01 - General 
	Section 2.02 - General Powers Adopted 
	Section 2.03 - Eminent Domain 
	Section 2.04 - Zoning In General 
ARTICLE 3 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
	Section 3.01 - City Council 
	Section 3.02 - Mayor 
	Section 3.03 - Mayor Pro Tem 
	Section 3.04 - Acting Mayor 
	Section 3.05 - Council Qualifications And Filing For Office 
	Section 3.06 - Eligibility 
	Section 3.07 - Judge Of Election Qualifications 
	Section 3.08 - Compensation 
	Section 3.09 - Vacancies, Forfeiture, Filling Of Vacancies 
	Section 3.10 - General Powers And Duties 
	Section 3.11 - Prohibitions 
	Section 3.12 - Meeting Of Council 
	Section 3.13 - Quorum 
	Section 3.14 - Rules Of Procedure 
	Section 3.15 - Voting 
	Section 3.16 - Ordinances In General 
	Section 3.17 - Emergency Ordinances 
	Section 3.18 - Bonds For City Employees 
	Section 3.19 - Investigative Body 
ARTICLE 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
	Section 4.01 - City Manager 
	Section 4.02 - Powers And Duties Of City Manager 
	Section 4.03 - Acting City Manager 
ARTICLE 5 - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 
	Section 5.01 - General Provisions 
	Section 5.02 - Municipal Court 
	Section 5.03 - Judge Of Municipal Court 
	Section 5.04 - Clerk Of Municipal Court 
	Section 5.05 - City Attorney 
	Section 5.06 - City Secretary-Appointment; Removal; Compensation 
	Section 5.07 - Duties Of City Secretary 
ARTICLE 6 - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
	Section 6.01 - City Elections 
	Section 6.02 - Canvassing 
	Section 6.03 - Election By Majority 
	Section 6.04 - Run-Off Election 
	Section 6.05 - Filing For Office 
	Section 6.06 - Official Ballots 
	Section 6.07 - Taking Office 
ARTICLE 7 - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
	Section 7.01 - Power Of Initiative 
	Section 7.02 - Power Of Referendum 
	Section 7.03 - Frequency Of Election. 
	Section 7.04 - Scope Of Recall 
	Section 7.05 - Petitions For Recall 
	Section 7.06 - Recall Procedure 
	Section 7.07 - Form Of Recall Petition 
	Section 7.08 - Various Papers Constituting Recall Petition 
	Section 7.09 - Public Hearing To Be Held On Recall Petition 
	Section 7.10 - Recall Election To Be Called 
	Section 7.11 - Ballots In Recall Elections 
	Section 7.12 - Results Of Recall Election 
	Section 7.13 - Recall, Restriction Thereon 
	Section 7.14 - Failure Of City Council To Call An Election 
	Section 7.15 - Form Of Petition 
	Section 7.16 - Filing Examination And Certifications 
	Section 7.17 - Council Consideration And Submission To Voters 
	Section 7.18 - Referendum Petition: Suspension Of Effect Of Ordinances 
	Section 7.19 - Results Of Referendum Elections 
	Section 7.20 - Court Review: New Petition 
ARTICLE 8 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
	Section 8.01 - General Powers 
ARTICLE 9 - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 
	Section 9.01 - Fiscal Year 
	Section 9.02 - Submission Of Budget 
	Section 9.03 - Budget 
	Section 9.04 - Amendments After Adoption 
	Section 9.05 - Capital Program 
	Section 9.06 - Public Records 
	Section 9.07 - Lapse Of Appropriations 
ARTICLE 10 - TAX ADMINISTRATION 
	Section 10.01 - Division Of Tax Administrations 
	Section 10.02 - Power To Tax 
	Section 10.03 - Assessment Of Property 
	Section 10.04 - Taxes: When Due And Payable 
	Section 10.05 - Tax Liens 
	Section 10.06 - Issuance Of Bonds 
ARTICLE 11 - FRANCHISE OF PUBLIC UTILITIES 
	Section 11.01 - Powers Of The City 
	Section 11.02 - Franchise, Power Of Council 
	Section 11.03 - Acquisition By Eminent Domain 
	Section 11.04 - No Public Utility Purchase Without Voter Approval 
	Section 11.05 - Right Of Regulations 
	Section 11.06 - Consent Of Property Owners 
	Section 11.07 - Extensions 
	Section 11.08 - Other Conditions 
	Section 11.09 - Franchise Records 
	Section 11.10 - Regulation Of Rates 
	Section 11.11 - Municipally Owned Utilities 
	Section 11.12 - Sales Of Services 
ARTICLE 12 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
	Section 12.01 - Publicity Of Records 
	Section 12.02 - Nepotism 
	Section 12.03 - Personal Financial Interest 
	Section 12.04 - Assignment, Execution And Garnishment 
	Section 12.05 - Power To Settle Claims 
	Section 12.06 - Security Or Bond Not Required 
	Section 12.07 - Notice Of Claim 
	Section 12.08 - Separability 
	Section 12.09 - Effect Of Charter On Existing Law 
	Section 12.10 - Interim Government 
	Section 12.11 - Amendment To Charter 
	Section 12.12 - Official Newspaper 
	Section 12.13 - Prohibitions 
	Section 12.14 - Gender 
	Section 12.15 - Pending Matters 
	Section 12.16 - Submission Of Charter To Electors 
 
  We, the people of the City of Santa Fe, Texas in order to establish a home rule municipal government that will provide for the future progress of our City through local self government, do hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter in Accordance with the Statutes of the State of Texas; and do hereby declare the citizens of the City of Santa Fe, Galveston County, Texas, residing within legally established boundaries of said City, to be a political subdivision of the State of Texas incorporated forever under the name of the "City of Santa Fe" with such power, rights and duties as are herein provided. 
ARTICLE 1 
FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Section 1.01 - FORM OF GOVERNMENT: 
  The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State constitution, the Statutes of this State and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the "City Council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the City Manager, who in turn shall be held responsible to the City Council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the City. All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the State constitution or the Statutes of the State.  
Section 1.02 - THE BOUNDARIES 
  The boundaries of the City of Santa Fe are hereby established and located and situated in the County of Galveston, State of Texas, and described by the metes and bounds; such metes and bounds recorded in the office of the county clerk of Galveston County, Texas. 
(Ordinance No. 14-2004 of May 27, 2004, Sec. 1, Exh. A.; Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 1.03 - CITY LIMITS - EXTENSION OF BOUNDARIES 
  The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Santa Fe and to provide for the alteration and the extension of said boundary limits, and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without the consent of the inhabitants annexed subject to the procedures set forth in State law.  
Section 1.04 - CONTRACTION OF BOUNDARIES 
  Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe any territory not suitable or necessary for City purposes, and lying adjacent to the corporate limits, the City Council may, upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory if the same be inhabited, or without any such petition if the same be uninhabited, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of said City; said petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the City and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained; and when said ordinance has been duly passed the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of said City, and from and after the entry of such ordinance said territory shall cease to be a part of said City, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said City, and the City shall continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the City as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the City. 
ARTICLE 2 
POWERS OF CITY  
Section 2.01 - GENERAL 
  The City of Santa Fe may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever; may cooperate with the federal government, the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof or any political subdivision of the State of Texas; and shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the power granted. The City may own or acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation or may sell, lease, hold, manage, control and police any property now owned by it or which it may hereafter acquire, and shall have the right to lease or let its property whether inside or outside of the City Limits subject to the limitations hereinafter set out, and may construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities, may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the City by the issuance and sale of bonds, certificate of obligation, warrants or notes of the City; may appropriate the money of the City for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the City, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its residents, and may provide suitable penalties for the violations of any ordinance enacted by the City of Santa Fe; and except where prohibited by the constitution and laws of this State or restricted by this Charter, the City may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 2.02 - GENERAL POWERS ADOPTED 
  The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive. In addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate or the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government and all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. The City of Santa Fe shall have and may exercise all the powers enumerated in Article 1175, Chapter 13, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925 as now or hereafter amended.  
Section 2.03 - EMINENT DOMAIN: 
  The City shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The City may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the governing authority, when so expressed, to take the fee in lands so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purpose. The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this Charter.  
Section 2.04 - ZONING IN GENERAL: 
  The Council shall have full power and authority to zone the city and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules and regulations governing the same under and by virtue of the authority given cities and legislative bodies thereof by Articles 1011A through 1011J inclusive, of the 1925 Revised Civil Statutes of Texas as now or hereafter amended. 
ARTICLE 3 
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
Section 3.01 - CITY COUNCIL: 
  The powers of the municipal government and the administration of the business affairs of the City shall be conducted by a Mayor and five (5) Councilmen, who, together, shall be known and designated as the City Council. Each shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City at large by place and shall hold their respective offices for three (3) years, and until their successors are elected and qualified, unless sooner removed as provided by this Charter or the laws of the State of Texas. (The Mayor's position and positions two (2) and three (3) beginning with the 2009 election and positions one (1), four (4), and five (5) beginning with the 2010 election.) The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council and shall not vote, except in case of a tie vote. The Mayor shall have power to veto within 3 days, but the veto may be overridden by a simple majority at the next regular or special called meeting. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 3.02 - MAYOR: 
  The Mayor shall be recognized as the head of the City Government for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for serving Civil processes, and by the governor for purposes of military law. In time of public danger or emergency, the Mayor shall take command of the police, maintain order and enforce the law. He shall see that all ordinances, bylaws, and resolutions of the Council are duly executed and put in force, sign all official documents such as ordinances, resolutions, conveyances, grant agreements, official plats, contracts, and bonds. He shall appoint special committees as he deems advisable and as instructed by Council. He shall perform such other duties consistent with this Charter or as may be imposed upon him by Council.  
Section 3.03 - MAYOR PRO TEM: 
  The City Council shall, at its first meeting, following each regular election, or as soon thereafter as practicable elect one (1) of its members as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall perform the duties of the Mayor in case of his absence or inability to perform the duties of his office, and who shall for such a time, be vested with all the powers of the Mayor.  
Section 3.04 - ACTING MAYOR: 
  In case of the absence or inability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem to perform the duties of their office, the remaining councilmen shall elect one of their members to act for that particular meeting in the place of the Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tem. An acting Mayor shall be selected to perform such duties for only one (1) meeting of the City Council, and for that particular meeting he shall be vested with all the powers of the Mayor.  
Section 3.05 - COUNCIL QUALIFICATIONS AND FILING FOR OFFICE: 
  In addition to any other qualifications prescribed by law, the Mayor, and each Councilman shall meet the following conditions while in office, and shall reside within the city limits while in office.  
Section 3.06 - ELIGIBILITY: 
  Eligibility to file. Each candidate for an elective City office shall meet the qualifications as prescribed by the Texas Election Code with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Shall be a registered voter of the city. 
(b)  Shall have resided continuously for at least twelve (12) months preceding the election within the corporate limits of the City, including territory annexed prior to the filing deadline. 
(c)  Shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(d)  No candidate may file more than one office or position number per election. 
(e)  No employee of the City shall hold an elected City office. He shall be granted a leave of absence by the City Council, without pay, at the time of filing for office, until after the election. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 3.07 - JUDGE OF ELECTION QUALIFICATIONS: 
  The Council shall be the final judge of all elections and of qualifications of its members and any other elected officials of the City.  
Section 3.08 - COMPENSATION: 
  Members of the Council shall serve without compensation provided, however, that they shall be entitled to all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official Council duties upon approval by the Council.  
Section 3.09 - VACANCIES, FORFEITURE, FILLING OF VACANCIES: 
(a)  Vacancies: 
The office of a Councilman or office of the Mayor shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of his office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office: 
A Councilman or the Mayor shall forfeit his office for certain offenses if so voted by a majority of the entire Council not affected by the forfeiture if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(2)  Violates any expressed prohibition of this Charter, as determined by Council or the courts. 
(3)  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, or a conflict of interest, or 
(4)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular Council meetings without being excused by the Council. 
(c)  Filling of Vacancies: 
A single vacancy in the Council shall be filled within sixty (60) days of the occurrence of the vacancy by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council by selection of a person qualified for the position as described in this Charter. This appointee shall serve until the position can be filled at the next regular City election. When more than one vacancy shall develop at any one time, a special election shall be called by the Council within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of the vacancies to fill the vacancies in the same manner as described herein for regular elections. However, if such vacancies occur within one hundred twenty (120) days of the regular election, then no special election shall be called and the remaining Council members shall appoint qualified persons to fill vacancies until the regular election. Not withstanding the requirements in section 3.13 that a quorum of the Council consist of three members, if at any time the membership of the Council is reduced to less than four, the remaining members may by majority action appoint additional members to raise the membership to four. These appointees shall serve until the positions can be filled at the next regular or special City election. All vacancies filled by election shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of the office so filled. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009) 
Note— Section 3.09 (c) is superseded by Section 11 of Article 11 of the Texas Constitution which requires a vacancy for a term exceeding 2 years but not exceeding 4 years to be filled by a special election with 120 days of the vacancy.  
Section 3.10 - GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES: 
  All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, and the Council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law.  
Section 3.11 - PROHIBITIONS: 
(a)  Holding other office: 
Except where authorized by law, no Mayor or Councilman shall hold any other City office of City employment during his term as Mayor or Councilman, and no former Mayor or Councilman, shall hold any compensated appointive City office of city employment until one year after the expiration of his term as Mayor or Councilman. 
(b)  Appointments and Removals: 
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any City Administrative officer or employees whom the Manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(c)  Interference with Administration: 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 3.19, the Council or its members shall deal with the City officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.  
Section 3.12 - MEETING OF COUNCIL: 
  The council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the business of the City and its citizens. The Council shall fix, by ordinance, the days and time of regular meetings. Special meetings of the Council shall be held on the call of the Mayor or a majority of the Councilmen.  
Section 3.13 - QUORUM: 
  Three councilmen shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business and no action of the Council shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the vote of three or more Councilmen. Councilmen shall not include the Mayor unless his vote is required to break a tie. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 3.14 - RULES OF PROCEDURE: 
  The Council, shall, by ordinance determine its own rules and order of business and the rules shall provide that citizens of the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting in regard to any matter under consideration.  
Section 3.15 - VOTING: 
  The Council shall provide for minutes being taken and recorded of all meetings, and such minutes shall be a public record. Voting, except on procedural motions shall be by roll call and the ayes and nayes shall be recorded in the minutes. 
  All members of the Council present, excluding the Mayor except to break a tie, shall vote upon every resolution or ordinance, except where there is a conflict of interests, the reason for which shall be stated concisely in the records. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 3.16 - ORDINANCES IN GENERAL: 
  Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the City Council only in written or printed form. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of appropriations. All ordinances except emergency ordinances, or those dealing with fines, penalties, budget, tax, franchises, public utilities or the setting of their rates, shall not be finally passed until they have been read on two separate days not less than 12 hours apart; provided however if an ordinance has been introduced at a regular meeting of the council the requirements for reading of two separate days may be dispensed with an affirmative vote of all the Council members present. The final reading of each ordinance shall be in full unless a written or printed copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member of the City Council prior to such meeting. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Santa Fe, Texas." 
  All ordinances which levy a fine or penalty and those which deal with franchises, public utilities or the setting of their rates, shall be read at two regular meetings followed by publication of a descriptive caption in one issue of the official newspaper of the City of Santa Fe before the same shall become effective.  
Section 3.17 - EMERGENCY ORDINANCES: 
  To meet a public emergency affecting life, property, or the public peace, the Council may adopt emergency ordinances. Such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. Neither shall they authorize the borrowing of money, except as provided in Section 9.04. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designated in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. Such emergency clause shall require the affirmative vote of three members of the City Council. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published as required for other adopted ordinances and shall become effective immediately. Every emergency ordinance so adopted, except one authorizing the borrowing of money as described herein, shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first day following the day on which it became effective, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance.  
Section 3.18 - BONDS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES: 
  The Council shall require bonds of all municipal officers and employees who receive or pay out any monies of the City. The amount of such bonds shall be determined by the Council and the cost thereof shall be borne by the City.  
Section 3.19 - INVESTIGATIVE BODY: 
  The Council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency, office, officer, or employee of the City, and for the purpose shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence pertaining to the inquiry. The Council shall provide by ordinance, the penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by such ordinance. 
ARTICLE 4 
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES  
Section 4.01 - CITY MANAGER: 
(a)  Appointment and Qualifications: 
The Council by majority vote of entire council shall appoint a City Manager. The method of selection shall be left to the discretion of the City Council so long as the method insures orderly, nonpartisan action toward securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position. The City Manager shall be chosen solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability. The City Manager shall be bonded at City expense in an amount of not less than ten thousand ($10,000) dollars. 
(b)  Compensation: 
The City Manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the Council according to his experience, educations, and training. The Compensation shall be agreed upon before appointment with the understanding that the Council may change it at their discretion. 
(c)  Residency: The City Manager shall reside within the city limits or the ETJ of the City of Santa Fe within six months of being hired by Council. Council may grant a variance. 
(d)  Term and Removal: 
The City Manager shall not be appointed for a definitive term but may be removed at the discretion of the Council by a vote of the majority of the entire Council. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final. It is the intention of the Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibilities of such suspension or removal in the Council. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 4.02 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER: 
  The City Manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City. He shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all City affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, he shall, with approval of the Council, appoint the administrative officers or directors of the City's departments which are provided for in this Charter or created by ordinance, and shall make all appointments of lessor position in the City's service on recommendation of the administrative officer or director of the department affected. When he deems it necessary for the good of the City, he may suspend any City employee provided, however, that no administrative officer as head of a department may be removed without the consent of the Council. 
(b)  He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by statute or ordinances. 
(c)  He shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(d)  He shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(e)  He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the Council. 
(f)  He shall be responsible for the submission to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City at the end of each fiscal year. 
(g)  He shall make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of City departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(h)  He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as he deems desirable. 
(i)  He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the Council. 
(j)  He shall be responsible for the proper handling, disbursement and reporting on all matters of finance, purchasing, property management and other acts required under article 9 of this Charter.  
Section 4.03 - ACTING CITY MANAGER: 
  The City Council shall appoint some person of suitable qualifications to serve as Acting City Manager during all vacancies in the office of City Manager. If an Administrative officer or departmental director is appointed Acting City Manager, such appointment shall be ex-officio and such officer shall not be deemed to be holding two civil offices of emolument. When an administrative officer or departmental director who may be serving ex-officio as Acting City Manager is not appointed as the regular City Manager, he shall revert to his former position, subject to removal only as provided in Section 4.02(a) of this Charter. Neither the Mayor nor any Councilman shall serve as Acting City Manager. 
ARTICLE 5 
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS  
Section 5.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS: 
(a)  Creation of Departments. 
The Council may by ordinance establish City Departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this Charter and may prescribe the function of all departments, offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this Charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other. 
(b)  Direction by Manager. 
All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and supervision of the City Manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager. The appointments of the directors of all departments established by the Council or by this Charter shall be subject to the approval of the Council, but approval by the Council shall not be required for the heads of subdivisions of any department, office or agency, or of any other subordinate employee of the City. The City Manager may serve as head of one or more such departments, offices or agencies or may appoint a person as the head of two or more of them. 
(c)  Each department head shall report to the Council, until such time as a City Manager assumes responsibility.  
Section 5.02 - MUNICIPAL COURT: 
  There shall be a court known as The Municipal Court of the City of Santa Fe, with such jurisdiction, powers and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 5.03 - JUDGE OF MUNICIPAL COURT: 
  The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a magistrate who shall be known as the Judge of the Municipal Court. The Presiding Judge shall be a licensed attorney in the State of Texas and shall be appointed by the Council to serve at the discretion of the Council. Associate, temporary, and relief judges are not required to be licensed attorneys. The City Council, by ordinance, may divide the Municipal Court into two (2) or more panels or divisions, each to be presided over by a magistrate one of whom shall be the Presiding Judge, and the other magistrates shall be Associate Judges, and by ordinance may provide for Temporary or Relief Judges to sit for the regular Judge or for the Presiding Judge or Associate Judges when such Judge or Judges, any or all, are temporarily unable to act for any reason, in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas relating to the Municipal Court in Home Rule Cities. Any or all such judges shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve at the discretion of the City Council. Such Judge or Judges shall receive such compensation as may be set by the City Council. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 5.04 - CLERK OF MUNICIPAL COURT: 
  There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the Court thereto, and otherwise perform any and all acts necessary in issuing process of such Court and conducting the business thereof.  
Section 5.05 - CITY ATTORNEY: 
  The City Council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the State of Texas, who shall be the City Attorney. He shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council and shall hold his office at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Attorney or such other attorneys selected by him with the approval of the City Council, will represent the City in all litigations. He shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the City and all officers and departments thereof. 
  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Council may engage special legal counsel to represent the City of Santa Fe in any specific matter or for the performance of any specifically delineated duties otherwise to be performed by the City Attorney.  
Section 5.06 - CITY SECRETARY-APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION: 
  The City Council shall appoint a City Secretary who shall serve at the discretion of the Council. He shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the Council.  
Section 5.07 - DUTIES OF CITY SECRETARY: 
  The City Secretary shall: 
1.  attend all meeting of the City Council and keep accurate records of all actions taken by the Council; 
2.  maintain the official records and files of the City; 
3.  keep and affix the seal of the corporation to documents as required by law or custom; 
4.  attest contracts, assessment certificates and other legal instruments when executed by the authorized officers of the City; 
5.  serve as the election official for all City elections; and 
6.  perform such other duties as may be required of him by this Charter, the City Council, or State law. 
ARTICLE 6 
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS  
Section 6.01 - CITY ELECTIONS: 
(a)  Schedule. 
The General City Election will he held annually on the uniform election date in May as prescribed by the Texas Election Code. The Council shall be responsible to specify places for holding such election. 
(b)  Special Election. 
The Council may, by resolution, order a special election under conditions specified elsewhere in this Charter, or for ordinances, bond issues, charter amendments, recall or other purposes deemed appropriate by Council. The Council will fix time and places for holding such special elections in accordance with the Texas Election Code, and provide all means for holding same. 
(c)  Voter Eligibility List. 
A certified list of voter registrants within the City, as prepared by the County-Tax Assessor-Collector, shall be maintained current by the County Tax Assessor-Collector. 
(d)  Conduct and Regulation of Elections. 
All City elections shall be governed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, general laws of the State, this Charter, and ordinance of the City, in the order named. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the election officials appointed or approved by the Council. 
(e)  Publicizing City Elections. 
It is the responsibility of the Council to inform the voters as to the time, place, date and purpose, for the upcoming general city election, in accordance with the Texas Election Code. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 6.02 - CANVASSING: 
  The returns of every municipal election shall be delivered from the election judge to the City Secretary at City Hall not later than twelve (12) hours after the closing of the polls. One extra copy shall be delivered for the Mayor at this time. The Council shall canvass the returns in accordance with the Texas Election Code. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council, by totals for each candidate, or, for or against each issue submitted. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 6.03 - ELECTION BY MAJORITY: 
  A majority vote for an election office is that number of votes which is greater than one-half of the total number of valid ballots cast for the office concerned. Any candidate for elective office who receives a majority vote shall be declared elected. If none of the candidates for an elective position receives a majority vote, none of such candidates shall be elected.  
Section 6.04 - RUN-OFF ELECTION: 
  In the event no candidate for an elective office receives a majority of the votes cast for that position in the general city or special election or there is a tie for first place, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) candidates who received the greatest number of votes. Such run-off election shall be held as prescribed by the Texas Election Code. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 6.05 - FILING FOR OFFICE: 
  Eligibility to File: 
  Each candidate for an elective city office shall meet the following qualifications: 
(a)  Qualification: Qualified as stated in Council Qualifications of this Charter in Section 3.05. 
(b)  Nomination: A person desiring to become a candidate for Mayor, or for any place on the City Council, or any other elected office, may file an application for a place on the ballot with the City Secretary in accordance with the Texas Election Code. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 6.06 - OFFICIAL BALLOTS 
(a)  Names on Ballot. 
The name of each candidate nominated for office, except those who have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designation or symbol, and in the form designed by the candidate. If two or more candidates have the same surname or surnames so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, their residence addresses shall be printed with their names on the ballot. 
(b)  Order of Listing. 
The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the supervision of the City Secretary. 
(c)  Early Voting Ballots. 
Procedures for early voting shall be consistent with current edition of Texas Election Laws. 
(d)  Ballots for Ordinances, Bond Issues, and Charter Amendments. 
An ordinance, bond issue or charter amendment, to be voted on by registered voters of the City shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement approved by majority of the whole Council, describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: "Shall the above described (Ordinance) (Bond issue) (Amendment) be adopted?" Immediately below or to the left of such question shall appear, in the following order, the words "Yes" and "No" each with a square in which the voter may cast his vote. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 6.07 - TAKING OFFICE: 
  The City Secretary shall promptly notify all persons elected to office. A candidate who is elected in a general, special or run-off City election shall, after taking the oath of office, take office, and enter into his duties at the next regular Council meeting after the returns are canvassed. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009) 
ARTICLE 7 
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL  
Section 7.01 - POWER OF INITIATIVE: 
  The voters shall have power to propose any ordinance except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the Council by a petition signed by currently qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of votes cast at the last general city election, or 250, whichever is the greater.  
Section 7.02 - POWER OF REFERENDUM: 
  The voters shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the Council or submitted by the Council to a vote of the voters, such power being known as the referendum, except in cases of bond ordinances and ordinances making the annual tax levy. Ordinances submitted to the Council by initiative petition and passed by the Council without change shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within twenty (20) days after the enactment by the Council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by currently qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of the votes cast at the last general city election or 250, whichever is greater, may file with the City Secretary requesting that any such ordinance be submitted to a vote of the voters.  
Section 7.03 - FREQUENCY OF ELECTION. 
  Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six (6) months, and no ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within one (1) year from the date of such election.  
Section 7.04 - SCOPE OF RECALL: 
  Any elected City official whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the City or appointed by the City Council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the City on grounds of incompetency, noncompliance with this Charter, misconduct or malfeasance in office.  
Section 7.05 - PETITIONS FOR RECALL: 
  Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of City Secretary: Which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least twenty percent (20%) of the number of votes cast in the last general City election, or 250, whichever is greater. Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign his own name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his name, voters registration number or date of birth, place of residence, giving name of street and number, and shall also write thereon the day, the month and year his signature was affixed. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 7.06 - RECALL PROCEDURE: 
  Any registered voters of the City may make and file with the person performing the duties of City Secretary an affidavit containing the name or names of the officer(s) whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The City Secretary shall immediately notify in writing the officer(s) sought to be removed that the affidavit has been filed and shall inform the officer(s) of its statement of grounds. The City Secretary shall within a period of two (2) working days from the time the affidavit was filed thereupon deliver to the registered voters making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The City Secretary shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by the City Secretary shall bear the signature of the City Secretary and be of such as prescribed in Section 7.07 of this Article, and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The City Secretary shall enter in a record to be kept in his office the name of the registered voters to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number to said persons.  
Section 7.07 - FORM OF RECALL PETITION: 
  The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the City Council of the City of Santa Fe, must distinctly and specifically state the grounds(s) upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one ground, such as for incompetency, noncompliance with this Charter, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed, notice of such matters and things with which he is charged. Recall petition papers provided by the person performing the duties of City Secretary shall be in form substantially as follows: 
  We the undersigned registered voters of the City of Santa Fe hereby demand the question of removing (Name of Person) from the office of (Name of Office) be submitted to a vote of the registered voters of the City. The charges and specifications upon which this demand for removal is predicated are as follows: 
_____
_____
NAME       ADDRESS       DATE 
_____
_____
The signatures shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF GALVESTON" 
I, _______, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
_______ Sworn and subscribed to, before me this _______ day of _______ 20___. 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 7.08 - VARIOUS PAPERS CONSTITUTING RECALL PETITION: 
  (a) The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription list, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other papers attached thereto. Verifications provided for in Section 7.05 of this Article may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts or copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons. No signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such original petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of City Secretary on the same day. The said Secretary shall immediately notify in writing, by registered mail, the officer so sought to be removed. 
  (b) Certification procedures as described in 7.16 shall be followed in certification of the recall petition. 
  Presentation of Recall Petition to City Council: 
  The person performing the duties of City Secretary shall present such certified petition to the City Council at the next regular Council meeting.  
Section 7.09 - PUBLIC HEARING TO BE HELD ON RECALL PETITION 
  The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the City Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the City Council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.  
Section 7.10 - RECALL ELECTION TO BE CALLED 
  If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the City Council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election. The election must be held on the first authorized uniform election date that affords enough time to hold the election in the manner required by law. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 7.11 - BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTIONS 
  Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: "Shall (Name of Person) be removed from the office (Name of Office) by recall?" 
(b)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two following words one above the other, in order indicated: 
"YES" 
"NO"  
Section 7.12 - RESULTS OF RECALL ELECTION 
  If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as vacancies in the City Council are filled. 
  In no instance shall an officer(s) removed from office by recall election succeed himself or themselves, nor shall his or their names appear on a ballot for elective office of the City of Santa Fe within a period of two (2) years following the date of the election at which he or they were removed from office.  
Section 7.13 - RECALL, RESTRICTION THEREON: 
  No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Santa Fe within three (3) months after his election or appointment, nor within six (6) months after an election for such officer's recall. A recall election need not be ordered by the Council if the term of office of the elected officer against whom a petition is filed is to expire within ninety (90) days after the petition is filed with the City Secretary.  
Section 7.14 - FAILURE OF CITY COUNCIL TO CALL AN ELECTION: 
  In case all of the requirements of this Charter have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said City Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then the County Judge of Galveston County, Texas, shall discharge any such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of City Secretary or by the City Council.  
Section 7.15 - FORM OF PETITION: 
  Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil, and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of five (5) voters, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that only be personally circulated the fore-going paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures appended thereto which were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they support to be. The number of circulators is not limited.  
Section 7.16 - FILING EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATIONS: 
  All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Secretary as one instrument. Within ten (10) days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator, and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters. The City Secretary shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. After completing his examination of the petition, if the City Secretary certifies that the petition is insufficient, he shall set forth in his certificate the particulars in which it is defective, and shall at once notify the petitioners of his findings. The City Secretary shall then notify the Council of the results of his examination at its next regular meeting. 
  An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten (10) days after the notification of the insufficiency had been sent by the City Secretary, by the filing of a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The City Secretary shall, within five (5) days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition, and, if the petition be still insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in his office, and notify the committee of petitioners of his findings, and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
  When a referendum petition, or amended petition as defined above, has been certified as sufficient by the City Secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or [further] action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless approved by the voters, as hereinafter provided.  
Section 7.17 - COUNCIL CONSIDERATION AND SUBMISSION TO VOTERS 
  Whenever the Council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the City Secretary, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read, and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The Council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty (60) days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to the Council by the City Secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the Council, and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?" 
  If the Council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by the initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefore, or if the Council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the voters not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days from the date the Council takes its final vote thereon. The Council shall, if no regular election is to be held within such period, provide for a regular election. 
  Ordinances submitted to a vote of the voters in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the City Attorney, but it shall be finally approved by the City Council. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance and if a paper ballot is used, it shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other in the order indicated: "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election, and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting on a initiated or referred ordinance or ordinances shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have below it the same two propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the voter shall be given an opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance.  
Section 7.18 - REFERENDUM PETITION: SUSPENSION OF EFFECT OF ORDINANCES 
  When a referendum petition is filed with the City Secretary, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(a)  there is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or 
(b)  the petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or 
(c)  the Council repeals the ordinance, or 
(d)  thirty (30) days have elapsed after vote for repeal of the ordinance has failed.  
Section 7.19 - RESULTS OF REFERENDUM ELECTIONS 
  If a majority of the voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the City. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If the conflicting ordinances are approved by the voters at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
  Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the voters shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the Council, after a period of two years has elapsed.  
Section 7.20 - COURT REVIEW: NEW PETITION 
  In the event the petition is found to be insufficient then a final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to review in a court of competent jurisdiction and higher. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon Court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
ARTICLE 8 
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
Section 8.01 - GENERAL POWERS 
  The City Council shall have authority to establish by ordinance such boards and commissions as it may deem necessary for the conduct of City business and management of municipal affairs. The authority, functions and responsibilities of such boards and commissions shall be such as is spelled out in the ordinance establishing them. All existing boards and commissions heretofore established shall be continued in accordance with the ordinance or other acts under which they have been created, or until the City Council shall by ordinance abolish, modify or alter the ordinances or acts under which they exist. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the elected City Council shall have paramount authority over all matters affecting the budgets, appropriation of funds, expenditures, purchases and sale of properties and procedures for accounting therefore, consistent with the expressed provisions of this Charter and applicable provisions of the State constitution and laws of this State. 
ARTICLE 9 
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION  
Section 9.01 - FISCAL YEAR 
  The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September of the next succeeding year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.  
Section 9.02 - SUBMISSION OF BUDGET 
  On or before the first meeting of July of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the Council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and the budget message. The Council shall review the proposed budget and make any appropriate changes prior to publishing the final budget.  
Section 9.03 - BUDGET 
A. Budget Message: A budget message explaining the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs shall be submitted with the budget. It shall outline the proposed financial programs of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, the capital program, and capital projects for five fiscal years succeeding the budget year. It shall describe the important features of the budget year and indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues including the reasons for such changes. It shall also summarize the City's debt position and contain such other material as the City Manager deems desirable. 
B. Budget Scope: The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and activities and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the Council may require. The budget shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and budgeted income and expenditure for the preceding fiscal year; budgeted and estimated income and expenditure for the current fiscal year; actual income and expenditure of the current fiscal year up to the time of preparation of the budget; and estimated income and expenditure for the next fiscal year. The total of the proposed expenditures for the budgeted year shall not exceed the estimated income and surplus. 
C. Content: The budget shall contain in separate sections the following: 
1.  A clear general summary of contents. 
2.  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of all funds. 
3.  An analysis and itemization of all estimated income of the City from surplus, miscellaneous income and taxes with miscellaneous income subclassified by source. 
4.  Tax rates and collections for the preceding five years or from incorporation of the City if the latter is less than five (5) year. 
5.  An itemized statement of expenditures for pending and proposed new capital projects. Included shall be the amounts appropriated from the budget, the amounts to be raised by issuance of bonds, and the amount required for down payment. 
6.  The amount required for sinking funds, for maturing serial bonds, and for interest on the City's debts. 
7.  The total amount of the City's outstanding debts, with a schedule of maturity on bond issues in an attachment. 
8.  A detailed estimate of the operating expenses of each department, office or agency. 
9.  Statement of estimated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned and operated by the City. A subsidiary budget for each utility shall be included giving details of income and expenditures. 
10.  Such other information as is required by Council or deemed desirable by the City Manager. 
11.  A contingency fund may be included not to exceed five percent of the General Fund proposed expenditure; and 
12.  Such dedicated reserves as may be required. 
D. Public Notice and Hearing: The Council shall post in the City Office and publish in the official newspaper a general summary of the proposed budget and a notice stating: 
1.  The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public; and 
2.  The time and place, not less than ten (10) days, nor more than thirty (30) days after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. 
E. Council Action: 
1.  The Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted at the time and place, so advertised or at another time and place with proper notification. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either for or against any item of the proposed budget. 
2.  After the public hearing, the Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. 
3.  The Council shall adopt the budget by ordinance on one reading. Adoption of the budget will require an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. 
F. Failure to Adopt: If the Council fails to adopt the budget by the last regular meeting of September, the amounts appropriated for operation during the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax normally approved as part of the budget adoption will be set such that the tax receipts for the budgeted year shall equal the tax receipts of the current fiscal year.  
Section 9.04 - AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION 
A. Supplemental appropriations: If during the fiscal year the manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Council may carry the excess into the next fiscal year or by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations to retire indebtedness or to fund emergency appropriations. 
B. At any time, in the fiscal year, the Council may not, pursuant to this section, make emergency appropriations, except that in case of grave public necessity, to meet unusual and unforeseen conditions which could not by reasonably diligent thought and attention have been included in the original budget. Such appropriation shall be by ordinance adopted by the favorable votes of four-fifths (4/5) of the Councilmen qualified and serving, and shall be made only upon recommendation of the Mayor or City Manager. 
C. Borrowing to Meet Emergency Appropriations. In the absence of inappropriated available revenues or other funds to meet emergency appropriations under the provisions of the next preceding section, the Council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money to meet such deficit by the issuance of notes, each of which shall be designated "Emergency Note" and may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes of any such fiscal year and any renewals thereof shall mature and be payable not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the fiscal year in which the emergency appropriation was made, as provided in the last preceding section. 
D. Reduction of Appropriations: If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendation as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action that it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit. 
E. Transfer of Appropriations: At any time during the fiscal year the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or agency. The Council may require their approval of these transfers within departments above a limit established by the Council. Upon written request by the City Manager, the Council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another. 
F. Limitations: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance. 
G. Effective Date: The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption of the ordinance.  
Section 9.05 - CAPITAL PROGRAM 
  The City Manager shall submit a five year capital program as an attachment to the annual budget. The capital program shall include the proposed program by the planning commission and comments by the City Manager. The program as submitted shall include: 
1.  A clear general summary of its contents; 
2.  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years succeeding the budget year, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
3.  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
4.  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
  The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.  
Section 9.06 - PUBLIC RECORDS 
  Copies of the budget and the capital programs as adopted shall be public records and shall be made available to the public upon request.  
Section 9.07 - LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS 
  Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
ARTICLE 10 
TAX ADMINISTRATION 
  Section 10.01 ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAX: 
  The assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes shall be compliant with the Texas Property Tax Code and Property Tax law. Subject to the approval of the City Council, the collection of taxes may be performed under contractual agreement with a third party. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 10.02 - POWER TO TAX: 
  The City shall have the power to levy, assess and collect taxes of every character, and for any municipal purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas as now or hereafter amended. The City shall have the power to levy taxes at a maximum increase of 7.50 percent (7 1/2%) above the effective tax rate and not to exceed the maximum rate of ninety cents (90¢) per one hundred dollars ($100) valuation. A tax levy in excess of this maximum rate must be approved by a majority of the votes cast by the electors of the City of Santa Fe. The tax rate will apply to the general fund, however, no tax limit will be set against any tax levied for the retirement of bonded indebtedness which has been authorized by the vote of the people. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 10.03 - ASSESSMENT OF PROPERTY: 
A. The basis for valuation for all taxable property shall be its market value as of the first day of January of each year. 
B. The Assessor-Collector shall be responsible for providing an assessment roll of said property by the first day of August of each year. This assessment roll shall be available for public inspection. If a change is made in an individual assessment from the previous year or a change is made in the owner's rendition of said property, a written notice shall be sent to such owner at his last known address, notifying him of such change and advising him that he may appear before the Assessor-Collector and/or the Board of Equalization to protest such change. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 10.04 - TAXES: WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE: 
  All taxes due the City of Santa Fe on real and personal property shall be payable at the office of the Assessor-Collector and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall be no later than October 1. Taxes shall be paid before February 1, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent, and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the City Council may provide by ordinance. The City Council may provide further by ordinance that all taxes, either current or delinquent, due the City of Santa Fe may be paid in installments. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approved tax roll shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from obligation to pay such current or past due taxes as shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question. No penalty or interest shall be added for unassessed years. 
(Charter amendment, May 9, 2009)  
Section 10.05 - TAX LIENS: 
  The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge or encumbrance upon real or personal property as of January 1 upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same. The lien, charge of encumbrance of the property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against non-resident. All taxes upon real estate and personal property shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property on which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction.  
Section 10.06 - ISSUANCE OF BONDS: 
  The City may issue bonds to pay for any property or public improvement which it may lawfully acquire or construct, to pay for any improvement the cost of which is to be assessed wholly or in part against abutting or benefiting property, or to fund or refund any indebtedness outstanding at the time this Charter takes effect for which inadequate provisions for payment has been made; but no bonds shall be issued to pay current expenses. The enumeration, in the preceding sentence, of particular powers of the City in connection with the issuance of bonds shall not be held or deemed to exclusive; and, in addition to the powers enumerated or implied in the preceding sentence, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city of Santa Fe shall have and may exercise the authority to issue revenue bonds for the purchase of utilities or any self-liquidating asset for which revenue bonds may lawfully be issued. It is intended that the City of Santa Fe shall have and may exercise the authority to issue bonds for the construction and extra-ordinary maintenance of necessary civic improvements or facilities within or without the City limits. No tax bonds of the City, excepting funding and refunding bonds, shall be issued until first approved by a majority of the duly qualified resident electors of the City of Santa Fe. All bonds shall be authorized by ordinance passed by an affirmative vote of at least a majority of the members of the Council. The City shall have full authority to issue bonds, warrants and other obligations under the provisions of Chapter 453, Acts of the Second Called Session of the 44th Legislature of Texas, 1935, Articles 1111 to 1118A, Chapters 1 and 7 Title 22 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, Chapter 163, Acts of the 42nd Legislature of Texas, Regular Session, and other general laws relating to the issuance of bonds, warrants and obligations by a municipal corporation as each of said laws has heretofore been amended or hereafter may be amended. 
ARTICLE 11 
FRANCHISE OF PUBLIC UTILITIES  
Section 11.01 - POWERS OF THE CITY 
  In addition to the City's power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the City shall have such further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 11.02 - FRANCHISE, POWER OF COUNCIL 
  The Council shall have power to grant, amend, renew or extend by ordinance all franchises of all public utilities of every character including any person, business or corporation providing cable television or community antenna television service, operating within the City of Santa Fe, and for such purposes is granted full power. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except to persons, firms or corporations taking all or substantially all of the holder's business in the City and except with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance. No franchise shall be granted for an indeterminate term. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted.  
Section 11.03 - ACQUISITION BY EMINENT DOMAIN 
  The City shall have the power through eminent domain proceedings to acquire any public utility operating with or without a franchise and furnishing a public service to the citizens of Santa Fe. The procedure to be used in the acquisition of such property, shall be that as set forth in Article 3264 to Article 3271 inclusive, Title 52, Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas. In valuing the property, the measure of damages shall be the fair market value of the physical properties together with its franchise, if any, taken together as one system. This power shall be in addition to and cumulative of any other powers of acquisition granted to or reserved by the City in a franchise ordinance.  
Section 11.04 - NO PUBLIC UTILITY PURCHASE WITHOUT VOTER APPROVAL 
  Prior to the purchase of any existing franchised public utility system, either according to the terms of the franchise or by eminent domain, the City Council must submit the question of the purchase to the qualified voters of the City of Santa Fe, and the same must be approved by a majority of those voting in the election.  
Section 11.05 - RIGHT OF REGULATIONS 
  All grants, renewals, extensions or amendments to public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the City. 
(a)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or for failure otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing. 
(b)  To require an adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public. 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust descrimination is service or rates. 
(d)  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility. If the franchise or ordinance does not prescribe the form of accounts kept by each utility, then it shall keep its accounts in accordance with the utility system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the appropriate State and/or Federal utility regulatory agencies. 
(e)  To examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility at any time and to require annual and other reports, including reports on local operations by each such public utility. 
(f)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
(g)  Procedural rules and regulations dealing with public utilities shall conform to the requirements of the appropriate State regulatory agencies.  
Section 11.06 - CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS 
  The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility, but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owners of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law.  
Section 11.07 - EXTENSIONS 
  All extenstions of public utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extensions shall terminate with the original grant. In case of an extension of public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
Section 11.08 - OTHER CONDITIONS 
  All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved and except the general power of the City heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a utility, which shall include the right to require adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this Article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchises. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the Council or the voters of the City in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant, including the right to require such compensation or rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 11.09 - FRANCHISE RECORDS 
  Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility and every owner of public utility franchise shall file with the City certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed, or under which such utility is operated in the City. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises.  
Section 11.10 - REGULATION OF RATES 
  The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix and regulate, after public hearing and reasonable notice, the price of water, gas, electric lights, electric power, steam heat and cable television, and to regulate and fix the fares, and charges of local telephone service and charges of all public transportation of every kind, whether transporting passengers, freight, or baggage, and generally to fix and regulate the rates and charges of all public utilities of every kind operating within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe.  
Section 11.11 - MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES 
  Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such City ownership and operation, including all assets and liabilities, appropriately subdivided by classes, reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show actual capital cost to the City of each utility owned, also cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements and the source of funds expended for such capital purposes. The account shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any City department. The Council shall cause an annual report to be made by a certified public accountant and shall publish such report showing financial results of such City ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such other data as the Council shall require.  
Section 11.12 - SALES OF SERVICES 
  The City Council shall have the authority and power to sell and provide water and/or sewer services and other utility services to persons or firms outside the City limits of Santa Fe and permit them to connect with City systems under contract with the City, under terms as are fair and reasonable and for the best interests of the City. The Council shall have the authority to prescribe the kind of materials used where it furnishes such services, to inspect same and require them to be kept in good condition; and to prescribe penalties for non-compliance. 
ARTICLE 12 
GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Section 12.01 - PUBLICITY OF RECORDS 
  All public records of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable times, provided that records closed to the public by law, shall not be considered public records for the purpose of this section. During normal office hours, any citizen of the City or any duly authorized representative of the press or other news media shall have the right to examine any such public records belonging to the City and shall have the right to make copies thereof under such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Council or this Charter.  
Section 12.02 - NEPOTISM 
  No person related, within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity, to the Mayor or any member of the City Council or City Manager shall be employed or appointed to any office, position or clerkship of the City. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person who shall have been continuously employed by the City at least two (2) years prior to and at the time of the election or appointment of the officer related in the prohibited degree.  
Section 12.03 - PERSONAL FINANCIAL INTEREST 
  No member of the City Council or employee of the City shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in contract with the City, nor shall be financially interested, directly, in the sale to the City of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies, or service. The above provision shall not apply where such stock ownership amounts to less than one percent (1%) of the corporation stock or as falls within the scope of Article 2529c of the revised Civil Statutes of Texas as now or hereafter amended. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the City found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the persons or corporation contracting with the City shall render the contract voidable by the City Manager or the City Council.  
Section 12.04 - ASSIGNMENT, EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT 
  The property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors.  
Section 12.05 - POWER TO SETTLE CLAIMS 
  The Council shall have the authority to compromise on all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the City, except suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes.  
Section 12.06 - SECURITY OR BOND NOT REQUIRED 
  It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceedings in which the City shall be a party for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of the City, but all actions, suits, and proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given. The City shall have all remedies of appeal provided by law to all courts without bond or security of any kind. For the purposes of all such actions, suits, proceedings and appeals, the City shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if the bond, undertaking or security had been executed and given.  
Section 12.07 - NOTICE OF CLAIM 
  The City shall not be held liable on account of any claim for the death of any person or injuries to any person or damage to any property unless the person making such complaint or claiming such damages shall, within sixty (60) days after the time at which it is claimed such damages were inflicted upon such person or property, file with the City a written statement under oath, stating the nature and character of such damages or injuries, the extent of the same, the place where same happened, the circumstances under which same happened and the conditions causing same, with a detailed statement of each item of damages and the amount thereof, and if it be for personal injuries, giving a list of any witnesses known by the claimant to have seen the accident.  
Section 12.08 - SEPARABILITY 
  If any section or part of a section of this Charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Charter.  
Section 12.09 - EFFECT OF CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW 
  All codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force on the effective date of this Charter, and not in conflict with this Charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the Council. All taxes, assessments, liens, encumbrances and demands, of or against the City, fixed or established before such date, or for the fixing or establishing of which proceedings have begun at such date, shall be valid when properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of the beginning of such proceedings or under law after the adoption of this Charter.  
Section 12.10 - INTERIM GOVERNMENT 
  From and after the date of adoption of this Charter and until the first general city election thereunder and the qualification of the Mayor and Councilmen therein elected, the Mayor and Councilmen then in office shall continue in office as Councilmen and shall exercise all of the powers conferred upon the City by this Charter.  
Section 12.11 - AMENDMENT TO CHARTER 
  Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter enacted.  
Section 12.12 - OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER 
  The Council shall contract annually with, or by resolution designate, a public newspaper of general circulation in the City as official publication thereof, and to continue as such until another is designated, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matter required by this Charter, by the ordinances of the City, or by the Constitution and/or laws of the State of Texas to be published.  
Section 12.13 - PROHIBITIONS 
A.  Activities Prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any City positions or appointive City administrative office because of race, sex, political or religious opinions or affiliations. 
(2)  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City position or appointive City administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(3)  No City officer or candidate for City office shall orally, by letter or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any candidate or for any political party or political purpose whatever from any person holding any compensated City position. 
(4)  No appointed officer or employee of the City who receives compensation as such shall make, solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate or of any political party to be used in a City election or for or against any candidate for City office or take any part in the management, affairs or political campaign of any candidate or of any political party in a City election, but he may exercise his rights as a citizen to express his opinions and to cast his vote. Nothing in this paragraph is intended to prohibit said person from participating in school district, special district, county, state, or national campaigns, elections, and political parties. 
B.  Penalties. 
Any person who either by himself or with others willfully violates any provisions of the foregoing Charter shall be ineligible for appointment or election to a position in the City for a period of four (4) years, and if he is an officer or employee of the City at the time of such violation, he shall immediately forfeit the office or position he holds.  
Section 12.14 - GENDER 
  Wherever the context shall so require, the words "he", "him", "his", "Councilman" and all other words herein in the male gender shall be deemed to include the female gender, and all such words shall include both the singular and the plural number.  
Section 12.15 - PENDING MATTERS 
  All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by the City department, office or agency appropriate under this Charter.  
Section 12.16 - SUBMISSION OF CHARTER TO ELECTORS 
  The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter finds and declares that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so that the voter may vote "Yes" or "No" and the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons the Charter Commission directs that said Charter be voted upon as a whole, and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Santa Fe at an election to be held for that purpose on the 8th day of August, 1981. If said Charter is approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting at said election, it shall become the Charter of the City of Santa Fe upon the entering upon the records of said City by the governing body of such City an official order declaring the adoption of said Charter. 


CITY OF SANTA FE, TEXAS 
  
ZONING ORDINANCE 
  
____________ 
Published in 1980 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2003 
____________ 
Adopted: January 23, 2003 
Effective: January 23, 2003 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SANTA FE, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Robert Cheek 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ted Gillis 
Pat McCrary 
Ralph Stenzel 
Joe Tambrella 
Neal Young 
City Council 
____________ 
Joe Dickson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Ellis J. Ortego 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janet Davis 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through May 9, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Brenda J. Blair, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Janet L. Davis, City Secretary and the other members of the city staff cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Santa Fe, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 2003. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 02-2003 
An Ordinance of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, repealing the text of Ordinance No. 04-96 Commonly known as the Santa Fe Unified Development Code or Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance and its Associated Zoning Map, and Adopting the City of Santa Fe Unified Development Code, or the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance, 2002 Edition, and the City of Santa Fe MasterPlan 2002 Zoning Map. 
Whereas: It is the intent of the City Council to review the ordinances of the city from time to time; 
Whereas: A review, of the Zoning Ordinance, found extensive revisions to be needed; 
Now Therefore, Be It Ordained By the City Council of the City of Santa Fe, Texas: 
Odinance No. 04-96 commonly known as the Santa Fe Unified Development Code or Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance and its Associated Zoning Map, is hereby repealed. Adopted as its replacement is the City of Santa Fe Unified Development Code, or Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance, 2002 Edition, and the City of Santa Fe MasterPlan 2002 Zoning Map. 
    PASSED and APPROVED on the first reading this 9th of January, 2003. 
    PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED on the second and final reading 23rd of January, 2003. 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
/s/   
      Robert Cheek, Mayor   ATTEST AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      Ellis Ortego, City Attorney   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Janet L. Davis, City Secretary   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Zoning Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 01-2009  1-22-09 Include 3 07-2009  5-14-09 Include 3 08-2009  5-28-09 Include 3 17-2009  9-24-09 Include 3 18-2009  9-24-09 Include 3 19-2009  9-24-09 Include 3 24-2009 11-12-09 Include 3 03-2010  4- 8-10 Include 3 04-2010  5-27-10 Include 3 06-2010  7-22-10 Include 3 07-2010  7-22-10 Include 3  8-2010  8-26-10 Include 3  9-2010  8-26-10 Include 3 01-2011  1-13-11 Include 3 02-2011  1-13-11 Include 3 03-2011  2-24-11 Include 4 11-2011  8-25-11 Include 4 16-2011 11-10-11 Include 4 17-2011 12- 8-11 Include 4 01-2012  1-12-12 Include 4 02-2012  1-12-12 Include 4 08-2012  2-23-12 Include 4 15-2012  5-24-12 Include 5 16-2012  5-24-12 Include 5 18-2012  8-23-12 Include 5 22-2012 11- 8-12 Include 5 23-2012 12-13-12 Include 5 01-2013  1-10-13 Include 5 04-2013  3-28-13 Include 5 05-2013  3-28-13 Include 5 08-2013  4-25-13 Include 6 09-2013  6-27-13 Include 6 13-2013  7-25-13 Include 6 14-2013  7-25-13 Include 6 19-2013  9-26-13 Include 6 02-2014  2-27-14 Include 6 03-2014  2-27-14 Include 6 10-2014 10- 9-14 Include 6 11-2014 10- 9-14 Include 6 12-2014 11-20-14 Include 6 13-2014 11-20-14 Include 6 13-2015 10- 8-15 Include 7 14-2015 12-10-15 Include 7 03-2016  5-12-16 Include 7 04-2016  5-12-16 Include 7  
ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, PURPOSE, APPLICATION, AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 1.01. - Title. 
    This Ordinance, in accordance with the authority granted by the State of Texas in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Title 7, Chapter 211, shall be known and may be cited as Part 1 of the Santa Fe Unified Development Code, or the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 1.02. - Purpose. 
    The Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance is specifically aimed at protecting the public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the citizens of the City. The regulations are necessary to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to reduce fire hazards and to improve public safety; to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent the undue concentration of population; to lay a proper foundation for the reasonable termination of land use activities which are not in conformance with the City's long-range land use plans; to create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses; to maintain and stabilize property values; to develop an efficient and effective basis upon which to provide services for water supply, sanitary and storm sewer systems, pedestrian and automobile circulation, schools, parks, and other public facilities. 
Sec. 1.03. - Application. 
    This Ordinance classifies and regulates the use of land and structures within the City limits of Santa Fe, as hereinafter set forth. Except as hereinafter provided, no land may be used and no structure may be erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt unless it shall be used and maintained in accordance with the requirements established for the district in which the structure is to be located, and in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance as they pertain to districts. 
Sec. 1.04. - Relationship to the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
    The regulations contained herein have been developed in accordance with a comprehensive land use planning program for the orderly growth and development of the City of Santa Fe. This Ordinance has been designed to incorporate and implement the goals, objectives, and policies found in the document entitled: The Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan, which is the officially adopted long-range plan for the City of Santa Fe. 
Sec. 1.05. - Effective Date and Application. 
    This Ordinance takes effect upon adoption by the City Council. Upon that date and thereafter, the provisions of this Ordinance supersede all other development regulations governing the development of land within Santa Fe. All development applications and proposals filed on or after the effective date of this Ordinance, whether for new developments or for additions or expansions of existing developments, shall be processed in accordance with the standards and requirements and pursuant to the procedures herein established, except insofar as such applications are governed by the development regulations adopted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 1.06. - Validity and Savings Clause. 
    All sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid in any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not cause any remaining section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance to fail or become inoperative. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.01. - General Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, words used in the present tense include the future tenses; words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular, except where the natural and obvious construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "may" is not discretionary unless the context in which it is used indicates otherwise. The word must and shall are mandatory in every instance. For purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as hereinafter defined. 
2.01.01 A-Weighted Sound Pressure Level: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read shall be designated dB(a) or dBA. 
2.01.02 Accessory Apartment: A single dwelling unit which is clearly secondary and accessory to the main dwelling unit on a residential lot, and containing not more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of habitable floor area and initially intended for the initial occupant(s) to be relatives of the occupant of the main dwelling unit of not greater than the third degree of consanguinity and the second degree of affinity. The initial occupant(s) must provide a notarized affidavit affirming the degree of consanguinity or affinity with the original certificate of occupancy application. Upon vacancy by the initial occupant(s), the relationship restriction is removed and the Accessory Apartment may be rented. 
2.01.03 Accessory Building: A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main building or use located on the same lot with the main building. 
2.01.03.1 Accessory Building as a Caretaker Residence: A single attached or detached dwelling unit intended for a caretaker, owner, operator, manager, or watchman and his immediate family for any commercial or industrial use for the purposes of security and protection of the principal use. Manufactured, Modular or Industrial Homes are specifically prohibited for use as a Caretaker Residence. 
2.01.04 Accessory Use: A land use activity that is customarily incidental appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of the land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
2.01.05 Adult Bookstore: An establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade books, films, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
2.01.06 Adult Mini Motion Picture Theater or Arcade: An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. Any place to which the public is permitted or limited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled; still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
2.01.07 Adult Motel: A motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
2.01.08 Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of more than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
2.01.09 Adult Use: Any of the land use activities described in Article 5, Section 5.06 of this Ordinance. 
2.01.10 Agriculture: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the accessory uses for the packing, crating, or storing of produce; provided, however, the operation of any such accessory use must be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. The operation of commercial feed lots, sale yards and auction yards for cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, or poultry, is deemed an industrial and not an agricultural land use. See stables-private and stables-public. 
2.01.11 Agricultural, Recreational: The use of land for agriculture and animal husbandry intended as a recreational activity rather than as a primarily income producing activity. 
2.01.12 Alley: A public passage or way affording a secondary, means of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
2.01.13 Alteration or Altered: Shall include the following: 
A.	Any addition to the height or depth of a structure. 
B.	Any change in the location of any of the exterior walls of a structure. 
C.	Any increase in the interior accommodations of a structure. 
2.01.14 Ambient: The average atmospheric or water condition existing naturally in any particular area of interest at any one (1) time. 
2.01.15 Apartment: Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two (2) families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building. 
2.01.16 Automobile Salvage Wrecking Yard: A parcel of land where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or wrecked, or where motor vehicles not in operable condition and used automobile parts are stored. 
2.01.17 Automobile Service Station: Any parcel of land, including the structures thereon, used for the sale of gasoline, oil, or other fuels, and automobile accessories, and which may include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, mechanical repair, and other normal servicing of automobiles. Painting is not within the scope of "other normal servicing." 
2.01.18 Automobile Wash: A facility designed primarily for washing automobiles. 
2.01.19 Automobile: A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including, but not limited to the following: passenger cars, trucks, busses, vans, motor scooters, and motorcycles. 
2.01.20 Average Grade: The grade of the finished ground level at the midpoint of each exterior surface of a sign, or a structure, in the event that the sign is attached to the structure. 
2.01.21 Bar, Dance Hall, Lounge, Night Club, or Tavern: An establishment for the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises. 
2.01.22 Bed and Breakfast Home: A building or place where lodging is provided by prearrangement for definite periods, for compensation, for not more than twelve (12) persons. 
2.01.23 Berm: An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views, and/or decrease noise. 
2.01.24 Block: A parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railway rights-of-way, parks, etc., or a combination thereof. 
2.01.25 Board of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
2.01.26 Boarding House: A dwelling other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons. The lodging of seven (7) or more individuals is prima facie evidence of the operation of a bed and breakfast as defined in this Ordinance. 
2.01.27 Boundary Property Line: The near side of any street, alley, stream, or other permanently dedicated open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and adjacent property. When no such open space exists the common line between two (2) parcels of property shall be interpreted as the boundary property line. 
2.01.28 Building Area: That portion of a lot upon which buildings may be placed, excluding required yards and limited by the maximum building coverage as specified for each zoning district. (See Graphic 1-A at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
2.01.29 Building Coverage: The percent of the lot area covered by the building exclusive of all overhanging roofs. 
2.01.30 Building Line: A line established generally parallel to the front street line. No building or structure may be permitted in the area between the building line and the street right-of-way line. (See Graphic 2-A at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) The setback line next to the front yard and the front building line. 
2.01.31 Building: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate structure. 
A.	Primary: A building in which the primary activity associated with the lot is conducted. In any residential zoning district, any dwelling shall be considered the primary building. 
B.	Secondary: A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary building located on the same lot. 
C.	Storage, Portable: A nonresidential pre-manufactured or site-built structure, normally less than one hundred and fifty (150) square feet in floor area, and commonly used for the storage of equipment and other items associated with residential living. 
2.01.31.1 Building Envelope: Means the outermost walls, roofs and lowest floor of a building that fully enclose a building space, including both habitable and non-habitable volumes. In multi-tenant buildings the envelope may be defined by demising walls, floors and ceilings. 
2.01.31.2 Building Site: A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure. 
2.01.31.3 Business Directory Sign: An outdoor sign used solely for the purpose of identifying the building name, address, number, primary business or activity conducted on the immediate premises. When a facility contains two (2) or more tenants, a directory sign may also identify individual tenants. 
2.01.32 Cabaret: A nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features the performance by topless and/or bottomless dancers, "go-go" dancers, erotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
2.01.33 Carport: A permanent roofed structure open on at least two (2) sides, designed for the parking and shelter of private passenger vehicles. 
2.01.34 Child Care Facility: A facility that provides care, training, education, custody or supervision for more than six (6) children under the age of fourteen (14) years of age who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the adult occupant of the associated structure. 
2.01.35 City Council: The governing body of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
2.01.36 City Planner: An employee of the City of Santa Fe, responsible for assisting in the preparation and implementation of the City Comprehensive City Plan, and other related plans and Ordinances. 
2.01.37 Clinic: A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions, including but not limited to dental and physical services. 
2.01.38 Comprehensive City Plan: The planning document and related material official adopted by the City of Santa Fe, containing the goals, objectives, and policies pertaining to land use, community facilities, infrastructure, circulation, housing and other subjects related to the growth and development of the City. 
2.01.39 Conditional Use: Uses and development standards that are determined in advance to often be appropriate within a zoning district but, due to either their location, function or operation, have a potentially harmfully impact on adjacent properties or the surrounding area, and furthermore, that are specifically authorized by the Zoning Ordinance when restricted or conditioned so as to mitigate or eliminate such adverse impacts. 
2.01.40 Condominium: An estate in land and a form of property ownership as defined by Texas state law. 
2.01.41 Construction Sign: A sign stating the name of the architect, engineer, financing company, owner, construction company and a brief description of the project. 
2.01.42 Convalescent, Rest, Nursing, or Extended Care Facility: A health care facility where persons are housed, furnished with meals, and provided with continuing nursing care for compensation. 
[2.01.42.5] Corner Lot: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
2.01.42.6 Cul-de-Sac Configuration: To allow for pie shaped lots that are narrower at the front than the back to be less than the minimum width at the front of the property line and to comply with the minimum lot width at the building line instead, (2) to allow for pie shaped lots with a front width greater than the rear width to be the minimum at the back yard rear building set back line, and (3) to require the minimum frontage at the street to be 40', as depicted on Graphic 2-G, attached hereto and marked as Exhibit "B." 
2.01.43 Day Care Facility: See Section "Child Care Facility" above. 
2.01.44 Daytime: The hours between sunrise and sunset on any given day. 
2.01.45 Decibel: A unit measurement of sound pressure. 
2.01.46 Density, Residential: The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located or residing within a residential area expressed as a function of unit area, typically per acre. 
Density = Lots, dwelling units or persons ° area (in acres) 
2.01.47 Density Transfer or Dwelling Unit Clustering: The substitution of common open space for private open space relinquished by the waiver of minimum yard requirements for individual buildings in a residential environment. The average density in dwelling units per acre for the total planned area remains the same as permitted in the appropriate zoning district before the clustering for an illustration of dwelling unit clustering, (see Graphic 2-C, at the end of this of the Ordinance.) 
2.01.48 Development: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parts; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land. 
2.01.49 Display Surface (Sign): The surface made available for the direct mounting or application of letters, graphics and decoration including the mounting and framework surrounding said surface. The supporting standards are not a part of the display surface. 
2.01.50 District Zoning: Any section or sections of the City of Santa Fe for which regulations governing the use of buildings and/or premises are described in Article 4, of this Ordinance and as shown on the Official Zoning Map of Santa Fe. 
2.01.51 Drainage: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development and includes the means necessary for water-supply, preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding. 
2.01.52 Dwelling or Dwelling Unit: 
A.	Attached: A dwelling having one (1) or more walls common with a principal building, or joined to a principal building by a covered porch, loggia, or passage way; the roof of which is a part or extension of the principal building. 
B.	Detached: A dwelling which is fully separated from any other building or joined to another building by structural members not constituting an enclosed or covered space. 
C.	Mixed-Use: A dwelling unit which is a part of a project which may, be composed of residential, office, and commercial land use activities. 
D.	Multiple-Family Dwelling: A dwelling designed for occupancy by two (2) or more families living independently of each other as tenants, exclusive of recreational vehicle camps, hotels, motels, or resort facilities. 
E.	Townhouse or Rowhouse Dwelling: Three (3) or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of which has a separate outdoor entrance and is designed to be occupied and may be rented or owned by one (1) family. 
F.	Zero Lot Line Dwelling: A dwelling located on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the dwelling's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
2.01.52.1 Easement: A right given by the owner of a parcel of land to another person, public agency or private corporation for a specific and limited use of that parcel. 
2.01.53 Erect: To build, construct, alter, reconstruct, pour, lay, move upon, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix; and also includes the painting of wall signs, murals or supegraphics, or any physical operation on the premises which are required for the construction of a sign including excavation, site clearance, landfill and the like. 
2.01.54 Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted children or a group of not to exceed five (5) persons not all related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, motel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. 
2.01.55 Farm: See "Agriculture", above. 
2.01.56 Floor Area: 
A.	Gross: The sum of the horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of the walls separating two (2) buildings, and including but not limited to: 
1.	Basements; 
2.	Elevator shafts and stairwells of each floor; 
3.	Floor space for mechanical equipment with structural head room of seven (7) feet; 
4.	Penthouses; 
5.	Attic space providing headroom of seven (7) feet or more; 
6.	Interior balconies, mezzanines, enclosed covered porches and steps; 
7.	Accessory uses in enclosed covered space, but not including space used for off-street parking. 
B.	Net: The total floor area within a building devoted or intended to be devoted to a particular use, within structural headroom of seven (7) feet or more, whether above or below the finished lot grade, and excluding items A2, A3, and A7 above. 
C.	Ratio: A mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located. 
2.01.57 Floodplain: Floodplains may be either riverine or inland depressional areas. Riverine floodplains are those areas contiguous with a lake, stream or stream bed whose elevation is greater than the normal waterpool elevation but equal to or lower than the projected 100-year flood elevation. Inland depressional floodplains are floodplains not associated with a stream system but which are low points to which surrounding lands drain. 
2.01.58 Footcandle: A unit of illumination intensity. 
2.01.59 Frequency: The number of times per second a vibration or sound wave oscillates. 
2.01.60 Frontage: The measure of property on one (1) side of a street, closest to the street right-of-way, and between the two (2) side property lines associated with the same tract of land. 
2.01.61 Garage apartment: A dwelling unit for one-family erected above a private garage. 
2.01.62 Garage: 
A.	Private: An accessory building or a part of a main building use for storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their guests for the building to which it is accessory. 
B.	Public: Any garage other than a private garage available to the public, used for the care or servicing of automobiles where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration hire or sale. 
2.01.63 Gasoline Service station: See "Service Station." 
2.01.64 Ground Cover: Plants normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity. 
2.01.65 Group Home: An interim or permanent residential facility shared by six (6) or fewer people who do not meet the definition of "family" including any resident staff who share a single housekeeping unit. (This use does not include facilities that permit sleeping arrangements on a daily basis.) 
2.01.66 Heavy Equipment: Motorized, self-propelled roll, rolling, stock, generally associated with earth moving grading, scraping, building site preparation, and infrastructure or real estate development. 
2.01.67 High Rise Building: A structure of more than six (6) stories in height. 
2.01.68 Home Occupation: An occupation that is incidental and secondary to the primary use of the premises as a residence, and which is not detrimental to adjoining properties. (Please see Article 5, of this Ordinance.) 
2.01.69 Home Owners' Association: A formal nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which (1) each lot and/or homeowner in a residential subdivision or a planned unit development is automatically made a member, and (2) each lot is automatically made subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintenance of common property, and (3) the fee if unpaid becomes a lien against the nonpaying homeowners property. 
2.01.70 Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient, medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
2.01.71 Hotel or Motel: Furnished temporary, living quarters that charge daily rates and are normally intended for over-night or a few day accommodations. Hotels and motels do not include accommodations that are intended for extended stay or permanent living quarters. 
2.01.72 Indirect Lighting: A light source separated from the surface and illuminating the sign surface by means of spot lights or similar fixtures. 
2.01.73 Ionizing Radiation: Gamma rays and X rays, alpha and beta particles, high speed electrons, neutrons, protons and other nuclear particles; but not sound or radio waves, or visible, infrared or ultraviolet light. 
2.01.74 Junk Yard: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, used plumbing fixtures, and other materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, or cleaned, and the places or yards for the storage of salvaged materials and equipment from housing wrecking and salvaged structural steel materials and equipment, but excluding establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars in operable condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture, and household equipment, and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as a part of manufacturing operations. 
2.01.74.1 Kennel: means any premises in which any person keeps, harbors, possesses, or maintains more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats, or the combination of such animals over three (3) months old. 
2.01.75 Landscaping: Any combination of living plants such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges or trees. 
2.01.76 Loading Space: A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith provided for the standing loading or unloading of trucks and having minimum dimensions of twelve (12) by sixty (60) feet. 
2.01.77 Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Ordinance, including one (1) principal building together with its accessory buildings; open spaces and parking spaces required by this Ordinance; and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved point of access. (See Graphic 2-A at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
A.	Corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
B.	Depth: The perpendicular distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
C.	Double-Frontage: A lot having direct access to two (2) parallel public streets. For purposes of this Ordinance, land abutting such streets shall be considered "front yards." (See Graphic 2-B) 
D.	Line: The boundary line of the property. 
E.	Frontage: The yard or yards nearest the street. 
F.	Rear Line: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and most nearly parallel to the front lot line. 
G.	Side Line: Lines running between the front and rear property lines. 
2.01.78 Manufactured, Modular, or Industrialized Home: A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which in the travel mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred and twenty (320) or more square feet in area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, and electrical systems. This term does not include recreational vehicle. 
2.01.79 Massage Parlor: Any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity: massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct, or where any person providing such treatment manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas. 
2.01.80 Massage Therapy Clinic: Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by a massage therapist as defined by Texas Law. "Massage therapy", as a health care service, means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body massage. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for massage therapy are massage, therapeutic massage, massage technology, myotherapy; or any derivation of those terms. The terms "therapy" and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. 
2.01.81 Mixed-Use Project: A real estate complex which may include residential office, commercial and other diverse forms of land use activity; frequently created as a planned unit development. 
2.01.82 Mobile Home Pad Area: An area designed for the exclusive use of an individual mobile home. 
2.01.83 Mobile Home Park: Any development site, parcel or tract of land desired maintained or intended to be used for the purpose of providing long term occupancy for more than thirty (30) days of two (2) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, including all buildings used or maintained for the use of the residents of the development. This term is not to be used in conjunction with any mobile homes or trailer sales lots which contain unoccupied units that are intended for purposes of inspection and sale. This term shall apply to both the lease and sale of pads or lots. 
2.01.84 Mobile Home: A movable, detached single-family dwelling unit, constructed before June 15, 1976, conforming to the minimum housing code requirements of both the State of Texas and Santa Fe, for permanent long-term occupancy; is constructed or fabricated within a factory, complete with an integral utility system capable of being connected to an outside system; can be transported over the road on its own chassis and wheels to the site where it is to be connected semi-permanently to a separate utility system and is not permanently attached to an foundation as required for permanent conventional dwelling or structure. 
2.01.85 Model Studio: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured photographed, or similarly depicted by members of the general public paying such consideration or gratuity. 
2.01.86 Motel or Motor Lodge: See "Hotel" above. 
2.01.87 Nonconformance: A condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. This may include but is not limited to a failure to conform to use, height, area coverage, or off-street parking requirements. 
A.	Nonconformance: The term nonconformance when applied to a use or structure shall be defined by Section 3.06, "Nonconformance" herein. 
B.	Nonconformance, Legal: The term "Legal Nonconformance" when applied to a use or structure shall be defined by Section 3.06.04 "Nonconformance Status" herein. 
C.	Nonconformance, Pre-Existing: Uses and development that are prohibited by Ordinance but were in existence at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance. The term "pre-existing nonconformance" shall mean a legal nonconformance as defined by Section 3.06.05. 
2.01.88 Nonconforming Use: A structure or a parcel of land occupied by a land use activity that does not conform to the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance and the district in which it is situated and which has been identified as a nonconforming use by the Board of Adjustment. 
2.01.89 Octave Band: A portion of the audible sound spectrum. An Octave Band analyzer divides the audible sound spectrum into eight (8) octave bands. 
2.01.90 Odor Threshold: The concentration of odorous matter in the atmosphere necessary to be perceptible to the olfactory nerve. 
2.01.91 Odorous Matter: Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter, including but not limited to gases, vapors, dusts, fumes and mists which cause an odor sensation to human beings. 
2.01.92 Office Complex: Means two (2) or more offices, sharing customer parking area regardless of whether said offices or office establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership, or on separate tracts of land. 
2.01.93 Open Storage and Display: The storage of any equipment machinery, commodities, raw semi-finished or finished materials, and building materials, which is visible from any public street. 
2.01.94 Parking, Interior: Parking rows which are not located on the periphery of the proposed project site and further, where none of the parking spaces abut any property line associated with the project site. 
2.01.95 Parking Rows: 
A.	Single Parking Row: A single row of spaces for the parking of motor vehicles. 
B.	Double Parking: Two (2) parallel rows of spaces for the parking of motor vehicles arranged so that when parked, the front end of each motor vehicle faces the front end of another motor vehicle. 
2.01.96 Parking Space: A permanently paved surfaced area enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) automobile together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the size of a parking space shall be in conformance with Article 6, of this Ordinance. 
2.01.97 Particulate Matter: Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, which is released into the atmosphere. 
2.01.98 Paving: A system of structuring base material and sealing an impervious wear surface, done in accordance with specifications provided by the Zoning Officer. Examples of hard surface, dust-free paving include asphalt, concrete or a chip sealed surface as described by the Texas Department of Transportation specifications. 
2.01.99 Person: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association of persons of whatever nature or description. 
2.01.100 Planned Unit Development or Cluster: An area with a specified minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a unified site design plan, containing one (1) or more residential uses, office uses, commercial uses, industrial uses, public or quasi-public uses, or any combination of same. (See Graphic 2-C, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
2.01.101 Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
2.01.102 Portable Sign: A sign mounted on wheels, skids, or legs intended to be moved from location to location and used as a short-term temporary advertising device. Limited to two (2) sign faces with a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face. 
2.01.103 Private Club: An establishment providing social or dining facilities, and which derives more than fifty (50) percent of its gross sales from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
2.01.104 Prohibited Uses: Uses and development standards that are not determined in advance and are not specifically authorized by the Zoning Ordinance. 
2.01.105 Recreational Vehicle: A portable vehicle built on a chassis and intended to be used generally for temporary living and sleeping quarters for travel, recreation and vacation purposes. The term includes travel trailers designed to be towed, motor homes designed as temporary dwellings equipped to travel under their own power, and any other portable contrivances intended to be used as temporary living and sleeping quarters which may be moved under its own power, towed or transported by another vehicle. This definition does not include mobile homes. 
2.01.106 Reflective Surface: Any material or device which has the effect of intensifying reflected light, including but not limited to scorch light, lamp glow, glass beads and luminous paint. 
2.01.107 Restaurant: 
A.	Conventional: An eating establishment, including cafeterias, where customers are primarily served at tables or are self-served and food is consumed on the premises, and which may, include a drive-in window. 
B.	Drive-In: An eating establishment where food is served to customers in motor vehicles or where facilities are provided on the premises which encourage the selling and consumption of food in automobiles on or next the restaurant premises. 
2.01.108 School, Parochial: A private school maintained by a religious body usually for elementary and secondary instruction. 
2.01.109 School, Private: A school that is established, conducted and primarily supported by a non-governmental agency, excluding residences within which a home school, as defined by the Texas Education Code, has been established. 
2.01.110 Screen: An opaque barrier of stone, wood, brick, block or other permanent material at least six (6) feet in height. 
2.01.111 Setback: A distance between the lot line and the building line. (See Graphic 2-A at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
2.01.112 Sexual Conduct: includes the following: 
A.	The fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; or 
B.	Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, anal copulation, masturbation. 
2.01.113 Shade Tree: Shall be any variety of tree having a mature height of not less than forty (40) feet and a mature drip line diameter of not less than thirty (30) feet measured at not less than fifteen (15) feet above the ground. 
2.01.114 Shopping Center: A group of primarily, retail and service commercial shops planned, constructed and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery, separated from customer access, provision of aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements. 
2.01.115 Sign: Shall mean any outdoor display, pictorial or other representation that shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that the same shall be used for advertising. 
A.	Sign face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two (2) or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
1.	Sign module: Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
B.	Abandoned sign: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, owner, lessor, lessee, service, product, or activity, or for which no legal owner can be found, or if found, disclaims any interest in the sign. 
C.	Automatically changeable advertising: Signs with text lines that can be changed using electronic means, signs with electronic reader boards using LED lights are not considered digital signs. 
D.	Billboard: A large outdoor advertising structure with any sign face greater than one hundred (100) square feet, typically found in high traffic areas such as alongside busy roads advertising goods or services not necessarily sold where the sign is located. 
E.	Digital sign: Plasma display panels (PDPs), liquid crystal displays (LCDs), light emitting diode signs (LEDs), or traditional television (CRTs) being used like signage. Instead of tuning in to a television station, they are showing specially prepared dynamic visual images to make them function like signs. 
2.01.116 Signs, Off-Premises: Any outdoor advertising sign which directs attention to a person, business, commodity, industry or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted elsewhere than on the premises on which the sign is located, or which directs persons to any location not on the premises, or which is sold, offered or conducted on such premises only incidentally, if at all. The term shall include all structures of whatever material which are erected, maintained and established for public display of posters, printed signs, pictures or other pictorial or reading matter. 
2.01.117 Signs, On-Premises: Any outdoor advertising sign which directs attention to a person, business, commodity, service, entertainment, industry or activity which is sold, offered or conducted, other than incidentally, on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
2.01.118 Signs, On-Premises Real Estate: Signs advertising a parcel of land or building for sale or lease and affixed to the subject building or land. 
2.01.119 Signs, Outdoor Advertising: Any arrangement of letters, figures, symbols or other devices used for advertising, announcements, direction or declaration intended to attract or inform the public, whether such signs are affixed to a building or structure or free standing, whether anchored or not anchored to foundations, paving or other structures, and outside the weather surface of any enclosed building. 
2.01.120 Sign Size: The area of the display area expressed in square feet. 
2.01.121 Sign Structure: The supports, uprights, bracing and structural framework of any outdoor advertising sign. 
2.01.122 Signs, Temporary: Signs falling in, but not limited to, the following categories shall be interpreted as temporary signs: Those advertising community events, grand openings, garage sales, of any size and when constructed of fabric or flexible plastic film; banners and flags; any sign, six (6) square feet or less in area, intended to be easily removable or intended to be erected at successive locations; and on-premise real estate signs six (6) square feet or less per face in area (intended to sell, lease or rent the property to which such real estate sign is affixed). 
2.01.123 Signs, Permanent: All signs greater than six (6) square feet per face in area, including on-premise real estate signs greater than six (6) square feet shall be categorized as permanent signs regardless of their physical characteristics or original intended purpose and shall conform to all provisions controlling permanent signs. 
2.01.124 Site Development Plan: A drawing showing the provisions for a proposed project including such information that enables the drawing to serve as a plat, together with information pertaining to all covenants relating to the site, location and bulk of structures intensity of use or density of development, location of streets, ways, and parking facilities; common open space and public facilities, and all other reasonable information required by the Planning Commission as a part of the review process. 
2.01.125 Smoke: The visible discharge of particulate matter from a chimney, vent, or combustion process. 
2.01.126 Sound Level Meter: An instrument used to measure sound intensity. 
2.01.127 Special Event: Any temporary activity or event involving any public show, exhibition, street dance, carnival, circus, concert, fair, festival, trade show, or amusement of any kind outside the confines of a building or permanent structure. 
2.01.128 Specified Anatomical Areas: Human genitals, the public region, buttocks, and female breasts. 
2.01.129 Stable: 
A.	Private: A stable for personal noncommercial use, for horses, mules, or donkeys. 
B.	Public: A stable, other than a private stable, where animals are rented or leased to the public, or where shelter is provided for animals. 
2.01.130 Street: Any public thoroughfare which affords the principal line between various land use activities. The City of Santa Fe has adopted a functional street classification system which is defined as follows: (See Graphic 2-D, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
A.	Arterial-Primary: An expressway, freeway, or primary thoroughfare whose primary function is the movement of traffic. 
B.	Arterial-Secondary: A thoroughfare whose predominate function is the movement of traffic but which provides more access than normally associated with a primary arterial. 
C.	Collector: A street designed to serve equally the functions of access and movement. Collector streets serve as links between local streets and arterials. 
D.	Frontage or Service Road: A collector street generally parallel to and adjacent to arterials, which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
E.	Local: A neighborhood or minor street whose primary purpose is to provide access to abutting properties. 
F.	Cul-De-Sac: A local street having one (1) end open to vehicular traffic and having one (1) end closed or terminated with a turning circle. 
2.01.131 Structural Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, bearing partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
2.01.132 Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground or an attachment to something located on the ground. 
2.01.133 Toxic and Noxious Matter: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter which is present in sufficient quantities to endanger the health safety, and conform of persons in the vicinity or which may cause injury or damage to property as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, in the Toxic Substances Control Act codified at 40 CFR 700-790. 
2.01.134 Tree: A large, woody plant having one (1) or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches. 
2.01.135 Use: A specific activity carried out on a lot or tract of land; i.e. a single-family dwelling, a welding shop, a dentist office, are all examples of a specific activity. 
2.01.136 Use-by-Right: Uses and development standards that are determined in advance and specifically authorized by the Zoning Ordinance. 
2.01.137 Vibration Perception Threshold: The minimum ground or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
2.01.138 Vibration: A temporal and spatial oscillation of displacement, velocity or acceleration in a solid material. 
2.01.139 Yard: (See Graphic 2-A at the end of this Section of the Ordinance.) 
A.	Front: An unoccupied open space on the same lot with a building, located between the wall of the building nearest the street on which the lot fronts, and bounded by the line of that wall extended, the side lines of the lot and the front street line of the lot. The minimum depth of the front yard is the distance between the nearest point of the street wall of the building and the front line of the lot, or that line produced, measured at right angles to the front line of the lot. The front yard of a corner lot consisting of one (1) platted lot is the yard adjacent to that street on which the lot has its least dimension. When this question arises, the Zoning Officer shall make a final determination. If a corner lot consists entirely of unplatted land or a combination of platted land the front yard is located on the street on which the greater number of lots front regardless of whether those lots are platted or unplatted. If a corner lot consists of all or more than two (2) platted parcels of land each of whose least dimension is on the same street as the other lots in the block; then the location of the front yard is on the same street as the other lots. 
Any questions as to the determination of yards associated with corner lots shall be resolved by the Zoning Officer. 
B.	Rear: An unoccupied open space on the same lot with a building between the rear line of a building and bounded by the rear line extended, the side lines of the lot and the rear line of the lot. Where no rear building line exists, a line parallel to the front street line and distant as far as possible and not less than ten (10) feet long, is deemed to be the rear line. The depth of the rear yard is the distance between the nearest point of the rear wall of the building and the rear line of the lot. 
C.	Side: An unoccupied open space on the same lot with a building situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extended through from the front yard to the rear yard. Any line not a rear line or a front line is deemed to be a side yard line. 
D.	Exterior Side. A side yard facing any street other than the street on which the lot fronts. (See Graphic 2-B at the end of this Section) 
2.01.140 Zero lot line: A common lot line on which a wall of a structure may be constructed. 
2.01.141 Zoning Map: The Official Zoning Map of the City of Santa Fe upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Map shall be housed, maintained, and revised regularly by the City Manager or other person designated by the City Manager. 
2.01.142 Zoning Officer: A municipal staff member who, working under the direction of the City Manager, assists in the implementation of this Ordinance. 
2.01.143 Zoning Permit: A written permit issued by the Community Services Director certifying the use of the land, building, or sign will be in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5-2003, 3-27-03; Ord. No. 10-2003, 4-24-03; Ord. No. 14-2003, 7-10-03; Ord. No. 19-2003, 8-28-03; Ord. No. 24-2004, 12-9-04; Ord. No. 02-2005, § 1, 3-10-05; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 11-9-06; Ord. No. 05-2007, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 06-2007, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 11-2011, §§ 1-3, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 02-2014, § 1, 2-27-14; Ord. No. 14-2015, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-15) 

Graphic 2-A Lot Measurements 

Graphic 2-B Lot Types 

Graphic 2-C Standard Residential Design 

Graphic 2-D Functional Street Classification 

Graphic 2-E Typical Parking Lot Layouts 

Graphic 2-F Relationship Charts 

Graphic 2-G Cul-de-sac Configuration 

Graphic 2-H Public Hearing Sign 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3.01. - Zoning Officer. 
3.01.0. Primary Responsibility for Enforcement: The Zoning Officer shall be the designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance. The City Manager or a designee of the City Manager shall serve in this capacity. The Zoning Officer may also serve as the staff advisor to the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, City staff, and citizens relating to the administration, interpretation, implementation, and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.01.015. Zoning Permit: 
A.	A zoning permit shall be required prior to receiving a development permit, when applicable, or a building permit for all uses, including signs, permitted by right. This permit ensures the proposed development complies with this chapter's standards and has any other required permits for access, water, sewer, or other required permits. 
B.	Applications for a zoning permit shall include a site plan reflective of the scale of the proposed development represented on the property for which the permit shall apply. Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee. The site plan is not required to be prepared by a professional. 
3.01.02. Duties: The Zoning Officer shall have the following duties: 
A.	The Zoning Officer shall have the power to make inspections of buildings and premises to carry out the duties prescribed herein. 
B.	The Zoning Officer shall examine all building permit applications and shall certify that the proposed construction, moving, alteration, or use complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.	The Zoning Officer shall certify all certificates of occupancy prior to their issuance. 
D.	The Zoning Officer shall investigate alleged violations of this Ordinance, and shall conduct a visual inspection of all uses within the City. If a violation or suspected violation is found, enforcement efforts shall be undertaken by the Zoning Officer. 
E.	The Zoning Officer shall perform such other duties as assigned by the City Manager relating to the administration, interpretation, implementation, and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 02-2005, § 2, 3-10-05) 
Sec. 3.02. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
3.02.01. When Required: A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
A.	Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered; 
B.	Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification; 
C.	Occupancy and use of vacant land, except agricultural use not involving animals; 
D.	Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification; and 
E.	Any major or significant modification, alteration, or change in a nonconforming use. 
3.02.02. Occupancy Without Certificate Prohibited: No such use, or change of use, shall be permitted unless a Certificate of Occupancy, approved by the Zoning Officer, has been issued. 
3.02.03. Procedure for New or Altered Buildings: Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered, shall be made at the same time as the application for the Building Permit for such building. Said Certificate shall be issued within ten (10) days after a written request for the same has been made to the Zoning Officer or his agent, and only after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.02.04. Procedure for Vacant Land Use or a Change in Building Use: Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use to a conforming use, as herein provided, shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer for review on forms available in the Zoning Officer's office. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and has been approved by the Zoning Officer, the Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application for same has been made. 
3.02.05. Contents of Certificate of Occupancy: Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of Santa Fe's Codes and Ordinances. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Officer or a designee and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
3.02.06. Temporary Certificate: Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Officer for a period not exceeding six (6) months, during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owners or of the City relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this Ordinance. 
Sec. 3.03. - Amendments to the Zoning Map and Text. 
3.03.01. Purpose of Amendments: The purpose of an amendment procedure is to provide for changes in the text of the Zoning Ordinance (text amendment) and to change the boundaries of zoning districts (rezoning) shown on the Official Zoning Map. Since these regulations represent the City's effort to provide for the orderly development of the community, no change shall be made in these regulations except: 
A.	To correct an error in the regulations or map; 
B.	To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality or area; or 
C.	To recognize a change in public plans or policies effecting the property. 
3.03.02. Comprehensive Plan Controlling: No amendment shall be made to this Ordinance which is not in compliance with the City's officially adopted long-range Comprehensive Plan. 
3.03.03. Applicant Qualifications: Any person, or corporation, or an authorized agent interest in any property, may initiate proceedings to allow the consideration of a change in the zoning classification of such property or to the regulations pertaining to said property. In the event that ownership stated on the application and that shown on City records are different, the applicant shall submit proof of ownership or legal standing to submit the application. The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may, on its own motion, initiate proceedings to consider a change to the zoning on any property or to the regulations pertaining to property, when it finds that the public interest would be served by consideration of such a request. 
3.03.04. Application Form: Each application for a text amendment or rezoning shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Santa Fe City Manager and shall be filed with the City Manager. Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee. An application for a rezoning shall also include plans and drawings in a form acceptable to the City Manager and containing sufficient information necessary to determine the impact on properties affected by the rezoning request. 
3.03.05. Scheduled Dates and Notification: 
A.	Rezoning Applications: Upon receipt of a complete application for a rezoning the City Manager shall set a date for a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. Notice shall be sent not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing. Written notice shall be sent to all owners of real property, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll, located within two-hundred (200) feet of the property to be rezoned. The notice may be served by its deposit in the United States Mail, within the City of Santa Fe, properly addressed with postage paid. 
B.	Revision of Public Plans or Policies: When the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council initiate proceedings to consider a change to the zoning of any property or to the regulations pertaining to property, public notice shall be served by publication as prescribed by subparagraph C, "Purpose of Amendments", without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. 
C.	On or before the fifteenth (15th) day before the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in Santa Fe. 
D.	On or before the tenth (10th) day before the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be posted on the property by placing signs thereon in the form, quantity and location set out in Paragraph 3.03.12 of this Section. Signs shall be removed by the applicant or property owner within three (3) days following the final public hearing or cancellation of application for any reason. Public Plans and Policies map changes as set forth in Subparagraph B, shall require the posting of signs only at the nearest street intersections, within the City limits, providing access to the territory proposed for a map change. 
E.	The posting of a public hearing shall not occur until a firm date is established by the applicant for the erection of required signs. Any failure, resulting from the actions or inactions of the applicant, to meet the minimum notification standards, including sign erection, will result in cancellation of the public hearing and forfeiture of all fees previously paid. 
3.03.06. Scheduled Dates and Notification-Text amendment Applications: Upon receipt of a complete application for a text amendment, the City Manager shall set a date for a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. No later than the fifteenth (15th) day before the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Santa Fe without the necessity for notifying property owners by mail. 
3.03.07. Withdrawal of Application: Prior to the issuance of the notice of a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, the applicant may, by written notice to the City Manager, withdraw the application or request rescheduling of the public hearing to a later regular meeting date. Once public notice is given, the applicant may withdraw the application or request for rescheduling only with the approval of the City Council. The City Council may reject a request to withdraw an application or request to reschedule and conduct the public hearing as stated in the notification and take action as appropriate within the context of the public notice provided. 
3.03.08. Planning and Zoning Commission Report: After public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commissioner shall submit a report to the City Council with a recommendation that the application be approved, approved with amendments and conditions, tabled, or denied. The vote of the Planning and Zoning Commissioner at the conclusion of a public hearing and the minutes pertaining thereto, shall constitute the Commission's final report to the City Council. 
3.03.09. Protests: In the event a protest to an application is filed with the City Secretary, duly signed and acknowledged, by the owners of either: 
A.	Twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or 
B.	By twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending two hundred (200) feet from such area. 
Such application shall not become effective except by affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. In computing the percentage of land area to be considered, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
3.03.10. Approval and Execution of Changes: If finally approved by the required number of votes of the City Council, the Ordinance shall be executed by the Mayor. 
3.03.11. Expiration of an Application: Any pending application shall automatically expire if no action of any kind has been taken on it by the City Council for a period of one (1) year. If no Ordinance granting a zoning change in accordance with this Article has been adopted within six (6) months of the date on which the City Council voted approval of an application, such application shall be automatically placed on the City Council agenda for further consideration. 
3.03.12. Public Hearing Notification Signs: 
Public hearing notification signs, where required by Paragraph 3.03.05.D., shall be posted on the site in conformance to the following provisions: 
A.	Minimum Quantity: One (1) sign shall be posted on each street frontage adjacent to property to be rezoned. Long street frontages shall have signs posted not more than five hundred (500) feet apart. 
B.	Size and Support: Signs shall not be less than forty-eight (48) inches × forty-eight (48) inches and secured to structural supports mounted at both vertical sign edges or, alternatively securely attached to an existing structure, of sufficient structural strength to safely support the imposed weight and wind loadings. Signs may also be mounted on stands weighted with a sufficient weight of sandbags to secure the sign against wind load overturning. 
C.	Signs Height: The sign shall be mounted so that the top edge of the sign is horizontal and between fifty-six (56) inches and one hundred (100) inches above the mean grade beneath the sign. 
D.	Sign Material and Color: The sign face shall be smooth plywood or sign board material resistant to weather and warping. The face shall be sealed on both faces and exposed edges with paint or other approved finish. Color of face shall be white. Alternative sign materials may be approved by the Zoning Officer. 
E.	Sign Copy: Sign copy shall be as follows: 
A border shall surround the sign no less than one-half (1/2) from the sign edge; the border shall be a one-half (1/2) inches wide continuous line. Copy shall not be placed closer to the border than three (3) inches. Copy shall be placed parallel with sign edges. All copy shall be black and copy shall be centered on the sign face. The copy typeface shall be Arial Black or similar approved type. 
Line 1-2 The top line shall be "Santa Fe City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission" in one and one-half (11/2) inches high letters. 
Line 3 The words "PUBLIC HEARING" shall be located next below and shall measure three (3) inches high. 
Line 4-6 The phrase "to consider a proposed change in the zoning for the property in the vicinity of this sign" follows in letters one and five-eighths (1 5/8 ) inches high. 
Line 7-10 The phrase "from (zoning district) to (zoning district)" follows in one and five eights (1 5/8 ) inches high letters. 
Line 11 The meeting date appears next as "Month, day, year at 7:00 p.m. in one and one-half (11/2) inches high letters. 
Line 12 The final phrase "in Council Chambers, 12002 Hwy 6" inches completes the message in one and one-half (11/2) inches high letters. 
The Zoning Officer may approve alternative phrasing for clarity and special conditions. 
See Article 2 Definitions, Graphic 2-H, illustrating the sign format. All copy and lines shall be distinct, sharp edged and professionally executed in a workmanlike manner. 
F.	Sign Location: Signs shall be located as near the center of the street frontage as feasible or evenly spaced across the frontage when more than one (1) is required. Signs shall be placed at or near the front property line but no further than twenty-five (25) feet behind the line. Signs shall not be erected on the street right-of-way. 
G.	Liability: Not withstanding the above minimum standards, the applicant shall be responsible for the structural integrity of the signs and for ensuring that the signs are adequately constructed, erected and secured from destruction and uprooting resulting from high winds and other causes. The applicant shall hold the City harmless from all damages arising from the erection, maintenance and removal of these signs. 
H.	Placement, Replacement and Maintenance Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to place and maintain the signs continuously during the public notice period. All vegetation and any other visual obstruction shall be cleared from around the sign for a distance of no less than twelve (12) inches and of sufficient width to provide a view of the sign from the road through an included angle of no less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees. Vandalism or theft shall cause the immediate replacement of any sign. All costs associated with the construction, erection, maintenance and removal of signs shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. It is the applicant's responsibility to obtain and erect all signs. 
I.	Optional Sign Lease: The City may, at its option, provide signs satisfying these requirements. Lease fees in an amount to cover the cost of building and maintaining sign boards plus ten (10) percent and a deposit may be charged to the applicant for the period in which the signs are in the applicant's possession. 
(Ord. No. 11-2003, 4-24-03) 
Sec. 3.04. - Conditional Use Permit Criteria and Procedures. 
3.04.01. Purpose: The purpose of the Conditional Use Permit process is to identify those land uses which may be appropriate within a zoning district but, due to either their location, function, or operation, could have a potentially harmful impact on adjacent properties or the surrounding area; and to provide for a procedure whereby such uses may be permitted by further restricting or conditioning them so as to mitigate or eliminate such adverse impacts. 
3.04.02. Authorization of Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commissioner shall make a report to the City Council which shall recommend approval or denial of a Conditional Use Permit for a use in any district in which such use is authorized under this Ordinance, following proper application, and after notice to affected landowners and public hearing, in accordance with the procedures and criteria herein established. 
3.04.03. Issuance Limitations and Forms Required: No Certificate of Occupancy or building permit for a purpose authorized only as a Conditional Use within a zoning district shall be issued unless the applicant obtains a Conditional Use Permit from the City Council. The application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be submitted on a form provided by the Zoning Officer and accompanied by a site plan in a form acceptable to the City Manager. The Planning and Zoning Commissioner may require additional information or plans as necessary and appropriate for review. 
3.04.04. Procedures: The procedures associated with the review and approval or denial of a Conditional Use Permit shall be the same as those associated with a zoning map amendment, as described in Section 3.03, above. 
3.04.05. Criteria for Approval: The Planning and Zoning Commissioner shall recommend denial of a Conditional Use if it finds that the proposed use: 
A.	Does not conform with applicable regulations and standards established by this Ordinance; 
B.	Is not compatible with existing or permitted uses on abutting sites, in terms of use, building height, bulk and scale, setbacks and open spaces, landscaping, drainage, or access and circulation features; 
C.	Potentially creates greater unfavorable effects or impacts on other existing or permitted uses on abutting sites than those which reasonably may result from the use of the site by a use permitted by right; 
D.	Adversely affects the safety and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian circulation in the vicinity, including traffic reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use and other uses reasonably anticipated in the area considering existing zoning and land uses in the area; 
E.	Fails to reasonably protect persons and property from erosion, flood or water damage, fire, noise, glare, odors, and similar hazards or impacts; 
F.	Adversely affects traffic control or adjacent properties by inappropriate location, lighting, or types of signs; 
G.	Fails to provide adequate and convenient off-street parking and loading facilities; 
H.	Fails to conform with the objectives and the purpose of the zoning district in which the development is located, and the goals, objectives, and policies, contained in the City's long-range Comprehensive Plan; 
I.	Will be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity, for reasons specifically articulated by the Commissioner; or 
J.	The premises or structure(s) are not suitable for the proposed Conditional Use. 
3.04.06. Site Plans: Site plans may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commissioner as a part of the Conditional Use Permit review process. Conditional Use site plans considered by the Planning and Zoning Commissioner shall be approved only after the Planning and Zoning Commissioner finds that the proposed development, if completed as proposed, will comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and all conditions deemed necessary. 
3.04.07. Authorization to Establish Conditions: The Planning and Zoning Commissioner may recommend, and the City Council may establish such conditions of approval as are necessary to assure that the proposed land use meets the criteria set forth in this Ordinance which may include without limitation requirements for special yards, lot sizes, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls or screening; requirements for installation and maintenance of landscaping or erosion control measures; requirements for street improvements, regulation of vehicular ingress and egress, and traffic circulation; regulation of signs; regulation of hours or other characteristics of operation; establishment of development schedules or time limits for performance or completion; and such other reasonable conditions as the City Council may deem necessary to insure compatibility with surrounding uses and to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. 
3.04.08. Agreement to Abide by Conditions Prior to Issuance: No Conditional Use Permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner or grantee of the Conditional Use Permit shall accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the Conditional Use Permit, as attached to the site plan drawing (or drawings) and approved by the City Council. the Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all Conditional Use Permits granted by the City. 
3.04.09. Validity of a Conditional Use Permit: A Conditional Use Permit shall remain valid until such time as one (1) of the following actions is taken: 
A.	The property is rezoned; 
B.	Another Conditional Use Permit is approved for the site; or 
C.	The use of the premises changes and such a change is authorized by the issuance of a new Certificate of Occupancy. 
3.04.10. Nonsubstantial Changes: No building, premise, or land used under a Conditional Use Permit may be substantially changed unless a new Conditional Use Permit is granted for the change. In the event a change is determined by both the City Manager and the Zoning Officer to be nonsubstantial, the City Manager may approve the change. The City Manager shall maintain a record of all such determinations and shall appraise the Planning and Zoning Commissioner of such determinations. 
Sec. 3.05. - New and Unlisted Land Uses. 
3.05.01. Procedure to Facilitate Land Use Classification: It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and that forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City of Santa Fe. New or unlisted forms of land use shall not include those land uses that can reasonably be interpreted as being similar to permitted or Conditional Uses already listed in the district regulations for the district in which the new use is to be located, or in the land use regulation matrix found at the end of Article 4, of this Ordinance. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies where new or unlisted land uses are not specified as a permitted use or a Conditional Use in any zoning district, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made in accordance with the terms of this Section of the Ordinance. 
3.05.02. Classification Rulings-Board of Adjustment: The City Manager shall refer questions concerning any new or unlisted use to the Board [of] Adjustment requesting an interpretation as to the zoning district into which such use should be placed. The referral shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwellings, sales, processing, type of product, storage, anticipated employment, transportation system requirements, the general requirements for public utilities such water and sanitary sewer, and other information deemed necessary to assist the Board of Adjustment in its deliberations. 
3.05.03. Board of Adjustment to Make Determination: The Board [of] Adjustment shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of considering the nature and characteristics of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts, and shall determine the zoning district or districts within which such use is most similar and should be permitted. 
3.05.04. Incorporation of Rulings into the Zoning Text: Written records of the rulings of the Board of Adjustment pertaining to land use classification shall be maintained by the City Manager. The City Manager shall regularly update the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance text by incorporating said rulings into the written text. 
Sec. 3.06. - Nonconformance. 
3.06.01. Purpose: Within the districts established by this Ordinance or amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this Ordinance was enacted, amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which do not conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. it is the intent of this Section of the Ordinance to permit such nonconformance to continue, under regulations herein contained, until the same are removed, but not to encourage their survival. 
3.06.02. Nonconformance Incompatible: Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved. 
3.06.03. Enlargement Prohibited: It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Except as herein provided, no nonconforming use of land or buildings nor any nonconforming structure shall be enlarged, changed, altered, or repaired except in conformity with the regulations contained in this Article. 
3.06.04. Nonconformance Status: Any use or structure which does not conform with the regulations contained in the zoning district in which it is located is deemed to be a legal nonconforming use when: 
A.	The use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of the passage of this Ordinance, and has since been in regular and continuous use; or 
B.	The use or structure was lawfully being used at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this Ordinance and by such amendment was placed in a district where it is not otherwise permitted; or 
C.	The use or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to the City of Santa Fe and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
3.06.05. Continuing Lawful Use of Property: 
a.	The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance, although it does not conform to the provisions herein, may be continued until termination is required in accordance with the provisions of this Article. During the period between designation as a nonconforming land use activity and notification of a prescribed termination date, if discontinuance occurs, any future use of the premises must be in conformity with the general provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.	A legal nonconforming use, when discontinued or abandoned, cannot be resumed. Prima facie evidence of continuance or abandonment is as follows: 
1.	When land associated with a legal nonconforming use ceases to be used in such a manner for a period of ninety (90) days. 
2.	When a structure associated with a nonconforming use ceases to be used in such a manner for a period of ninety (90) days. 
C.	Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment and may include a consideration of the following factors in addition to the prima facie evidence of abandonment cited in Subsection B., above: 
1.	The intent of the user or owner; or 
2.	The apparent act of discontinuance as supported by evidence submitted to the Board of Adjustment. 
3.06.06. Development of Nonconforming Lots: Nonconforming lots which do not meet the minimum area, width, or depth requirements for the district in which they are located may be used for any lawful purpose permitted within the zoning district in which they are located. However, the use of such a lot shall be subject to a determination by the Zoning Officer that a good faith effort has been made to follow all rules and regulations associated with this Ordinance. 
3.06.07. Proof of Legal Nonconformance: It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator, or occupant to provide proof that a nonconforming structure or use of land or building existed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance. 
3.06.08. Restoration of Damaged Property: Nothing in this Article shall prevent the restoration of a building destroyed to the extent of not more than fifty (50) percent of its reasonable value by fire, explosion, or other casualty or Act of God, or a public enemy, nor the continued occupancy or use of such a building or part which existed at the time of such destruction. However, the preceding allowance for the restoration of damaged nonconforming property has no bearing on an approved amortization schedule for the termination of nonconformance as described in this Article. 
3.06.09. Substitution of Nonconforming Uses or Structures Prohibited: No nonconforming use or structure may be substituted for any other nonconforming use or structure. Only uses permitted by right and approved Conditional Uses may be substituted for nonconforming uses or structures. 
3.06.10. Enlargement of Nonconformance Prohibited: No nonconforming use or structure may be extended or enlarged, and no nonconforming use of land may be enlarged or increased, to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the site achieved nonconforming status. 
3.06.11. Survey and Certification: The Zoning Officer is responsible for the production of an annual survey and report on the status of zoning nonconformance in Santa Fe. The Officer's report shall be sent to the Planning and Zoning Commission at its first regular meeting of the official municipal year. The Commissioner shall review the report and shall approve or reject the certification of each site that the Officer has identified as being nonconforming. Once certified by the Commissioner as nonconforming, a site shall be given an alpha-numeric designation for future reference. Upon receipt of the approved certified report from the Commissioner, the Officer shall notify each tenant and property owner of such nonconforming status. 
3.06.12. Termination of Nonconformance: The right to use a parcel of land or a structure in a nonconforming manner shall terminate under any of the following circumstances: 
A.	When the use is abandoned. (See 3.06.05 "Continuing Lawful Use of Property") 
B.	When any provision of this or any other Ordinance of the City of Santa Fe is violated. 
C.	When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use by means of an amendment to the zoning text or map. 
D.	When the structure in which a nonconforming use is housed, operated, or maintained is damaged to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its value. 
E.	When the right to maintain or operate a nonconforming use has been terminated in accordance with an amortization schedule established by the Board of Adjustment as described in this Article. 
3.06.13. Amortization of Nonconformance: 
A.	Responsibility of the Board of Adjustment: It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Adjustment to provide a program for the orderly and fair termination of all nonconforming land uses and structures in Santa Fe. The board shall cooperate with the Zoning Officer in reviewing the status of certified nonconforming uses and structures for amortization scheduling and termination. 
B.	Public Hearing Required: Prior to the establishment of an amortization schedule for a nonconforming land use or structure, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given in written form to the tenant and owner of the certified nonconforming use or structure and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Santa Fe. The notice shall state the time and the place of the hearing. The notice shall appear in said newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
C.	Factors to be Used by the Board of Adjustment in Amortization Scheduling: In determining the amortization schedule for the termination of a certified nonconforming land use or structure, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors: 
1.	The length of time required for the user or owner of the property to amortize his/her capital investment. 
2.	The general condition of the site and the facilities. 
3.	The length of time that the property has been used or owned. 
4.	Conforming land use activities that would be permitted on the site. 
5.	The land use activities surrounding the site in question. 
6.	The Comprehensive City Plan of the City of Santa Fe and the impact that such existing nonconformance has on plan implementation. 
E.	Notification and Recordation: The Board of Adjustment shall send a copy of all approved amortization schedules for the termination of nonconformance to the owners and lessees of affected sites. The termination date and the reasons for the schedule term shall be clearly described in the notification. The Zoning Officer shall keep a permanent record of all amortization schedules for the City. 
F.	Violation of an Amortization Schedule: The failure of an owner or a tenant of a certified nonconforming land use or structure to comply with the termination date of a recorded amortization schedule shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall be punishable in accordance with the terms of Article 13, of this Ordinance. 
3.06.14. Small, Undersized, or Oddly Shaped Lots: A small, undersized, or oddly shaped lot which was platted or otherwise legally recorded prior to the adoption of this Ordinance may be used for any lawful purpose permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. However, the design, layout, and use of such a lot shall be subject to a de-termination by the Zoning Officer that a good faith effort has been made to follow the rules and regulations associated with this Ordinance as closely as possible. 
Sec. 3.07. - Zoning of Annexed Areas. 
3.07.01. Plan Required Prior to Annexation: It shall be the responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Commissioner to prepare a land use and zoning plan for any area to be annexed by the City of Santa Fe. City Council shall review, modify if necessary, and adopt said plan. After annexation, said area shall be zoned in accordance with the aforementioned plan and the land use plan for the annexed area shall become an integral component of the City's Comprehensive City Plan. 
Sec. 3.08. - Official Zoning Map. 
3.08.01. Official Zoning Map Established: The boundaries of the zoning districts established within the City of Santa Fe shall be drawn on an Official Zoning Map, adopted as part of this Ordinance, and incorporated as a part of this Ordinance by this reference thereto. 
3.08.02. Location of the Official Zoning Map: One original of the Official Zoning Map shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary and labeled as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. This copy shall be the Official Zoning Map and shall bear the signature of the mayor and attestation of the City Secretary. This map shall not be changed in any manner except by Ordinance. In case of any questions regarding boundary interpretation or land use classification, this map, together with any amending Ordinances, shall be controlling. 
3.08.03. City Manager to Retain Copy: A copy of the original Official Zoning Map shall be placed in the office of the City Manager. Said copy shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments. Reproductions of the Official Zoning Map may be made for informational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, § 1, 5-10-07; Ord. No. 19-2007, 7-26-07; Ord. No. 25-2007, § 1, 9-13-07; Ord. No. 02-2008, § 1, 1-24-08; Ord. No. 21-2008, § 1, 10-9-08; Ord. No. 01-2009, § 1, 1-22-09; Ord. No. 07-2009, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 17-2009, 9-24-09; Ord. No. 18-2009, 9-24-09; Ord. No. 19-2009, 9-24-09; Ord. No. 24-2009, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 04-2010, 5-27-10; Ord. No. 06-2010, 7-22-10; Ord. No. 8-2010, § 1, 8-26-10; Ord. No. 9-2010, § 1, 8-26-10; Ord. No. 01-2011, § 1, 1-13-11; Ord. No. 02-2011, 1-13-11; Ord. No. 03-2011, 2-24-11; Ord. No. 01-2012, 1-12-12; Ord. No. 02-2012, 1-12-12; Ord. No. 16-2012, 5-24-12; Ord. No. 18-2012, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 22-2012, 11-8-12; Ord. No. 23-2012, 12-13-12; Ord. No. 01-2013, 1-10-13; Ord. No. 04-2013, 3-28-13; Ord. No. 09-2013, 6-27-13; Ord. No. 13-2013, 7-25-13; Ord. No. 14-2013, 7-25-13; Ord. No. 19-2013, 9-26-13; Ord. No. 03-2014, 2-27-14; Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-9-14; Ord. No. 11-2014, 10-9-14; Ord. No. 12-2014, 11-20-14; Ord. No. 13-2014, 11-20-14; Ord. No. 13-2015, 10-8-15; Ord. No. 03-2016, 5-12-16; Ord. No. 04-2016, 5-12-16) 
Sec. 3.09. - Zoning Ordinance Text and Map Interpretation. 
3.09.01. Primary Interpretation-Zoning Officer: The Zoning Officer shall be the individual primarily responsible for the interpretation of the text of this Ordinance and the Official Zoning Map. If the Zoning Officer determines that the meaning of a word or a provision is unclear, or that the application of same to a particular circumstance is uncertain, then the Zoning Officer shall provide a written statement of interpretation, specifying the reasons supporting the interpretation. Unless the interpretation is revised by the Board of Adjustment, City Manager, or modified by amendment to this Ordinance, the interpretation of the Zoning Officer shall be presumed to be correct. 
3.09.02. Ultimate Interpretations-Board of Adjustment: An interpretation by the Zoning Officer may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Ordinance. The Zoning Officer may request an interpretive ruling from the Board of Adjustment by placing the request on the appropriate agenda of the Board. 
3.09.03. Official Zoning Map Interpretation: The zoning district boundary lines shown on the Zoning District Map usually follow streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center line. 
B.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
C.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following City limits. 
D.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the right-of-way lines. 
E.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections A through D above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
F.	Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley, or other public way shall be automatically extended to the center line of such vacated street, alley, or way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
G.	The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the center line of the street unless as a condition of zoning approval it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street. 
H.	Permanent zoning changes made after the date of passage of this Ordinance shall be indicated in approximate locations on the Official Zoning Map. Individuals seeking exact legal descriptions, shall be referred to the adopting Ordinance amendment for each particular permanent zoning change. 
Sec. 3.10. - Annual Recodification Required. 
3.10.01. City Manager Responsible for Recodification: It shall be the responsibility of the City Manager to annually update this Ordinance. All amendments to the text or the map of this Ordinance shall be incorporated in said annual recodification. Each new entry or modification to this Ordinance shall include an annotation as to the date at which such change occurred. 
3.10.01. Ordinance Format: This Ordinance shall be maintained and updated in a three-ring binder format. 
Sec. 3.11. - Fees. 
3.11.01. Fees Schedule: Fees for zoning amendments, Conditional Use Permits, and any other permits or review procedures associated with this Ordinance shall be established by the City Council and shall be made known to citizens by means of a fee schedule which shall be available from the City Manager. 
3.11.02. Waiver of Fees: The City Council, upon a vote of the majority of members present, may waive the fee for an amendment, Conditional Use Permit, or any other permit or review procedure associated with this Ordinance. However, fees may be waived only in the case of extreme hardship on the applicant or in cases where a submission of a zoning action is required by the Planning and Zoning Commissioner or the Board of Adjustment. 
3.11.03. Attributable Fees: All fees attributable to non-staff consultants such as a City Attorney, City Engineer, Contract Inspector, and other similar contract personnel shall be payable by the applicant. Failure to pay such fees shall suspend or nullify the review or approval of an application until such fees are paid in full. 
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4.01. - AR - Agricultural/Residential District 
4.01.01. Description: The AR - Agricultural/Residential Districtis intended to retain the open character of the land. This district is primarily designed for those areas on the periphery and within Santa Fe which have soils most suitable for agricultural production. Agricultural activities are frequently associated with noise, odors, dust, aerial chemical spraying, and other activities generally incompatible with urban life. However, agriculture forms a vital segment of both the Texas and local economy. Therefore, it is the purpose of the AR - District to provide areas of low density development to accommodate land uses within a district which will have the least negative impacts on agriculture. Developmental standards within the AR - District are designed to provide for a high quality of life while effectively reducing the need for extensive urban infrastructure and associated public facilities. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.01.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.01.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.01.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4E Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
A.	Lot Area: A lot located in the AR - Agricultural Residential District shall have not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of area where public water and sewer are available or one-half (1/2) acre elsewhere or as approved by the Galveston County Health Department. 
B.	Lot Width: A lot located in the AR - Agricultural Residential District shall have not less than eighty (80) feet of width as measured at the front and rear building setback line. 
C.	Lot Depth: A lot located in the AR - Agricultural Residential District shall have not less than one hundred (100) feet of depth. 
D.	Front Yard: Each lot in an AR - Agricultural Residential District shall have a front yard building line setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
E.	Rear Yard: Each lot in an AR - Agricultural Residential District shall have a rear yard building line setback of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
F.	Side Yard: Each lot in an AR - Agricultural Residential District shall have side yard building line setbacks of not less than ten (10) feet on each side. Any exterior side yard building line setback shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. Exception: Any exterior side yard building line setback adjacent to a lot facing the side street shall be increased to match the front yard building line setback required for that adjacent lot. 
G.	Density: One (1) dwelling unit per lot or tract and two (2) accessory apartments (see 4.01.06 below). 
H.	Lot Coverage: Structures on an AR - Agricultural Residential District lot shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent of the lot. Exception: Structures on an AR - Agricultural Residential District lot one-half (1/2) acre or less in size may cover up to forty (40) percent of the lot. 
I.	Height: No structure on an AR - Agricultural/Residential District lot shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, except non-habitable agricultural structures such as silos and similar structures and radio frequency communications structures. 
4.01.05. Signs: No lot located in this zoning district may have more than one (1) sign. No sign may exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. No sign may exceed five (5) lineal feet on any side. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with specifications provided by the Santa Fe Zoning Officer. (Note limits established by Section 5.03 "Home Occupations" and by Article 7, "Outdoor Advertising Sign Regulation".) 
4.01.06. Encroachment by Accessory Structures: Accessory structures may encroach on the rear yard set backs of any lot where the rear lot line abuts a dedicated alley; but in no case shall such structure be located closer than five (5) feet from such rear property line. In addition, unattached non-dwelling unit accessory buildings or structures less than fifteen (15) feet in height, as measured from the adjacent grade to the highest point of any portion of such building or structure, may be located in a required rear yard within a residential district, provided they are set back not less than ten (10) feet from any rear lot line. 
Primary and Accessory Structure Restrictions: The following additional restrictions are placed on primary and accessory structures: 
A.	No primary or accessory structures or other obstructions, including but not limited to, decks, pools, paving, landscaping structures, fountains or trees, shall be erected or planted on any utility or drainage easement. 
B.	Connecting breezeways shall not exceed eight (8) feet in width at the eaves and must be provided with fire stopping in accordance with building codes. 
C.	Eaves of primary buildings shall not project into building line setbacks more than two (2) feet; eaves of accessory buildings shall not project into the required building line setback more than one and one-half (11/2) feet. 
D.	Chimneys, fireplaces, bay or bow windows and similar architectural features of primary and accessory buildings shall not reduce the minimum yard building line setback by projecting into or over such yard setbacks. 
4.01.07. Occupancy of Accessory Apartments Limited: The initial occupancy of Accessory Apartments shall be limited to relatives of the occupant of the main dwelling unit not greater than the third degree of consanguinity and the second degree of affinity. Upon vacancy by the original occupant(s), the relationship restriction is removed and the Accessory Apartment may be rented. 
(Ord. No. 17-2006, § 2, 11-9-06; Ord. No. 04-2007, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 14-2007, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 20-2007, § 1, 7-26-07; Ord. No. 08-2013, § 1, 4-25-13) 
Sec. 4.02. - R-1 - Single-Family Residential District. 
4.02.01. Description: This district is primarily intended for single-family detached residential dwellings and related religious, educational, and recreational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive neighborhood. These areas are intended to be separated and protected from the encroachment of land use activities which do not perform a function necessary to sustain the residential environment, internal stability, attractiveness, order, efficiency, and security. The maintenance of property values is encouraged through the provision of adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of various land use elements. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.02.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.02.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.02.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4E Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
A.	Lot Area: A lot located in the R-1 - Single-Family Residential District shall have not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of area. 
B.	Lot Width: A lot located in the R-1 - Single Family Residential District shall have not less than sixty (60) feet of width as measured at the front and rear building setback line. 
C.	Lot Depth: A lot located in the R-1 - Single-Family Residential District shall have not less than one hundred (100) feet of depth. 
D.	Front Yard: Each lot in an R-1 - Single-Family Residential District shall a front yard building line setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
E.	Rear Yard: Each lot in an R-1 - Single-Family Residential District shall have a rear yard building line setback of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
F.	Side Yard: Each lot in an R-1 - Single-Family Residential District shall have side yard building line setbacks of not less than six (6) feet on each side. Any exterior side yard building line setback shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. Exception: Any exterior side yard building line setback adjacent to a lot facing the side street shall be increased to match the front yard required for that adjacent lot. 
G.	Density: One (1) dwelling unit per lot or tract and one (1) accessory apartment (see 4.02.06). 
H.	Lot Coverage: Structures on an R-1 - Single-Family Residential District lot shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot. 
I.	Height: No structure in an R-1 - Single-Family Residential District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
4.02.05. Signs: No lot located in this zoning district may have more than one (1) sign. No sign may exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. No sign may exceed five (5) lineal feet on any side. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with specifications provided by the Santa Fe Zoning Officer. (Note limits established by Section 5.03 "Home Occupations" and by Article 7, "Outdoor Advertising Sign Regulation".) 
4.02.06. Encroachment by Accessory Structures: Accessory structures may encroach on the rear yard set backs of any lot where the rear lot line abuts a dedicated alley; but in no case shall such structure be located closer than five (5) feet from such rear property line. In addition, unattached non-dwelling unit accessory buildings or structures less than fifteen (15) feet in height, as measured from the adjacent grade to the highest point of any portion of such building or structure, may be located in a required rear yard within a residential district, provided they are set back not less than ten (10) feet from any rear lot line. 
Primary and Accessory Structure Restrictions: The following additional restrictions are placed on primary and accessory structures: 
A.	No primary or accessory structures or other obstructions, including but not limited to, decks, pools, paving, landscaping structures, fountains or trees, shall be erected or planted on any utility or drainage easement. 
B.	Connecting breezeways shall not exceed eight (8) feet in width at the eaves and must be provided with fire stopping in accordance with building codes. 
C.	Eaves of primary buildings shall not project into building line setbacks more than two (2) feet; eaves of accessory buildings shall not project into the required building line setback more than one and one-half (11/2) feet. 
D.	Chimneys, fireplaces, bay or bow windows and similar architectural features of primary and accessory buildings shall not reduce the minimum yard building line setback by projecting into or over such yard setbacks. 
E.	Occupancy of Accessory Apartments Limited: The initial occupancy of Accessory Apartments shall be limited to relatives of the occupant of the main dwelling unit not greater than the third degree of consanguinity and the second degree of affinity. Upon vacancy by the original occupant(s), the relationship restriction is removed and the Accessory Apartment may be rented. 
(Ord. No. 17-2006, § 3, 11-9-06; Ord. No. 04-2007, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 20-2007, § 2, 7-26-07) 
Sec. 4.03. - R-2 Medium Density Residential District. 
4.03.01. Description: This district is primarily intended for medium density single-family attached and detached residential dwellings and related religious, educational, and recreational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive neighborhood. These areas are intended to be separated and protected from the encroachment of land use activities which do not perform a function necessary to sustain the residential environment, internal stability, attractiveness, order, efficiency, and security. The maintenance of property values is encouraged through the provision of adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of various land use elements. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.03.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.03.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.03.04. Qualification: To qualify for application of medium density regulations under this Section, the lots must be platted or replatted in conformance to these restrictions. Lots pre-existing this regulation shall conform to R-1 - Single-Family Residential District restrictions. 
4.03.05. Area and Dimensional Regulations: The following regulations operate under the principal of density transfer of area to commonly held ownership. 
A.	Density Transfer: Each residence shall be provided the equivalent of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land, exclusive of street and alley rights-of-way, dedicated storm water control structures and similar areas dedicated to public use. 
B.	Front Yard: Each lot in an R-2 Medium Density Residential District shall have a front yard building line setback of not less than the greater of twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line or thirty-five (35) feet from the back of curb. 
C.	Rear Yard: Each lot in an R-2 Medium Density Residential District shall have a rear yard building line setback or unroofed patio depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
D.	Side Yard: Each lot in an R-2 Medium Density Residential District shall have side yard building line setbacks of not less than as set out in "type specific restrictions", 4.03.08 below). 
E.	Density: One (1) residential unit per lot when detached and two (2) units per lot when attached. No accessory apartments are permitted. 
F.	Height: No structure in an R-2 Medium Density Residential District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
4.03.06. Signs: No lot located in this zoning district may have more than one (1) sign. No sign may exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. No sign may exceed five (5) lineal feet on any side. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with specifications provided by the Santa Fe Zoning Officer. (Note limits established by Section 5.03 "Home Occupations" and by Article 7, "Outdoor Advertising Sign Regulation".) 
4.03.07. Encroachment by Accessory Structures: Accessory structures may encroach on the rear yard set backs of any lot where the rear lot line abuts a dedicated alley; but in no case shall such structure be located closer than five (5) feet from such rear property line. In addition, unattached non-dwelling unit accessory buildings or structures less than fifteen (15) feet in height, as measured from the adjacent grade to the highest point of any portion of such building or structure, may be located in a required rear yard within a residential district, provided they are set back not less than ten (10) feet from any rear lot line. 
Primary and Accessory Structure Restrictions: The following additional restrictions are placed on primary and accessory structures: 
A.	No primary or accessory structures or other obstructions, including but not limited to, decks, pools, paving, landscaping structures, fountains or trees, shall be erected or planted on any utility or drainage easement. 
B.	Connecting breezeways shall not exceed eight (8) feet in width at the eaves and must be provided with fire stopping in accordance with building codes. 
C.	Eaves of primary buildings shall not project into building line setbacks more than two (2) feet; eaves of accessory buildings shall not project into the required building line setbacks more than one and one-half (11/2) feet. 
D.	Chimneys, fireplaces, bay or bow windows and similar architectural features of primary and accessory buildings shall not reduce the minimum yard building line setbacks by projecting into or over such yard setbacks. 
4.03.08. Type-Specific Restrictions: 
A.	Conventional: 
1.	Lot Area: A lot located in the R-2 Medium Density Residential District shall have no less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of area. 
2.	Lot Width: A lot located in the R2-Medium Density Residential District shall have not less than forty (40) feet of width as measured at the front and rear building setback line. 
3.	Lot Depth: A lot located in the R-2 Medium Density Residential District shall have not less than eighty (80) feet of depth. 
4.	Each lot shall have side yards of not less than six (6) feet on each side. 
5.	Lot coverage: Structures on an R-2 Medium Density Residential District lot shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot. 
B.	Zero Lot Line: 
1.	Each lot shall have a zero (0) side yard building line setback on one side and not less than a twelve (12) feet side yard building line setback on the opposite side. 
2.	Any side abutting properties outside of the zero lot line development shall have a side yard building line setback of not less than six (6) feet. 
3.	Any side abutting a street right-of-way shall have a side yard building line setback of not less than fifteen (15) feet or twenty-five (25) feet if adjoining a lot fronting said side street. 
4.	The wall of any structure within ten (10) feet of a property line shall be constructed of decorative masonry or decorative masonry veneer. 
5.	The zero lot line shall be screened by a matching solid decorative masonry wall extending between the residential unit and the front and rear yard building line setback lines. The remainder of the zero (0) side yard building line setback shall be screened from the adjoining lot by an opaque fence. All fences shall be no less than seven (7) feet high nor more than nine (9) feet high measured from grade. 
6.	Any lateral wall crossing a side yard building line setback shall contain a three (3) feet wide gate, not more than eighty (80) percent opaque or similar grade level opening. This opening is intended for fire fighting access. 
7.	No eave or other building encroachment shall be permitted on the zero (0) yard building line setback except eave guttering may encroach up to one (1) foot. 
8.	Roofs pitched toward the zero lot line side shall be storm water guttered in a manner that precludes drainage flooding to the adjoining yard. 
9.	A twenty (20) feet wide alley or unobstructed (including fences) utility easement may be provided by the developer across the rear of all lots and, if provided by the developer, shall connect to an existing right-of-way. Such alley or easement may be divided between back-to-back lots. If provided by the developer, alleys shall be paved with concrete or asphalt with a width of no less than twelve (12) feet. 
10.	Provision shall be made on the plat that permits right-of-access to the zero (0) lot line side of each party wall for maintenance purposes. 
C.	Cluster Housing: 
1.	The minimum lot size shall be determined by the projected roof area at the plane of the natural grade and may include un-roofed areas. The balance of the required minimum lot area shall be included in commonly owned landscaped area within the development. 
2.	All primary structures shall maintain a twenty-five (25) building line setback from the perimeter limits of the full development or development phase. 
3.	Any primary structures shall maintain no less than a twelve (12) feet separation from any other primary structure. 
4.	Any structures within twenty (20) feet of another, exclusive of maximum eave encroachments of eighteen (18) inches, shall have exterior walls constructed of decorative masonry or decorative masonry veneer. 
5.	Garden and patio walls shall be constructed of decorative masonry or masonry veneer and shall be not higher than nine (9) feet above adjoining grade. 
6.	Roofs pitched toward neighboring patios and gardens shall be guttered in a manner that precludes drainage flooding to the neighboring patio or garden. 
4.03.09. Transfer of Lot Area to Commonly Held Landscaping and Private Recreational Area: Up to two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of mandatory lot area may be transferred into commonly held landscaped or private recreational area but other provisions of this Section shall not be reduced thereby. 
4.03.10. All vehicular circulation and parking shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or an approved masonry paver system. 
4.03.11. Specific provision shall be incorporated into development in this classification allowing reasonable access by fire and other emergency vehicles and personnel to individual units. 
(Ord. No. 04-2007, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 11-2007, 5-10-07; Ord. No. 20-2007, §§ 3, 5, 6, 7-26-07) 
Sec. 4.04. - R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District. 
4.04.01. Description: This district is primarily intended for multiple-family dwellings consisting of townhouses, row houses, garden apartments, and other similar medium density designs, along with related religious, educational, and recreational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive neighborhood. The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide for a higher density residential district with a more diverse mixture of residential and associated land uses. In order to accommodate higher densities, a greater use of open space and recreational areas is required within this district. Projects in this district are intended for locations along or near designated arterial streets to accommodate the higher traffic generation of uses within the district. These areas are intended to be separated and protected from the encroachment of land use activities which do not perform a function necessary to sustain the residential environment, internal stability, attractiveness, order, efficiency, and security. The maintenance of property values is encouraged through the provision of adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of various land use elements. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.04.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.04.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.04.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4E Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
A.	Site Area: A site located in the R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District shall have not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
B.	Site Width: A lot located in the R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District shall have not less than one hundred (100) feet of width as measured at the front and rear building setback line. 
C.	Site Depth: A site located in the R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District shall have not less than one hundred (100) feet of depth. 
D.	Additional Parking: In addition to the parking established by the Parking Matrix, additional office and/or visitor parking shall be required according to the following standard and shall be placed in close proximity to the project office or project manager's administrative location: 
Three (3) to sixteen (16) units two (2) parking spaces. 
One (1) additional parking space for every additional thirty-two (32) units thereafter. 
E.	Front Yard: Each site in an R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District shall have a front yard building line setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
F.	Rear Yard: Each site in an R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District shall have a rear yard building line setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
G.	Side Yard: Each site in an R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District shall have side yard building line setbacks of not less than twenty-five (25) feet on each side. 
H.	Lot Coverage: The maximum impervious surface permitted in the project shall be sixty (60) percent of the project site. 
I.	Height: No structure in an R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District shall exceed two (2) stories in height. Exception: Multi-Family Residential may be increased to three (3) stories when connected to a public water supply with a capacity and pressure approved by the Fire Marshal. 
4.04.05. Signs: No lot located in this zoning district may have more than one (1) sign. No sign may exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. No sign may exceed five (5) lineal feet on any side. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with specifications provided by the Santa Fe Zoning Officer. (Note limits established by Section 5.03 Home Occupations. Exception: Multi-family residential complexes may erect a single identification sign larger than twenty (20) square feet but otherwise limited by the provisions of Article 7, "Outdoor Advertising Sign Regulations".) 
4.04.06. Buffering and Screening: Any property developed in this zoning district which adjoins or abuts any residential property shall provide a fifteen (15) foot wide buffer yard along the entire perimeter of such residential property. Any property developed in this zoning district which adjoins or abuts any residential property shall be screened along the entire perimeter of such lot or zoning district by a solid, opaque fence or dense landscaping, created and maintained in accordance with specifications which shall be provided by the Santa Fe Zoning Officer. 
4.04.07. Landscaping: One (1) square foot of landscaping for each gross square foot of building area excluding detached support buildings such as offices, maintenance facilities, boiler and utility rooms and similar detached ancillary activity spaces and excluding detached buildings devoted exclusively to recreational activities 
4.04.08. Additional Support Facilities: The greater of four hundred (400) square feet or five (5) percent of the lot area shall be dedicated and constructed for recreational uses; this is in addition to mandatory landscaping areas. 
4.04.09. Platting: The creation of an R-3 - Multi-Family Residence shall require conformity to the platting requirements of the Santa Fe Subdivision Development Ordinance and Chapter 3 Building Regulations, Section 7, Multi-Family Dwellings of the Code of Ordinances. 
4.04.10. Public Safety: Specific provision shall be incorporated into development in this classification allowing reasonable access by fire and other emergency vehicles and personnel to individual units. 
A.	All vehicular circulation and parking shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or an approved masonry paver system. Streets shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet wide. Cul-de-sacs shall have no less than forty (40) feet radius turn-arounds or "T" turn-arounds with a cross bar no less than eighty-five (85) feet long. Parking spaces may be loaded from streets but no parking may occur on streets except parallel parking may be permitted when streets are increased by eight (8) feet in width for parking on one (1) side only or sixteen (16) in width for parking on both sides. 
B.	Buildings containing courts and court-yards shall be restricted as follows: 
1.	Outer Courts: Any outer court in a multi-family dwelling shall have a minimum width no less than the greater of eight (8) feet or the depth or the height of the court; but, the width need not exceed thirty (30) feet in any case. Access to said court shall be directly to a street or yard and shall remain accessible to emergency services personnel at all times. 
2.	Inner Courts: Any inner court in a multi-family dwelling shall have a length or width no less than the height of the building or wall surrounding the court. In no case shall an inner court be less than twenty (20) in width or length. Inner courts shall be served by no less than two (2) means of protected egress and shall remain accessible to emergency services personnel at all times. 
(Ord. No. 20-2003, 8-28-03; Ord. No. 04-2007, 3-8-07) 
Sec. 4.05. - MH - Manufactured Housing District. 
4.05.01. Description: This district is intended to serve as a residential zone that will meet the needs of persons living in manufactured housing. The primary use of land in the MH District is for manufactured homes, other related religious, educational, and recreational facilities normally required for the provision of a balanced and attractive neighborhood. These areas are intended to be separated and protected from the encroachment of land use activities which do not perform a function necessary to sustain the residential environment, internal stability, attractiveness, order, efficiency, and security. The maintenance of property values is encouraged through the provision of adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of various land use elements. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.05.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. Also, refer to Section 5.09 "Portable and Modular Building Standards". 
4.05.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.05.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4F Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
A.	Site Area: A site for an MH - Manufactured Home District shall contain not less than two (2) acres. 
B.	Lot Area: A lot located in the MH - Manufactured Home District shall have not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of area. 
C.	Lot Width: A lot located in the MH - Manufactured Housing District shall have not less than sixty (60) feet of width as measured at the front and rear building setback line. 
D.	Lot Depth: A lot located in the MH - Manufactured Home District shall have not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of depth. 
E.	Front yard: Each lot in an MH - Manufactured Home District shall have a front yard building line setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
F.	Rear Yard: Each lot in an MH - Manufactured Home District shall have a rear yard building line setback of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
G.	Side Yard: Each lot in an MH - Manufactured Home District shall have side yard building line setbacks of not less than six (6) feet on each side. Any exterior side yard building line setback shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. Exception: Any exterior side yard building line setback adjacent to a lot facing the side street shall be increased to match the front yard building line setback required for that adjacent lot. 
H.	Height: No structure in an MH - Manufactured Home District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
I.	Lot coverage: Structures on an MH - Manufactured Housing District lot shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the lot. 
J.	Density: One (1) residential unit per lot. No accessory apartments are permitted. 
4.05.05. Signs: No lot located in this zoning district may have more than one (1) sign. No sign may exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. No sign may exceed five (5) lineal feet on any side. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with specifications provided by the Santa Fe Zoning Officer. (Note limits established by Section 5.03 "Home Occupations" and by Article 7, "Outdoor Advertising Sign Regulation".) 
4.05.06. In-Migration of Additional Mobile Homes Prohibited: On and after the effective date of the adoption of this Ordinance no additional mobile homes will be permitted to locate within the City. 
4.05.07. Location of Manufactured Homes: Except as provided for in Section 4.05.08 below., manufactured homes shall be permitted to locate only in MH - Manufactured Home Zoning Districts. 
A.	All manufactured housing shall be permanently affixed to the lot by means of a permanent foundation or by "tie-downs" which are approved by the Zoning Officer. 
B.	All manufactured housing shall have any and all wheels and axles screened from public view. Said screening material shall be approved by the Zoning Officer. 
4.05.08. Existing Mobile Homes: Mobile homes which are located within the City of Santa Fe on the day that this Ordinance becomes effective and which are not located in an MH Manufactured Home zoning district shall become legal nonconforming land uses. Such homes shall be permitted to remain within the City subject to the following: 
A.	Mobile or manufactured homes may be conveyed or sold without penalty and may remain on legal nonconforming lots unless otherwise determined by the Zoning Officer to be unsafe and unfit for human habitation. 
B.	A mobile or manufactured home destroyed by fire, storm, or act of God, may be replaced with a manufactured home on a legal nonconforming lot. A replacement manufactured home shall be permanently anchored to the site, fully skirted, and shall be otherwise installed in accordance with health, safety, aesthetic and performance standards as specified by the Zoning Officer. 
C.	Individuals owning a legal, nonconforming mobile or manufactured home may replace it with another manufactured home. A replacement manufactured home shall be permanently anchored to the site, fully skirted, and shall be otherwise installed in accordance with health, safety, aesthetic and performance standards as specified by the Zoning Officer. 
4.05.09. Where a legal nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home is removed from a lot, and where such lot remains vacant for a period of ninety (90) days or more, said vacancy shall terminate the legal nonconforming status of said lot, and it shall be used only for land uses permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. 
4.05.10. Encroachment by Accessory Structures: Accessory structures may encroach on the rear yard set backs of any lot where the rear lot line abuts a dedicated alley; but in no case shall such structure be located closer than five (5) feet from such rear property line. In addition, unattached non-dwelling unit accessory buildings or structures less than fifteen (15) feet in height, as measured from the adjacent grade to the highest point of any portion of such building or structure, may be located in a required rear yard within a residential district, provided they are set back not less than ten (10) feet from any rear lot line. 
Primary and Accessory Structure Restrictions: The following additional restrictions are placed on primary and accessory structures: 
A.	No primary or accessory structures or other obstructions, including but not limited to, decks, pools, paving, landscaping structures, fountains or trees, shall be erected or planted on any utility or drainage easement. 
B.	Connecting breezeways shall not exceed eight (8) feet in width at the eaves and must be provided with fire stopping in accordance with building codes. 
C.	Eaves of primary buildings shall not project into set-backs more than two (2) feet; eaves of accessory buildings shall not project into the required setbacks more than one and one-half (11/2) feet. 
D.	Chimneys, fireplaces, bay or bow windows and similar architectural features of primary and accessory buildings shall not reduce the minimum yard set backs by projecting into or over such yard set backs. 
4.05.11. Manufactured Home Parks: Manufactured Home Parks shall be governed by the regulations set out in the "Mobile Home Regulations" of the City and shall be in general conformity with the subdivision and platting regulations and "Public Works Specifications" of the City as adopted elsewhere by City Ordinances. Lot dimensions and yard requirements may vary from the above standards when approved by City Council. 
(Ord. No. 04-2007, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 20-2007, § 4, 7-26-07) 
Sec. 4.06. - NC neighborhood Commercial District. 
4.06.01. Description: The NC - Neighborhood Commercial District is designed to facilitate centers which accommodate trade and personal services meeting the basic needs of families residing in areas adjacent to such centers. Requirements for sunlight, natural air circulation, open space, and off-street parking area more restrictive in the NC District because the retail trade and services located within it are intended to become an integral part of the neighborhood and must operate in harmony with other residential, educational, religious and recreational land use activities. Uses allowed in the district are intended to produce a relatively low traffic volume and are not intended to create any noise, lighting, glare, or odors abnormal to a residential environment. No outside storage of goods or materials is allowed. Screening and buffering standards are incorporated to reduce the negative impact of the NC District land-uses on abutting residential neighborhoods. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.06.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.06.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.06.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4F Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.06.05. Standard for Single-Family Residential Use of Commercial Property: Single-family residential construction placed in this commercial district shall conform to the more restrictive of the standards for both R-1 - Single-Family Residential District and NC - Neighborhood Commercial District in which placed. 
4.06.06. Single-Family Residential Subdivision Prohibited: Property within commercial districts shall not be subdivided for R-1 - Single-Family Residential District purposes. 
4.06.07. Performance Regulations Arising from Scale: 
A.	This district contains Small Scale and Large Scale provisions. If a property and associated buildings meet all of the Small Scale criteria, then the property qualifies to be constructed under the Small Scale Performance Standards. If the property or associated buildings fail to meet any of the Small Scale criteria then the property must meet the provisions of the Large Scale Performance Standards. The Large Scale Performance Standards shall be the default standards. 
B.	When a property is modified in a manner that removes it from the Small Scale category it must be upgraded to the Large Scale Performance Standards, consistent with the controlling PENC (Pre-existing nonconforming) notes accompanying the matrix text. No Occupancy Permit shall be issued until all characteristics of the upgrade are consistent with these standards. 
C.	A Temporary Occupancy may be issued by the Development Officer during the construction phase when continuous occupancy of parts of the facility can be maintained. Failure to abate the pre-existing nonconforming conditions in a timely manner shall be cause to cancel such Temporary Occupancy Permit. 
4.06.08. Criteria and Regulations: 
See Appendix 4-A for NC - Neighborhood Commercial District Small Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4-A for NC - Neighborhood Commercial District Large Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4-A for Accompanying "Notes and Pre-existing Non-conforming (PENC) Conditions". 
Sec. 4.07. - HC - Highway Commercial. 
4.07.01. Description: The HC - Highway Commercial District is designed to accommodate offices and retail activities associated with the major arterial highways located in Santa Fe. The front yard setback, site access, and site design requirements associated with this district are intended to reduce the impact of the heavy vehicular traffic so often present in this district. Screening and buffering standards are incorporated to reduce the negative impact of the HC District land-uses on abutting residential neighborhoods. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.07.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.07.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.07.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4E Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.07.05. Standard for Single-Family Residential Use of Commercial Property: Single-Family Residential construction placed in this commercial district shall conform to the more restrictive of the standards for both R-1 - Single-Family Residential District and HC - Highway Commercial District in which placed. 
4.07.06. Single-Family Residential Subdivision Prohibited: Property within commercial districts shall not be subdivided for R-I - Single-Family Residential District purposes. 
4.07.07. Performance Regulations Arising from Scale: 
A.	This district contains Small Scale and Large Scale provisions. If a property and associated buildings meet all of the Small Scale criteria, then the property qualifies to be constructed under the Small Scale Performance Standards. If the property or associated buildings fail to meet any of the Small Scale criteria then the property must meet the provisions of the Large Scale Performance Standards. The Large Scale Performance Standards shall be the default standards. 
B.	When a property is modified in a manner that removes it from the Small Scale category it must be upgraded to the Large Scale Performance Standards, consistent with the controlling PENC (Pre-existing nonconforming) notes accompanying the matrix text. No Occupancy Permit shall be issued until all characteristics of the upgrade to are consistent with these standards. 
C.	A Temporary Occupancy may be issued by the Development Officer during the construction phase when continuous occupancy of parts of the facility can be maintained. Failure to abate the pre-existing nonconforming conditions in a timely manner shall be cause to cancel such Temporary Occupancy Permit. 
4.07.08. Criteria and Regulations: 
See Appendix 4-B for HC - Highway Commercial Small Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4-B for HC - Highway Commercial Large Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4-B for Accompanying "Notes and Pre-Existing Nonconforming (PENC) Conditions". 
Sec. 4.08. - TR - Transportation District. 
4.08.01. Description: This district is intended to serve the needs of limited manufacturing, fabrication, assembling, warehousing and wholesaling businesses. Because of the potential environmental problems inherent in manufacturing processes, stringent performance standards are made applicable to this district. It is recognized that lot depth is limited in this zone and special consideration of yard set backs are necessary. Furthermore, special consideration is given to ameliorate the negative result of the reduced yard set backs. Screening and buffering standards are incorporated to reduce the negative impact of the TR District land-uses on abutting neighborhoods. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.08.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.08.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.08.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4E Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.08.05. Performance Regulations arising from scale: 
A.	This district contains Small Scale and Large Scale provisions. If a property and associated buildings meet all of the Small Scale criteria, then the property qualifies to be constructed under the Small Scale performance standards. If the property or associated buildings fail to meet any of the Small Scale criteria then the property must meet the provisions of the Large Scale Performance Standards. The Large Scale Performance Standards shall be the default standards. 
B.	When a property is modified in a manner that removes it from the Small Scale category it must be upgraded to the Large Scale Performance Standards, consistent with the controlling PENC (Pre-existing nonconforming) notes accompanying the matrix text. No Occupancy Permit shall be issued until all characteristics of the upgrade are consistent with these standards. 
C.	A Temporary Occupancy may be issued by the Development Officer during the construction phase when continuous occupancy of parts of the facility can be maintained. Failure to abate the pre-existing nonconforming conditions in a timely manner shall be cause to cancel such Temporary Occupancy Permit. 
4.08.06. Criteria and Regulations: 
See Appendix 4-C for TR - Transportation Small Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4- C for TR - Transportation Large Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4-C for Accompanying "Notes and Pre-existing Nonconforming (PENC) Conditions". 
Sec. 4.09. - LM - Light Manufacturing District. 
4.10.01. Description: This district is intended to serve the needs of manufacturing, fabrication, assembling, warehousing and wholesaling businesses. Because of the potential environmental problems inherent in manufacturing processes, stringent performance standards are made applicable to this district. It is intended that industrial areas in Santa Fe reflect a campus orientation with large lot design and substantial landscaping. Screening and buffering standards are incorporated to reduce the negative impact of the PS District land-uses on abutting residential neighborhoods. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.09.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.09.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.09.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4E Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.09.05. Standard for Single-Family Residential Use of Commercial Property: Single-Family Residential construction placed in this commercial district shall conform to the more restrictive of the standards for both R-1 - Single-Family Residential District and LM - Light Manufacturing District in which placed. 
4.09.06. Single-Family Residential Subdivision Prohibited: Property within commercial districts shall not be subdivided for R-1 - Single-Family Residential District purposes. 
4.09.05. Performance Regulations Arising from Scale: 
A.	This district contains Small Scale and Large Scale provisions. If a property and associated buildings meet all of the Small Scale criteria, then the property qualifies to be constructed under the Small Scale performance standards. If the property or associated buildings fail to meet any of the Small Scale criteria then the property must meet the provisions of the Large Scale Performance Standards. The Large Scale Performance Standards shall be the default standards. 
B.	When a property is modified in a manner that removes it from the Small Scale category it must be upgraded to the Large Scale Performance Standards, consistent with the controlling PENC (Pre-existing nonconforming) notes accompanying the matrix text. No Occupancy Permit shall be issued until all characteristics of the upgrade are consistent with these standards. 
C.	A Temporary Occupancy may be issued by the Development Officer during the construction phase when continuous occupancy of parts of the facility can be maintained. Failure to abate the pre-existing nonconforming conditions in a timely manner shall be cause to cancel such Temporary Occupancy Permit. 
4.09.06. Criteria and Regulations: 
See Appendix 4-D for LM - Light Manufacturing Small Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4 D for LM - Light Manufacturing Large Scale Criteria and Regulations. 
See Appendix 4-D for Accompanying "Notes and Pre-existing Nonconforming (PENC) Conditions". 
Sec. 4.10. - AU - Adult Uses District. 
4.10.01. Description: A number of findings from cities in Texas and other states (Michigan, Washington, and Virginia, among others) indicate that the concentration of certain sexually oriented business or so-called "adult entertainment" business tends to result in the blighting and deterioration of areas of such concentration. Accordingly, it is necessary that these business be regulated so that they have the least negative impact on residential neighborhoods, educational institutions, religious institutions, and the public. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies identified in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
4.10.02. Uses Permitted by Right: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.10.03. Conditional Uses: Please see Appendix 4F Zoning District Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
4.10.04. Area Regulations: For a comprehensive review of area regulations pertaining to all zoning districts, please see Appendix 4E Lot Area and Standards Matrix, at the end of this Section of the Ordinance. 
A.	Lot Area: All lots located in the AU - Adult Uses District shall have not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. 
B.	Lot Width: Each lot in an AU - Planned Uses District shall be no less than eighty (80) feet in width. 
C.	Lot Depth: Each lot in an AU - Adult Uses District shall have not less than one hundred and twenty-five feet (125) in depth. 
D.	Front Yard: Each lot in an AU - Adult Uses District shall a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
E.	Rear Yard: Each lot in an AU - Adult Uses District shall have a rear yard of not less twenty-five (25) feet. 
F.	Side Yard: Each lot in an AU - Adult Uses District shall have side yards of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Exception: Any exterior side yard adjacent to a lot facing the side street shall be increased to match the front yard required for that adjacent lot. 
G.	Lot Coverage: Structures on an AU - Adult Uses District lot shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot area. 
H.	Height: No structure on an AU - Adult Uses District lot shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
I.	All other site and structure limitations shall conform to those standards established by Neighborhood Commercial District (Large Scale). 
4.10.05. Buffering and Screening: As required by Neighborhood Commercial District (Large Scale). 
4.10.06. Additional Regulations: Please see Article 5, of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 4.11. - Planned unit development (PUD) overlay. 
4.11.01. Purpose: The Planned Unit Development (PUD) option provides for mixed use design and promotes superior development compatible with adjacent land uses. Development flexibility occurs in the program's degree of zoning relief realized from the jurisdiction's traditional land use standards approved by City Council. 
4.11.02. Objectives: A typical PUD development project may consist of a mixture of residential, commercial, entertainment, recreational and other site specific compatible type development in character and function to the surrounding community. Objectives of a PUD District are: 
(1)	To provide a mechanism by which existing land use and development criteria may be adjusted to accommodate for creative development proposals using an array of otherwise permissible land uses, shared common areas, parking and street system. 
(2)	To permit the use of a single development site for the development of a mixture of commercial and residential activities preferably with an 80 to 20 ratio of residential to commercial facilities. 
(3)	To encourage comprehensive well planned and creative development of land in the city. 
(4)	To strategically limit traffic demands upon city streets and highways. Refer to City of Santa Fe Development Guide Book for traffic impact analysis requirements. 
(5)	To establish predetermined amounts of open or green space for the utilization by the public and neighborhood residents. 
(6)	To encourage strategic design that results in smaller networks of utilities and streets. 
(7)	To encourage a pedestrian oriented environment (sidewalks) with limited vehicular access to commercial areas. 
4.11.03. PUD District Unique: Each designated PUD district will have unique standards particular only to that development approved by City Council and duly recorded in the Office of the Galveston County Clerk. No PUD designation may be applied to property located within any Adult Use (AU), Transportation (TR) or Mobile Home (MH) district. 
4.11.04. Scope: 
(a)	In order to achieve the goals of the City of Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan and to allow flexibility in development that will result in improved design, character, and quality of new mixed use developments and preserve the natural and scenic features of open spaces, a PUD may be established as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	A PUD is an amendment to the Zoning Development Standards Ordinance (ZDSO) and the City of Santa Fe Official Zoning Map. An adopted PUD Master Plan may be utilized as an instrument to establish a PUD Overlay on the Official Zoning Map. The adopted PUD map is a zoning overlay map for the property. The establishment of a PUD is an action derived from the adoption of an ordinance. All ordinances approved by City Council require the requisite number of public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council. 
(c)	It is the intent of these PUD provisions to encourage innovative site planning for residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial developments within the PUD. A PUD may provide for variations from the ZDSO and the regulations of other established zoning districts concerning use, setbacks, lot size, density, bulk, and other requirements to accommodate flexibility in the arrangement of uses for the general purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(d)	The purpose of approving a PUD Overlay is to implement the Comprehensive Plan by providing additional flexibility in land planning that will result in improving design, character, and quality of new, homogenous and mixed use developments; to promote the most appropriate use of land; to facilitate the provision of such things as streets, and utilities; and to preserve the natural and scenic features and open space. 
(e)	The City of Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan contemplates the establishment through a rezoning process the PUD concept in any area when an applicant demonstrates that the proposal meets the requirements of City of Santa Fe Zoning and Development Standards Ordinance. 
4.11.05. Qualifications for PUD zoning: 
(a)	PUD as a planning tool is designed to create innovative site designs. The connection to surrounding areas that increase accessibility and interconnectivity is a goal of PUD and should be encouraged to the greatest extent possible. 
(b)	All property that is at least fifteen (15) contiguous acres and eligible to be classified as a priority investment area may be approved as a PUD. 
(c)	All applications for a PUD regardless of size shall submit a Concept Plan for review. 
(d)	Properties unusually complex or involving environmentally sensitive areas may elect to schedule a pre-application conference with the Community Services Director (CSD) prior to the submission of a Concept Plan to avoid undue delays and expense in the review process. 
(e)	All property classified as PUD shall be under single ownership, or if in multiple ownership, then by written consent of all owners who agree to be bound by the PUD designation and regulations. 
(f)	The detailed standards set forth herein are minimum requirements and it is the intent of this section that city staff and the Planning Commission may recommend to City Council, and City Council may impose additional conditions and safeguards in excess of, or in addition to, the specified minimal requirements. Nothing in this section should be construed as entitling any party to a PUD Overlay classification. 
(g)	PUDs will be approved only in areas where the infrastructure necessary to support the proposed development already exists; is slated to exist; or, the developer may extend services to the site. 
4.11.06. General Considerations: The following is a list of general considerations to be reviewed by City staff, the City Planning Commission, and the City Council when considering applications for PUD classification. 
1.	The applicant's statement describing the character of and rationale for the proposed development. 
2.	The appropriateness of each development area and the development standards proposed for each area. 
3.	Land uses proposed within the prospective PUD. 
4.	The location of major components in each proposed phase of the PUD shall be clearly marked so that City staff, the Planning Commission and City Council can evaluate the functionality of each phase as a stand-alone entity. 
5.	Compatibility of proposed land uses within the PUD and the surrounding area. 
6.	Infrastructure capacity and the effect upon public services to include the cumulative impact of existing zoning in the surrounding area. 
7.	Conformance with engineering and other technical requirements. 
8.	Effects upon public health, safety, and general welfare. 
9.	Land usage densities and intensities as they compare to current City underlying zoning requirements. 
10.	Impacts on local and regional transportation facilities. 
4.11.07. Special Considerations: The following list includes special considerations to be made when reviewing applications for PUD classification. Satisfaction of these requirements is not mandatory, but are strongly recommended and most desired. 
a.	Placement of structures on most suitable sites with consideration of topography, soils, vegetation, slope, etc. 
b.	Preservation of open space, natural and cultural areas, as well as the creation of active and passive recreation to include greenways, sidewalks, and other pedestrian/bicycle circulation networks that serve to connect significant areas and various land uses. 
c.	Enhanced landscaping, deeper buffers, and increased planting along public rights-of-way, open space/recreational areas, and the overall perimeter of the project. 
d.	Separation of vehicular, pedestrian, and/or bicycle traffic lanes, internal traffic patterns, connections to adjacent properties/interconnectivity, and other traffic mitigation measures. 
e.	Provision of affordable housing. 
f.	Public benefits (e.g., public parks and water access) and community facilities and the access thereto. 
g.	Sensitive treatment of perimeters to mitigate negative impacts upon adjoining property and existing residents. 
h.	Placement of utilities underground. 
4.11.08. Permitted Uses: 
1.	The PUD development agreement shall detail authorized land uses to be permitted by the City. Such uses shall comply with required approval processes outlined in the Zoning Ordinance. 
2.	There shall be no areas of a PUD that are unspecified as to the type of land uses that will occupy those particular areas. 
3.	The development plan text is the ultimate authority regarding density, use and development provided that the development plan shall not exceed the maximum number of residential units and commercial lots identified in the Master plan. 
4.	The development plan must account for all residential units and nonresidential square footage within specified phases of the development plan. In the event a development plan departs from the Master Plan, City Council approval is required. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the transfer of development from one tract to another tract within phases, provided such transfer is in compliance with the approved Master Plan for proposed use, density and location. 
4.11.09. General Standards: 
(a)	All property in a PUD shall be required to adhere to the City's zoning standards unless otherwise stated in the PUD Ordinance. The regulations applicable to the uses in an approved PUD shall be those of the zoning district where such uses are typically allowed unless a variation or deviation from the restrictions are clearly stated in writing in the Master Plan and approved by Ordinance. 
(b)	No development shall occur in buffer or setback areas except as provided explicitly in the PUD Ordinance. 
(c)	This ordinance shall be reviewed for continuing development applicability and legal compliance every three (3) calendar years. 
4.11.10. Application: 
a.	A request for PUD classification shall be processed as an amendment to the City of Santa Fe Zoning Development Standards Ordinance (ZDSO) and the Official City of Santa Fe Zoning Map. 
b.	To initiate a PUD classification designation, an application shall be filed with the City Community Services Department. 
c.	The application shall contain, at a minimum, a legal description of the property and, if in multiple ownership, the written consent of all owners who agree to be bound by the PUD overlay designation and regulations. 
d.	A Concept Plan shall be submitted with the application to the Office of the Community Services Director. Applications and Concept Plans will be forwarded to the City Planning Commission with the CSD's comments and recommendations. 
4.11.11. Concept Plan. 
a.	The choice of a Concept Plan to initiate a PUD amendment to the Official Zoning Map will require a "three-step review and approval process" of the PUD. The Concept Plan is the first step, followed by a Master Plan and a Development Plan. The Concept Plan and the Master Plan will necessitate a review and recommendation from the Planning Commission, and the adoption by an Ordinance for the Master Plan. 
The Development Plan is an implementation of the Master Plan and shall be reviewed by the CSD. 
b.	A Concept Plan shall contain all of the following: 
1.	A narrative statement by the applicant as to the goals of development and a definitive justification of why a PUD designation is desirable to achieve the goals. 
2.	The types of uses proposed for the PUD, either specifically or generally. To avoid miscommunication and to encourage ease of administration, applicants are encouraged to specifically designate the uses proposed, (i.e. single-family residences, offices, and business parks). 
3.	The total number of units for residential uses and proposed non-residential uses shall be specified along with the total acreage. 
4.	A general layout of roadways of major circulation, including their widths and whether they are to be publicly or privately maintained. 
5.	A description or list of any proposed variations or deviations from the ZDSO standards and what are proposed in their place. The applicant shall provide a clear and concise statement of any proposed variations or deviations from the ZDSO, and the reasons for the variations or deviations. 
6.	The applicant shall, at the time of filing, provide letters from utility providers, indicating the ability of utility providers to service the PUD, or, what would be required to provide such services. 
7.	A proposed build-out schedule. 
8.	A statement identifying existing buildings, structures, or other facilities on the property including identification of designated historic properties, as applicable. 
9.	Identification, by name, number, and width of existing public rights-of-way on/or adjacent to the property, and the proposed access to such existing rights-of-way. 
10.	Proposed storm-water mitigation for any deviations from the ZDSO. 
11.	The proposed ownership and maintenance of rights-of-way, drainage systems, water and sewer systems, open space systems, and amenities. 
12.	A description of known archaeological sites or historic structures on the property, and the proposed approach for protecting them and any others that might be discovered during development. 
13.	A site map/plan delineating the vicinity of the property; the boundary lines of the property; any rivers, creeks, marshes, and general patterns of wetlands on or adjacent to the property; land uses adjacent to the property; municipal or county boundary lines adjacent to the property; designated historic structures and archeological/cultural resources on or adjacent to the property, as applicable; any flood hazard and all overlay district boundary lines; proposed access to existing roads; and arrangement/layout or land uses, approximate acreage of each land use area, type of use and residential density of each use area. 
14.	A traffic impact analysis. 
15.	A natural resources survey shall be performed utilizing the best information reasonably available from City of Santa Fe or other public or private sources. The analysis performed may not be exhaustive, but it must be representative of the natural resources found within the boundaries of the project. The typical resources of concern include, but are not limited to: wetlands, drainage features, significant stands of trees, specimen trees, marshes, topographical features, animal or plant habitats, soil types, bird nesting areas, rivers, streams, etc. 
16.	Parking spaces shall be accounted for on the Concept Plan in accordance with the ZDSO. Any deviation or variation shall be explained. All parking spaces that are to be counted to meet parking requirements must be located on non-publicly owned property unless otherwise specifically approved in the PUD ordinance. Parallel parking on streets that the developer anticipates will be maintained by the public cannot be counted in the parking requirements for the proposed development. 
c.	The City Council will consider the application, Concept Plan and recommendations from City Planning staff and the City Planning Commission. City Council shall examine, consider, and address issues relating to financial impacts upon the City, environmental impacts, and required infrastructure to serve the PUD. The City Council may require submission of additional maps, data, or proposed methods of addressing other pertinent matters relative to the development, which are reasonably available, and where, owing to the nature, size, and location of the proposed development, are critical to the health, safety, and welfare of the community and its citizens. Such elements may be, but are not limited to, Environmental Impact Statements as to specific matters not otherwise required or adequately addressed herein, hurricane evacuation, other emergency preparedness and response, historical preservation, shoreline erosion, public access, community linkages, public education, and the like. Should additional information be requested by the City Council, the City Council may request the review and recommendation of City Planning staff and the City Planning Commission relative to the additional information. When necessary and appropriate to address such issues, the City staff may recommend to City Council a "development agreement" as a prerequisite to approving a PUD hereunder, in accordance with the Texas Economic Development Act. 
d.	Upon approval by the City Council of the application and Concept Plan, property greater than fifteen (15) contiguous acres may be classified as a PUD. Once designated or permitted as a PUD, continuing inactivity phased or otherwise for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) months shall terminate the PUD designation and associated permits. 
e.	A conceptual PUD shall not entitle an owner of the affected property any right to develop or engage in any land use or land disturbing activity. Further, initial conceptual application for PUD does not vest a developer any number of residential units or commercial/institutional/or any amount of industrial use. To engage in development or any land use or land disturbing activity other than that in existence when PUD classification is approved, the development plan(s) must be approved for the areas to be developed or engaged in land disturbing activity. A conceptual classification of PUD is not deemed by the City to constitute the commencement of activity or use that would abrogate exemptions, tax or otherwise, attendant to silvi-culture activities. 
4.11.12. The Master Plan: 
(a)	A Master Plan shall be developed for the entire PUD property. The Master Plan shall be submitted to the City Planning staff to review; then, to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation to City Council for action. The minimum requirements of the Master Plan shall include all Concept Plan requirements and the following: 
1.	The applicant shall supply the required number of copies of the Master Plan as directed by staff. 
2.	Proposed arrangement of land uses, including land for public facilities, approximate acreage of each use, including mixed use, by acre or tract, type of use and density (residential use tracts). All specified densities will be construed as maximums, with acceptance of the maximums subject to satisfaction of other provisions with the PUD Ordinance. 
3.	A boundary survey tied to the latest datum with the computed acreage of the tract bearing the seal of a Texas registered land surveyor. A file copy of GIS disk/CAD. 
4.	The location of primary control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers, and similar data shall be referred. 
5.	The proposed name of the development. 
6.	Type of land use of all parcels contiguous to the development property. 
7.	A map or site plan showing: 
a.	The location, dimensions, descriptions, and flow of existing watercourses and drainage structures within the tract or on contiguous tracts. 
b.	Location of municipal limits or county lines, and district boundaries, if they traverse the tract, form part of the boundary of the tract, or are contiguous to such boundary. 
c.	Vicinity map or sketch showing the general relationship of the proposed development to the surrounding areas with access roads referenced to the intersection of the nearest state primary or secondary paved roads. 
8.	Topographic survey of the property. 
9.	The location, dimensions, name, and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public rights-of-way within the tract, intersecting, or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. 
10.	The location, dimensions, name, and description of all existing or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, permanent structures, and other sites within or contiguous with the tract. 
11.	The proposed location, dimensions, and description of land(s) for public facilities. 
12.	Proposed street system layout, vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle paths, with review by the Community Services Director or his assigned agent. 
13.	Traffic impact analysis plan if (more than 50 ADT/average daily trips) required under the general provisions of the ZDSO, with review by the City transportation planner or engineer. If mitigation is requested by the traffic planner or engineer, the applicant must submit a response to the mitigation request and justification for any proposed departure from that request. 
14.	A drainage plan and water and sewer plan for the entire PUD with the review by the Community Services Director or his assigned agent. 
15.	The location of any Overlay District boundary on the development property. 
16.	Preliminary written comments from affected agencies having approval or permitting authority over elements related to the proposed development, or evidence that a written request for such comments was properly submitted to the agency and a reasonable period of time has elapsed without receipt of such comments. 
17.	The proposed ownership and maintenance of streets, drainage systems, water and sewer systems, open space areas, parking areas, and other proposed amenities and improvements; and when any are to be privately owned, a description of the mechanism to be used to secure their future maintenance, upkeep, and upgrading. 
18.	Proposed phasing and time schedule if development is to be done in phases. 
19.	Proposed phasing and time schedule for lands to be dedicated for public facilities. 
20.	Proposed internal site planning standards such as typical lot sizes, widths, setbacks, and buffers aimed at addressing potential incompatibility between adjacent land uses and activities. 
21.	Letters of capability and intent to serve community water supply, sewage and solid waste disposal, and other utility services from the affected agency or entity, where applicable. 
22.	A statement describing the character of, and rationale for, the proposed Master Plan. 
23.	Other information or descriptions deemed reasonably appropriate for review. 
(b)	Upon review of the proposed Master Plan, the City Council may move to approve or disapprove the Master Plan. The City Council may request additional study of the Master Plan. 
(c)	All phases of the PUD will be required to adhere to the "latest version" of the ZDSO at the time of development plan submittal for standards (unless exempted within the PUD text) pertaining to: 
1.	Tree and landscaping standards; 
2.	Storm water best management practices; 
3.	Environmental quality standards; and 
(d)	Unless otherwise specified in a development agreement, an approved Master Plan may be revised subject to the approval of the CSD for the following changes: 
1.	Minor changes in the location of roads or widths of streets or right-of-ways within the master plan; 
2.	Minor changes in the allocation of housing density within the master plan so long as the overall approved density of the master plan is not increased; and 
3.	Change in the proposed build-out and phasing schedule. 
(e)	Any changes to the Master Plan, other than the changes delineated above, shall be considered major and shall require Planning Commission review and approval by City Council. 
4.11.13. Development Plan: An approved development plan is required prior to commencement of development (e.g. land disturbance/construction) within any area or phase within the PUD. Development plans must be in conformance with the approved Master plan. Development plan approval must follow the process outlined in the ZDSO. 
Sale or transfer of an interest in ownership in a PUD. 
The developer of a PUD may sell or transfer ownership of all or a portion of the PUD in accordance with the following procedures and provisions: 
1.	A Concept Plan and or Master Plan for the PUD shall have been approved by City of Santa Fe, Texas City Council; 
2.	Property covenants and restrictions shall run with the land and a written acknowledgement of such covenants and restrictions shall be provided by the purchaser and dully recorded as a deed restriction; 
3.	The developer must submit a sworn affidavit from the prospective purchaser of a development tract wherein the purchaser waives rights to the guarantee of the installation of required improvements afforded through the PUD Ordinance for the subdivision of land, and further acknowledges and agrees that an initial Master Plan and Final Development Plan must be submitted, and a development permit awarded, prior to commencement of any development on the tract; 
4.	The developer must submit a "plat for certification" and recording by the Community Services Director (CSD) and subsequently record such plat prior to the sale or transfer of any development tract or phase; and 
5.	This procedure will not be permitted for the sale or transfer of any individual single-family lot or group of lots intended for construction of one single-family dwelling. 
4.11.14. Applicant reconsideration of PUD designation: 
a.	Within 30 days after the approval by City Council of the Concept Plan or the Master Plan, the applicant may elect to withdraw from a PUD classification designation upon a written notification by certified mail to the City Council. If withdrawn, the zoning for the area shall be unchanged from the zoning existing before the application was submitted. 
b.	If a PUD Concept Plan or Master Plan is not withdrawn within 30 days upon proper notification to the City Council, the uses, densities, and development parameters set forth in the PUD shall thereafter be restricted to those approved by the City Council." 
4.11.15. Major vs. Minor change authority: 
a.	City Council shall approve any major change to any PUD. Major changes shall include: Master Plan changes, overall density increases; use changes, new streets and drainage, MUD amendments and open community status. 
b.	The Community Services Director is authorized to approve minor changes to a PUD. Minor changes shall include Phase Plan in field adjustments phase density modifications less than fifteen (15) percent and streets and drainage relocations. 
4.11.16. MUD Exit Strategy: Up to a five (5) year extension on the debt repayment period may be authorized by City Council up front. However, the City of Santa Fe, Texas shall annex into its jurisdiction any Municipal Utility District (MUD) in its entirety authorized to operate for use in any PUD within the city limits not more than twenty-years (20) years after such MUD's creation. Debt amounts for any MUD shall be limited to repayment periods not to exceed thirty (30) years from the creation of such MUD. 
(Ord. No. 07-2006, 4-27-06) 
Sec. 4.12. - Public Service District. 
4.12.01. This district is intended for activities of a primarily public service nature. Public buildings, public schools and private not-for-profit schools, private not-for-profit service organizations and institutions qualify for this designation. These functions require close and easy access to primary streets and public transportation routes and facilities. They tend to generate emergency or high volume street traffic. The activities of this district serve only non-sectarian purposes and serve a general community population by providing social, medical or citizen support services. Although public buildings are permitted in all districts as a use-by-right such facilities and buildings are encouraged to obtain the Public Service District designation. 
4.12.02. This district is an overlay district and must conform to the Planned Unit Development provisions, Appendix 4F, except as modified herein. 
A.	This overlay district may be applied to any other district. 
B.	This overlay district does not have to provide full complement of urban infrastructure; the omission of any standard element of such infrastructure shall be permitted only by permission of the City Council. 
C.	This overlay district does not have to contain residential property. 
ARTICLE 5. - SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5.01. - Purpose and Description. 
5.01.01. This Article establishes regulations for certain land uses which are permitted in a given district, yet require additional regulations to ensure complete compatibility with surrounding land uses. 
Sec. 5.02. - Group Homes (Community Homes). 
5.02.01. Location: Group homes shall be permitted as a use-by-right in AR Agricultural-Residential Districts, R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts, R-2 Multi-Family Residential Districts, R-3 Multi-Family Residential Districts and MH Manufactured Housing Districts only in conformity with the Texas "Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act", known hereafter as the "Act" which limits the number of occupants to six (6) residents and two (2) supervisors per residence in addition to other limitations not stated herein. 
5.02.02. Distance Requirement: A group home shall be located not less than one-half (1/2) mile from any other group home as measured from the nearest boundary of the sites on which they are located (per the "Act"). 
5.02.03. Parking Requirements: Parking shall be in accordance with Article 6, of this Ordinance and shall be limited as restricted by the "Act". 
5.02.04. Signs: No signs shall be permitted. 
5.02.05. Visual Compatibility: No structural alterations shall be permitted that will cause the group home to be substantially distinguishable from other surrounding residential properties. 
5.02.06. Statutory Licensing Requirements: All group homes shall meet every State statutory licensing requirement. 
5.02.07. Outside Lighting: All outside lighting shall meet the performance criteria established in Article 7, of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 5.03. - Home Occupations. 
5.03.01. Location: Home occupations shall be limited to AR Agricultural Residential, R-1 Single-Family Residential and MH Manufactured Home districts. 
5.03.02. No External Activities Permitted: All activities and storage associated with a home occupation shall be located within the associated residence. 
5.03.03. Employment of Persons Outside of the Immediate Family: Employment shall be limited to one (1) person who is not a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
5.03.04. Parking Requirements: Parking shall be in accordance with Article 6, of this Ordinance. 
5.03.05. Signs: One (1) on-premise sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area shall be permitted. 
5.03.06. Visual Compatibility: No structural alterations shall be permitted that will cause the home occupation to be substantially distinguishable from other surrounding residential properties. 
5.03.07. Permit Required: All home occupations shall obtain a Home Occupation Permit from the City of Santa Fe. 
5.03.08. Performance Criteria: All home occupations shall meet the performance criteria established in Article 8, of this Ordinance. 
5.03.09. One Commercial Vehicle Permitted: One light weight commercial vehicle, with a Gross Vehicle Weight of no more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, is allowed to be parked at the residence for use by the Home Occupation employees. Light weight package delivery vans shall be permitted for delivery and pick-up services associated with a home occupation. No eighteen-wheelers or heavy weight vehicles are permitted. 
5.03.10. Land Uses not Qualifying as Home Occupations: The following land use activities shall not be qualified as home occupations: 
A.	Any use associated with automobiles, i.e. Auto repair, auto painting, detailing, restoration, etc. 
B.	Furniture upholstering, paint and finish striping, and repair. 
C.	Welding services. 
(Ord. No. 21-2007, §§ 1-3, 7-26-07) 
Sec. 5.04. - Child Care Facilities. 
5.04.01. Location: Child Care Facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use in AR Agricultural Residential, R-1 Single-Family Residential, R-2 Multiple-Family Residential, R-3 Multiple-Family Residential, and MH Manufactured Home Districts. Child Care Facilities shall be permitted as uses permitted by right in NC Neighborhood Commercial, HC Highway Commercial, and PS Planned shopping districts. 
5.04.02. Distance Requirement: In any residential district, a child care facility shall be located not less than one thousand (1,000) lineal feet from any other child care facility or group home as measured from the nearest boundary of the sites on which they are located. 
5.04.03. Parking Requirements: Parking shall be in accordance with Article 6, of this Ordinance. 
5.04.04. Signs: One (1) on premise sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
5.04.05. Visual Compatibility: Within any residential district, no structural alterations shall be permitted that will cause the child care facility to be substantially distinguishable from other surrounding residential properties. 
5.04.06. Statutory Licensing Requirements: All child care facilities shall meet every State statutory licensing requirement. 
5.04.07. Annual Licensing Required: All child care facilities located in residential districts shall obtain annual operational licenses from the City of Santa Fe. Complaints from surrounding property owners during the course of any year shall be recorded and shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the re-issuance of any operational license. Decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission to renew or not to renew a Child Care Facility operational license shall be appealable to the City Council. 
5.04.08. Performance Criteria: All child care facilities shall meet the performance criteria established in Article 7, of this Ordinance. 
5.04.09. Screening Required in Residential Districts: All outdoor play areas bordering residential property shall be screened by a solid, opaque fence, constructed and maintained in accordance with specifications provided by the zoning officer. 
5.04.10. Time of Operation Limits in Residential Districts: All child care facilities located in residential districts shall be limited to operating between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily. 
Sec. 5.05. - Special Events. 
5.05.01. Location: Special events shall be located as a conditional use in AR - Agricultural Residential, HC - Highway Commercial, or PS - Planned Shopping districts. 
5.05.02. Duration and Time of Operation Limits: No special event may operate for more than seven (7) consecutive days. Special events may not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. daily. 
5.05.03. Zoning Officer to Specify Performance Criteria: The Zoning Officer is authorized to ensure adequate parking, sanitary facilities, safety requirements, and other appropriate performance criteria for special events to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
Sec. 5.06. - Adult uses. 
5.06.01. Description: A number of findings from cities in Texas and other states (Detroit, Michigan; Renton, Washington, etc.) indicate that the concentration of certain Adult Use businesses or so-called "adult entertainment" businesses tends to result in the blighting and deterioration of areas of such concentration. Accordingly, it is necessary that these businesses be regulated so that they have the least negative impact on residential neighbor-hoods, educational institutions, religious institutions, and public facilities. This section of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance is a time, place, and manner Ordinance aimed at controlling the proximity of such businesses to the neighborhoods and institutions cited above. This Section of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance is complementary and supportive of, and an addition to Chapter 4, Section 17 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. 
5.06.02. Uses Regulated: This section of the Zoning Ordinance includes but is not limited to the regulation of the following uses: 
A.	Adult book store. 
B.	Adult motion picture theater. 
C.	Adult mini motion picture theater. 
D.	Adult motels. 
E.	Cabarets. 
F.	Massage parlor. 
G.	Model studio. 
5.06.03. Operating Permit Required: The owner of an adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult mini motion picture theater, adult motel, cabaret, massage parlor, model studio or Adult Use business, or his agent for the purpose of managing, controlling, or collecting rents, or any other person man-aging or controlling a building or premises, any part of which contains an activity listed above shall obtain an operating permit in accordance with Chapter 4, Section 17 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. 
5.06.04. Proof of Age Required: In order to insure that minors are not permitted access to an Adult Use, it shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, and manager of any Adult Use to require proof of age identification of all patrons prior to admitting them to an Adult Use. No person below the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be admitted to an Adult Use. 
5.06.05. Exterior Display: No Adult Use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not registered as an Adult Use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show, window or other opening. 
Sec. 5.07. - Health and Safety Standards. 
5.07.01. All City and County Standards Apply: All health and safety standards which have been adopted by the City of Santa Fe or Galveston County shall be met before a building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued. 
Sec. 5.08. - Certain Permanent Residential Occupancy Prohibited. 
5.08.01. Prohibited Residential Occupancy: The use of recreational vehicles, buses, vehicles with camper tops, or tents as a residence is prohibited. 
Sec. 5.09. - Portable and Modular Building Standards. 
5.09.01. Additional References: Refer to standards for "Manufactured Housing" as built to Federal HUD Code Standards. Also refer to standards for "Industrialized Housing" and to "Industrialized Buildings" as built to the Texas Industrialized Housing and Building Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f-1. 
5.09.02. General: 
A.	All such structures shall be mounted on concrete slabs or on continuous concrete or masonry perimeter footings and ribbon foundation walls when the lowest floor structure provides less than seven (7) feet of clearance above the finished grade below. Exception: Manufactured Housing when located in any Residential District may be installed on any type of foundation when such installation is in compliance with the provisions of the Housing and Urban Development Standards and conforms to Type 2 Standards for high wind conditions. 
B.	Where the finished floor elevation is above the top of the foundation slab or above the supporting perimeter ribbon foundation wall, a rigid skirt shall be provided extending from such foundation to the wall above and composed of material similar in appearance to the building siding or wall finish above. 
C.	Portable buildings shall not be used as the primary habitable building nor as the sole type of building on a site. Exception: a single portable non-habitable storage (secondary) building of not greater than one hundred (100) square feet may be permitted on a vacant residential lot. 
D.	The combined gross floor area of all portable buildings shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the primary building on the site. Exception: Portable buildings may be permitted on construction sites during the time that an active construction permit is maintained but in no case for a period longer than thirty-six (36) months. 
5.09.03. Shipping Containers and Road Freight Trailers: 
A.	In-transit shipping containers shall not be placed in any district other than an LM - Light Manufacturing District, HC - Highway Commercial District, TR -Transportation District or NC - Neighborhood Commercial (Large Scale) District. 
B.	In-transit freight trailers shall not be placed in any district other than HC - Highway Commercial District, LM - Light Manufacturing District and TR -Transportation District. 
C.	Shipping containers and road freight trailers used as permanent or temporary storage are restricted to Light Manufacturing Districts. All units shall be erected on concrete foundation pads or concrete paving. Railroad cars shall not be permitted in any district as storage containers. Railroad cars used as components of a mercantile retail establishment as an architectural feature may be permitted only as a conditional use. [Exception: shipping containers and road freight trailers may be permitted on commercial and industrial construction sites during the time that an active construction permit is maintained but in no case for a period longer than thirty-six (36) months. Shipping containers and road freight trailers may be used for temporary storage in HC - Highway Commercial Districts, TR - Transportation Districts, and LM - Light Manufacturing Districts for up to sixty (60) days upon issuance of a permit by the City. No more than three (3) such permits shall be issued to any individual, corporation or partnership in any twelve (12) consecutive months. 
D.	Shipping containers used as permanent or temporary storage (other than aluminum) shall be painted. All shipping containers shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. 
Sec. 5.10. - Kennels and Veterinary Clinics. 
5.10.01. Kennels, Breeding, Indoor or Outdoor, Kennels, Boarding, Indoor or Outdoor and Veterinary and Animal Clinic: 
A.	Location: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or construct a kennel or veterinary clinic within five hundred (500) feet of any dwelling, school, church, hospital, nursing home or day care and within five hundred (500) feet from any residential property line. 
B.	Existing kennels and veterinary clinics operating legally on February 11, 1993 or at the time of annexation to the City of Santa Fe and continuously thereafter, with no cessation of activity longer than ninety (90) days, are exempt from the distance limitation. Cessation of activities for a longer period shall require full compliance with these provisions and issuance of a new occupancy certificate before resuming kennel activities. 
C.	Exception: Kennel, Boarding, Indoor or Veterinary and Animal Clinic meeting at least the minimum standards of paragraph 5.10.02 following. 
5.10.02. Qualifications for Separation Reduction for Kennels, Boarding, Indoor Use or Veterinary and Animal Clinic use: 
A.	Any animal outside the building or tenant space envelope shall be under the supervision of a staff handler and shall be limited to four (4) animals at one time per handler. 
B.	Animals shall be permitted outside the building or tenant space envelope only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and during the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. except briefly during the time animals are being delivered to or picked up from the facility. 
C.	In addition, "special needs" animals may be exercised outside the building or tenant space between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. while under the direct control and supervision of staff handler at the ratio of one (1) animal per handler. 
D.	The building housing the animals shall be built or modified to provide sound attenuation as follows: 
1.	The owner shall obtain the services of a qualified acoustical engineer and shall construct or modify the building or space to the design and specifications of said acoustical engineer in compliance with the criteria below. 
2.	The building envelope shall reduce the sound energy of a one hundred twenty (120) dBA source, (with the noise characteristics of barking dogs), to a maximum of ten (10) dBA above the outside ambient sound level, at the property line or demising wall, as measured with a calibrated Type II sound level meter, to an accuracy within (+ or -) two (2) dBA, as specified in current ANSI specifications. The ambient noise levels shall be based on the average sound levels occurring between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., measured at the property line or demising wall, and located at a point between the building or tenant space and the nearest neighboring building, tenant space or district classified as a restrictive use or district in Paragraph 5.10.01(A) "Location" above or the nearest residential property line, whichever is closer. 
3.	Acoustical engineer's credentials and test results demonstrating compliance, acceptable to the Zoning Officer, shall be submitted to the City prior to issuance of any kennel Occupancy Permit or the placement of animals in the facility. 
(Ord. No. 10-2003, 4-24-2003) 
Sec. 5.11. - Agricultural Activities. 
    Agricultural activities may occur in the various districts as established by Appendix 4F, Zoning District Matrix but shall be restricted in intensity and in relation to human domestic density according to the following provisions. Note that animal maintenance is further restricted by the distance limitations and other restrictions of the Santa Fe Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Animal Control. 
5.11.01. Agricultural uses, all districts, crop and truck: no limitations. 
5.11.02. Agriculture uses, with animal husbandry in whole or in part. 
A.	The maximum density shall be as set out in Table #1: 
Table #1 
Expressed as "animal units per acre". 
Property Size Animal type, mature weight < 25 lbs. Animal type, mature weight 25 to 200 lbs. Animal type, mature weight > 200 lbs. Up to 1/4 acre 6 0 0 Subsequent 1/4-1/2 acre containing residence 12 3 0.5* Subsequent 1/2 to 1 acre containing residence 36 6 2.5* All acreage over one acre or acreage containing no residence 100 12 5 units per acre Stables, private See limits shown above Stables, public AR-Agricultural/Residential District only- 5 animal units per acres  
NOTE: Permissible quantities are additive as acreage increases. 
Table #2 
Expressed as "animal units per acre". 
Property Size Animal type, mature weight < 25 lbs. Animal type, mature weight 25 to 200 lbs. Animal type, mature weight > 200 lbs. Animal unit count 
per acre 54 9 3  
*One animal greater than one year of age = One animal unit 
*One animal under one (1) year in age = One-half (1/2) animal unit 
B.	Wherever animal unit counts per acre exceed the limits of Table #2, methods must be instituted for the control and removal of animal manure. Manure produced in excess of the natural biological breakdown and absorption rate of the land shall be removed from the site on a periodic basis. Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in a manner or quantities that cause a public nuisance, a health risk or contamination of storm water runoff leaving the property. Collected manure shall be stored on a stabilized non-absorbent surface and shall be contained by methods or structures capable of limiting polluted storm water run-off to neighboring properties and drainage systems. Overgrazing or animal densities causing the destruction of 50 percent of the normally occurring natural vegetative ground cover, over the area devoted to the agricultural activity, shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of excessive animal densities regardless of whether the densities comply with the above tables. Animal densities shall thereafter be reduced to mitigate the condition. 
(Ord. No. 19-2003, 8-28-03) 
Sec. 5.12. - Churches or Places of Worship. 
5.12.01 Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and buildings shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the underlying zoning district in which the church or place of worship is located. 
5.12.02 Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicle usage shall be allowed on church property for the following uses: 
A.	For temporary housing during emergency disaster situations to house disaster workers, no more than six (6) months per emergency occurrence. 
B.	To house visiting clergy or missionary workers on a temporary basis, no more than ninety (90) days per visit. 
(Ord. No. 17-2011, § 1, 12-8-11) 
ARTICLE 6. - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING, INGRESS AND EGRESS 

Sec. 6.01. - Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
6.01.01. Purpose: The purpose of this Section of the Ordinance is to regulate required off-street parking facilities. These regulations are designed to provide for the needs of each land use activity within the City of Santa Fe. 
6.01.02. Applicability: These regulations shall be applied in any of the following circumstances: 
A.	Any building, improvement, or use of land approved or erected after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall include the necessary off-street parking spaces that this Section of the Ordinance requires. 
B.	Whenever any building, improvement, or use of land is proposed to be changed (whether or not the existing use is conforming), the provisions of this Section of the Ordinance shall be met before such change is approved. 
6.01.03. Minimum Number of Off-Street Spaces Require: All land use activities in Santa Fe shall be governed by the off-street parking requirements as described in Table 6-C, of this Section of the Ordinance. 
6.01.04. Shared Parking: Uses may join in establishing shared parking areas, provided that each of the following qualifications are met: 
A.	Up to sixty (60) percent of the parking spaces required for a cinema or other place of evening entertainment, and up to eighty (80) percent of the parking spaces required for a church, auditorium or similar uses, may be provided by or used jointly with banks, offices, or other similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening and weekend hours. 
B.	A written agreement assuring the joint usage of the shared parking spaces shall be drawn and executed by all parties concerned and shall be approved as to form by the City. Attorney's fees shall be paid for by the parties subject to the contract and shall not be paid for by Santa Fe. 
C.	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall specifically approve the shared parking plan. 
D.	The City Council may rescind such approval and require additional spaces if the City Council finds that such shared parking is inadequate or is resulting in a public nuisance adversely affecting the public health, safety, or welfare. 
E.	All off-site shared parking shall also be required to be in conformance with all of the provisions found in Section 6.01.05 entitled "Proximity." 
6.01.05. Proximity: An off-street parking lot shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a pedestrian entrance for its associated land use, exclusive of street and alley widths, and shall have direct access to a street or an alley. It shall be located in a district with the same zoning classification for which it is intended to serve. It may not be located on a site which is zoned for Residential Use. 
6.01.06. Off-Street Parking Dimensions: Parking spaces shall be designed and constructed on the basis of the following standards: 
A.	Ninety (90) Degree Angle Parking: Each parking space shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide or less than nineteen (19) feet in length. Maneuvering space is additional to the parking space and shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
B.	Sixty (60) Degree Angle Parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide or less than nineteen (19) feet in length. Maneuvering space is additional to the parking space and shall be no less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
C.	Forty-five (45) Degree Angle Parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide or less than sixteen (16) feet in length. Maneuvering space is additional to the parking space and shall be no less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
6.01.07. Parking Area Standards: 
A.	Surface and Drainage: All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or a chip sealed surface built in accordance with the Santa Fe municipal specifications provided by the City Engineer. In addition, all parking areas shall allow for sufficient drainage. 
B.	Maintenance: All parking areas shall be continually maintained in a satisfactory condition so as to be safe and attractive and free of any hazard, nuisance, or other unsafe condition. 
C.	Lighting: To prevent nuisance situations, all parking area lighting shall be designed and operated so as not to reflect or shine intrusively on adjacent properties. 
D.	Parking Space Identification Marking: Except for single-family and two-family residential uses, parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods. Impermanent marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained. If any space identification markings become worn or otherwise dysfunctional, it is the responsibility of the property owner to replace or repair the identifiers within thirty (30) days of notification of same by the Zoning Officer. 
E.	Headlight Beam Barriers: Whenever a parking lot is located across the street from or adjacent to residentially zoned property (whether or not residences have been built at the time the parking lot is constructed), a permanent natural or artificial solid barrier of not less than three (3) feet and not more than four (4) feet above the finished grade of the off-street parking area shall be erected and maintained so as to provide a headlight screen for the residential district. 
6.01.08. Planned Unit Development or Mixed-Use Developments: The minimum parking space requirement for Planned Unit Development shall be calculated by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a regular function of the site plan review process. The Commission shall take into consideration the land uses proposed for the project and the normal parking requirements for such uses as shown on Table 6-C of this Section of the Ordinance. 
6.01.09. Parking Lot Design: 
A.	Lighting: All off-street parking areas for land uses permitted in districts other than AR, R-1, and R-2, and which are used after dark, shall be illuminated. Such illumination shall begin one-half (1/2) hour after sunset, and continue throughout the hours of use or until midnight, whichever is later. 
B.	Accessibility: All parking spaces shall be accessible at all times from a street, aisle, or driveway intended to serve such off-street parking. 
6.01.10. Special Requirements for Automotive Retail Sales: Each new car lot and each used car lot or place of business for the sale of trucks or other motor vehicles existing or hereafter established shall be required to provide and conform to the following minimum standards and requirements: 
A.	The entire surface of the lot upon which such vehicles are displayed for sale shall be paved, and shall be graded to drain properly. 
B.	No vehicle displayed for sale upon a lot shall be parked within three (3) feet of the right-of-way line abutting public streets or other public property, or within three (3) feet of any private property line. 
6.01.11. Requirements for Off-Street Physically Handicapped Parking: Spaces for the handicapped and physically impaired shall be provided in accordance with federal and State laws. 
6.01.12. Parking Area Structures: The following restrictions apply to any structure with parking on a level above the street level or for any parking areas. 
A.	In all districts, above-grade parking structures shall conform to the height restrictions set forth in this Ordinance. 
B.	The distance from parking structure entry and exit points to a corner of a street intersection shall be no less than twenty (20) feet to minimize traffic interference. 
C.	Ramps shall not be constructed with slopes exceeding fifteen (15) percent and single lane entrances shall not be less than twelve (12) feet wide at the street. 
D.	A minimum of one (1) car length shall be provided between an exit control gate and the inside edge of a sidewalk to minimize conflicts between exiting cars and pedestrians. 
E.	Parking structure facades shall be left at least fifty (50) percent open and exposed, and interior light levels shall be maintained at ten (10) foot candles to enhance security. Full enclosure of any level of a parking structure may be permitted only if such structure has a fully equipped and operational sprinkler system and is mechanically ventilated. 
6.01.13. Adjustments: For a use or a site subject to approval by the Planning Commission either as a Planned Unit Development, Mixed-Use Development or as a Conditional Use, the minimum requirements of this Section may be adjusted in order to improve the safety, usability, efficiency, attractiveness, and protection to adjoining land uses in a manner equal to or greater than the specific requirements of this Section of the Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 14-2015, § 3, 12-10-15) 
Sec. 6.02. - Off-Street Loading and Storage Requirements. 
6.02.01. Purpose: The purpose of this Section of the Ordinance is to require the allocation of sufficient off-street/on-site loading facilities and storage space by business and industry to ensure that the loading and unloading of vehicles will not interfere with traffic flow or block roadways and/or fire lanes. 
6.02.02. Application: 
A.	All retail, commercial, and industrial structures, or portions of such structures, shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within the building or outside the building on the premises. 
B.	Where such loading space is adjacent to a residential district, the space shall be enclosed and screened from such district on three (3) sides. 
C.	Loading spaces shall have a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by thirty (30) feet, and shall not interfere with public right-of-way or emergency vehicle operations. 
6.02.03. Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces or Berths Required: Off-Street loading shall be in conformance with the standards in Tables 6-A, and 6-B. 
6.02.04. Location: All off-street loading spaces shall be located at the side or rear of the building. No loading space may be in a designated fire lane. 
6.02.05. Surface and Drainage: All off-street loading areas shall be paved and sealed in accordance with the municipal specifications provided by the City Engineer. In addition, all loading areas shall allow for sufficient drainage. 
TABLE 6-A 
Required Off-Street Loading Spaces for Retail, Commercial and Industrial Land Uses 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 0 to 5,000 None 5,001 to 50,000 One (1) 50,001 to 100,000 Two (2) 100,001 to 200,000 Three (3) Each additional 100,000 One (1) additional  
6.02.06. Maintenance: All off-street loading areas shall be continually maintained in a satisfactory condition so as to be safe and attractive and free of any hazard, nuisance, or other unsafe condition. 
6.02.07. Adjustments: For a use or a site subject to approval by the Planning Commission either as a Planned Unit Development, Mixed-Use Development or as a Conditional Use, the minimum requirements of this Section may be adjusted in order to improve the safety, efficiency, usability, attractiveness, and protection to adjoining land uses in a manner equal to or greater than the specific requirements of this Section of the Ordinance. 
TABLE 6-B 
Required Off-Street Loading Spaces for Hotels, Office Buildings, Restaurants, and Similar Establishments 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 0 to 5,000 None 5,001 to 20,000 One (1) 10,001 to 150,000 Two (2) 105,001 to 300,000 Three (3) 300,001 to 500,000 Four (4) 500,001 to 1,000,000 Five (5) Each additional 100,000 One (1) additional  
Sec. 6.03. - Ingress and Egress Requirements for Parking Lots. 
6.03.01. Entrance and Exit Widths: 
A.	One-Way Entrances and Exits: Drives shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide and no greater than twenty-five (25) feet wide at the property line. 
B.	Two-Way Entrances and Exits: Drives shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet wide and no greater than forty-five (45) feet wide at the property line. 
C.	Curb Return Radii: Curb return radii shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the specifications provided by the Santa Fe City Zoning Officer. Said specifications are incorporated as part of this Ordinance by this reference to them. 
6.03.02. Public Safety: The Santa Fe City Engineer is empowered to regulate the number and location of ingress and egress points on a site in order to ensure public safety. 
6.03.03. Relationship to Intersections: The minimum location of entrances and exits to parking lots shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from an intersection so as to minimize traffic interference. 
6.03.04. Adjustments: For a use or a site subject to approval by the Planning Commission either as a Planned Unit Development, Mixed-Use Development or as a Conditional Use, the minimum requirements of this Section may be adjusted in order to improve the safety, efficiency, usability, attractiveness, and protection to adjoining land uses in a manner equal to or greater than the specific requirements of this Section of the Ordinance. 
Sec. 6.04. - Parking Area Requirements. 
See Appendix 6 for a list of required parking spaces for each use listed in the Zoning District Matrix (Appendix 4-F Zoning District Matrix). 
ARTICLE 7. - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN REGULATION 

Sec. 7.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these sign regulations is to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the City of Santa Fe; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and Santa Fe's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. This Section of the Ordinance is adopted under the zoning authority of Santa Fe in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in this Ordinance. This Section of the Ordinance is adopted in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 216, of the Texas Local Government Code. This Section of the Ordinance is specifically aimed at achieving the goals, objectives, and public policies enumerated in the Santa Fe United Development Code of the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 7.02. - Definitions. 
All related definitions are found in Article 2. 
Sec. 7.03. - Other Laws and Ordinances. 
    Scope of regulations and regulatory bodies: Signs under this Ordinance shall conform to the provisions of the International Building Code, the laws of Texas, and such other Ordinances of the City of Santa Fe as may apply. These provisions shall govern signs and display structures with respect to location, safety, size, design, construction, erection, attachment, alteration, repair, support, anchorage and maintenance. The Building Official shall have and is given jurisdiction over the erection, construction, location, relocation and structural maintenance of all outdoor advertising signs within the City limits of the City of Santa Fe, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 4, 8-25-11) 
Sec. 7.04. - General Restrictions. 
    The following general restrictions shall apply to all signs: 
7.04.01. Obstruction by Signs: No person shall erect, construct, suspend or maintain any sign across, over or above any public right-of-way, sidewalk or any portion thereof except banners for public events when approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained in any manner that obstructs a means of egress, any opening necessary for required light or ventilation, or any access required for fire fighting. No sign shall be erected in a manner that obstructs the safe flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No sign shall be constructed on any exterior yard so as to constitute a hazardous visual obstruction to traffic in any direction. 
7.04.02. Vehicular Signs: No sign shall be displayed on or attached to any vehicle that requires a state inspection sticker other than for immediate transfer from or to a permitted location. This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the customary commercial or industrial logo, location, phone numbers, identification numbers and slogan carried on the sides of a commercial vehicle and intended for identification. Any vehicle displaying advertising and parked off-premise of the business so advertised, that does not carry a valid state inspection sticker or a valid license and is parked in such a manner as to be conspicuous to the motoring public shall be considered an off-premise sign for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
7.04.03. Spectacular Signs: The following restrictions apply to spectacular signs: 
A.	Signs with flashing, glaring, strobe, chasing, rotating or blinking lights shall be prohibited. 
B.	Signs which interfere with the safe operation of motor vehicles by the nature of their design or the manner of their operation are prohibited. 
C.	Automatically changeable advertising shall be limited to no more than one (1) message every eight (8) seconds. 
D.	Signs which alternately display time and temperature shall conform to standard industry design for such signs. The message shall not change in less than a ten-second interval. 
E.	Digital signs, with display areas of less than one hundred (100) square feet, shall not change message in less than a five-minute interval. 
F.	All spectacular signs shall be placed parallel to the roadway with a deviation of not greater than twenty (20) degrees with the exception of: 
1.	Automatically changeable advertising, 
2.	Signs which alternatively display time and temperature. 
7.04.04. Signs Confusingly Similar to Traffic-Controlled Devices: No sign confusingly similar to a traffic control sign or device shall be placed in the view of any street or thoroughfare. The words "stop," "danger," "yield" and similar words, phrases and symbols that may interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular traffic are also prohibited. 
7.04.05. Sign Illumination: Only internal, direct, indirect, diffuse or neon lighting shall be permitted. 
7.04.06. Exemption from Building Setback Restriction: Signs permitted under this Ordinance shall be exempted from the setback restrictions imposed by the Zoning Ordinances. 
7.04.07. Signs Prohibited on Easements and Right-of-ways: No signs shall be placed on or over any public right-of-way, water, sewer or drainage easements except signs erected by the Texas Highway Department, Galveston County, the City of Santa Fe and signs identifying underground pipeline structures. No signs in this category shall be allowed to maintain a pre-existing nonconforming status. 
7.04.07.01 Signs Prohibited on Public Property: No signs shall be placed, posted or displayed or other wise attached upon any street lamp post, street sign, traffic sign or signal, hydrant, tree, shrub, fence or utility pole. 
7.04.08. Re-inspection: Signs shall be subjected to a re-inspection. The sign face shall be kept in good repair. If portions of the sign face or structure are incomplete or missing, and upon notice to the permit holder, the sign face is not repaired within a period of thirty (30) days or if a structural defect exists and is not repaired within fifteen (15) days from notice, the sign shall be considered to be an abandoned sign. 
7.04.09. Emergency Abandonment: When a sign has been found to have structural design flaws or to have structural defects constituting a clear and immediate threat to the public or to adjacent property owners, the Code Enforcement Officer shall take action to secure or dismantle the threatening sign at City expense and to charge the owner such cost. A first lien can be secured against the property owner for nonpayment. 
7.04.10. Temporary Sign Removal: Temporary signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the event advertised. 
7.04.11. Sign lettering: Professional even lettering with clearly legible font styles is required on all permanent or temporary signs within the City of Santa Fe. 
7.04.12. Sign design and color: The design of all signs shall be unobtrusive and of a design, material and color that blend harmoniously with the natural surroundings, and the scale of neighboring architecture. 
Predominant color design shall be compatible and traditional historic colors, earth tones (greens, tans, light browns and terracotta), grays, pale primary and secondary colors, white and cream tones. Accent color design (i.e., black, dark blue, grays and other primary colors) may be used on a limited basis. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 4, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 08-2012, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-12) 
Sec. 7.05. - Categorizing of All Signs. 
    The Building Official shall categorize all signs into either on-premise or off-premise sign categories. Once so categorized, the sign thereafter shall be judged according to the applicable limitations as set forth hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 4, 8-25-11) 
Sec. 7.06. - On-Premise. 
7.06.01. Permanent On-Premise Signs: All signs in this category with a combined sign structure and display area over thirty-two (32) square feet shall be anchored against up-lift and overturning resulting from winds of not less than one hundred twenty (120) miles per hour. Such signs of this size shall also have construction plans designed and certified by a qualified engineer. Sign standards shall be in conformance with restrictions set out elsewhere in this Ordinance. See the "Qualifications and Standards" Section for each commercial and manufacturing district as listed in Article 4, "Zoning District". 
7.06.02. Temporary On-Premise Signs: The following restrictions are placed on temporary signs: 
A.	Temporary signs shall be secured against dislodgment by wind. 
B.	Temporary signs, including portable signs, shall be removed after the event they advertise has passed or thirty (30) days, whichever is the lesser. 
C.	Temporary signs shall be removed when faded or otherwise deteriorated. 
D.	Only one (1) construction sign is permitted per general construction permit. Construction signs shall be considered on-premise signs when placed on the construction site. 
E.	Temporary signs shall not be erected on public property and equipment, rights-of-way, utility poles and equipment, traffic control signs, and on other property of the foregoing nature. 
F.	Portable signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face with a limit of two (2) sign faces. 
7.06.03. Political Signs: A political sign is a sign that contains a primarily political message. Such signs are allowed subject to the following regulations: 
A.	Political signs may be placed only on private property and only with the property owner's permission. 
1.	All written political signs meant to be seen from a road must carry a "right-of-way" notice as prescribed by Texas Election Code Section 255.007: 
"NOTICE: IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW (CHAPTERS 392 AND 393, TRANSPORTATION CODE) TO PLACE THIS SIGN IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY OF A HIGHWAY." 
B.	Political signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
C.	Political signs shall not have an effective area greater than thirty-six (36) square feet. 
D.	Political signs cannot be artificially illuminated. 
E.	Political signs shall not have any moving elements. 
F.	No permit is required to place a political sign on private property. 
G.	Signs placed on public property or the public right-of-way are subject to immediate removal. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 4, 8-25-11) 
Sec. 7.07. - Off-Premise. 
7.07.01. Permanent Off-Premise Signs: Effective on the date of passage of this Article, no new permanent off-premise signs shall be erected or re-erected within the City limits of the City of Santa Fe except as provided for in this Article or as installed by the City of Santa Fe. This provision does not prohibit the ordinary maintenance or the conversion to digital billboards, to such previously erected signs, but such signs shall otherwise not be improved nor enlarged. Excluding Digital Billboards, if a sign is fifty (50) percent or more destroyed, as determined by the Building Official, it shall be removed by the owner and not re-erected. 
7.07.02. Temporary Off-Premise Signs: No temporary off-premise signs shall be erected within the City of Santa Fe. 
7.07.03 Billboards: All billboard signs are prohibited. This provision does not prohibit the ordinary maintenance of such previously erected signs during the amortization schedule for removal, but such signs shall not be improved nor enlarged. Excluding billboard signs constructed or reconstructed in conformance with this ordinance and through a Digital Billboard Conversion Agreement, if a billboard sign is fifty (50) percent or more destroyed, as determined by the Building Official, it shall be removed by the owner and not re-erected. 
A.	Notwithstanding Sec. 7.07.01, 7.08.04 and any other provision of this article, an existing off-premise billboard may be converted to a digital billboard sign subject to the provisions of this Section. Only a billboard sign constructed or reconstructed in conformance with this ordinance and a Digital Billboard Conversion Agreement will be considered a conforming sign and all requirements of this Section are met. 
Digital Billboard means an off-premise sign utilizing digital message technology, capable of changing the static message or copy on the sign electronically. A Digital Billboard may be internally or externally illuminated. Digital Billboards shall contain static messages only, and shall not have animation, movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign. Each static message shall not include blinking, flashing, scintillating lighting or the varying of light intensity. 
Digital Billboard Conversion Agreement: An existing traditional face off-premise billboard sign may be modified to support an electronic face(s) as a digital billboard if the owner presents the City Manager with pictorial proof and a sworn affidavit evidencing the removal of at least two (2) square feet of traditional face from within the city for every one (1) square foot of digital face display area to be erected. (Example: for a 576 sq. ft. digital face, an owner would have to remove at least 1,152 sq. ft. of existing traditional sign face area.) The removal of the face of which the digital face will replace does not count toward the removal total. Prior to issuance of a building permit the City Manager or their designee must approve a Digital Billboard Conversion Agreement which outlines which static billboards are being removed and the location and the dimensions of the digital billboards being constructed. 
The owner of an existing off-premises billboard sign may replace any or all the structural components necessary to support a digital face(s). The sign structure that is modified or replaced: 
1.	Shall not increase the number of physical faces on the structure. 
2.	Shall not have a digital face with an active copy area that exceeds five hundred eighty (580) square feet or has an active copy area greater than the original sign face. 
3.	Shall obtain all necessary electrical permits from the City. 
4.	Must comply with all State Regulations. If there is any conflict between State and City Regulations, the more restrictive shall apply. 
The owner of an off-premises digital sign(s) shall coordinate with local authorities to display, when appropriate, emergency information important to the traveling public such as Amber Alerts, alerts concerning terrorist attacks, natural disasters or as authorized by the Office of Emergency Management. Emergency information messages shall remain in the advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency that issues the information. The owner of an off-premise digital sign(s) shall also coordinate with the City of Santa Fe to display community information for 0.005 percent of the annual display time. At least fifty (50) percent of the Community information will be displayed during peak times. 
B.	Digital billboard requirements: 
1.	Maximum Display Area: Five hundred eighty (580) square feet, or the active copy area shall not be greater than the original sign face. 
2.	Maximum Height: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
3.	Location: Must maintain a one thousand-foot separation from other billboards, as measured along the same side of the road the sign is designed to be visible from and setback a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from a platted residential area, at the time the digital billboard is permitted. 
4.	Dwell Time: Messages shall remain static for at least eight (8) seconds and change message shall be accomplished within two (2) seconds. 
5.	Display: No display shall include animation, full motion video, dissolving or fading images, moving light, scrolling images or text, nor shall it project a static image upon a stationary object. 
6.	Change of Message: Must occur simultaneously on the entire sign. 
7.	Brightness: Limited to 0.3 foot candles over ambient light conditions measured at a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the sign for a nominal size twelve-foot by twenty-five-foot (12' × 25') sign face. 
8.	Malfunction: Sign shall contain a default mechanism built in to either turn off the display or show "full black" or company logo only on the display if a malfunction occurs. 
9.	Automatic Dimmer: Sign face shall be equipped with both a dimmer control and photocell that automatically adjusts the face's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions. 
10.	Windstorm requirement: All signs in this category shall be certified by a qualified engineer as anchored against up-lift and overturning resulting from winds of not less than one hundred twenty (120) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 4, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 08-2012, §§ 3, 4, 2-23-12) 
Sec. 7.08. - Sign Permits. 
7.08.01. General Permit Requirements: Any person desiring to erect or alter any regulated sign within the City of Santa Fe shall make application for a permit to the Building Official of the City of Santa Fe. The application fee is due at the time of the permit application is submitted. 
7.08.02. Applications shall be in writing and the initial application shall be accompanied by a sketch of the sign to be erected showing dimensions and structural details and a description of the property upon which the sign is to be located, together with a statement and plot plan describing the location of the sign upon said property, in addition to all existing signs maintained on the premises and visible from the right-of-way. 
7.08.03. The written consent of the property owner where the sign is to be erected shall also be submitted to the Building Official. 
7.08.04. All signs erected before the enabling of this Ordinance which do not meet the regulations herein contained, shall be registered with the City as pre-existing, nonconforming signs. It is the intent of this Section of the Ordinance to permit such nonconforming signs to continue until the same are removed, but not to encourage their survival. 
7.08.05. Sign permit fees shall be established by separate Council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 4, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 08-2012, § 5, 2-23-12) 
Sec. 7.09. - Nonconforming and Abandoned Signs. 
7.09.01. Enlargement Prohibited: Except as herein provided, no nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, changed, altered, or repaired except in conformity with the regulations contained in this Article. 
7.09.02 Nonconformance Status: Any sign which does not conform with the regulations contained in the zoning district in which it is located is deemed to be a legal nonconforming sign when: 
A.	The sign was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of the passage of this Ordinance, and has since been in regular and continuous use; or 
B.	The sign was in existence at the time of annexation to the City of Santa Fe and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
7.09.03. Continuing Lawful Use of Sign: 
A.	The lawful use of a sign existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance, although it does not conform to the provisions herein, may be continued until termination is required in accordance with the provisions of this Article. During the period between designation as a nonconforming sign and notification of a prescribed termination date, if discontinuance occurs, any future sign must be in conformity with the general provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.	A legal nonconforming sign, when discontinued or abandoned, cannot be resumed. Prima facie evidence of continuance or abandonment is as follows: 
1.	When land associated with a legal nonconforming sign ceases to be used in such described by the sign a manner for a period of ninety (90) days. 
2.	When a business housed in a structure associated with a nonconforming sign ceases to be used in such a manner described by the sign for a period of ninety (90) days. 
C.	Abandonment of a nonconforming sign shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
7.09.04 Removal of Abandoned Signs: Abandoned signs shall be removed at the discretion of the City Manager and/or his or her designee. If not removed by owners or occupants of the property within ten (10) days of notice, the City Manager and/or his or her designee shall cause the signs to be otherwise removed and the cost of removal shall become a lien against the property until satisfied. 
7.09.05. Proof of Legal Nonconformance: It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator, or occupant to provide proof that a nonconforming sign existed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance. 
7.09.06. Restoration of Damaged Sign: Nothing in this Article shall prevent the restoration of a sign destroyed to the extent of not more than fifty (50) percent of its reasonable value by fire, explosion, or other casualty or Act of God, or a public enemy, nor the continued use of such a sign which existed at the time of such destruction. However, the preceding allowance for the restoration of damaged nonconforming sign has no bearing on an approved amortization schedule for the termination of nonconformance as described in this Article. 
7.09.07. Survey and Certification: The Code Enforcement Officer is responsible for the production of an annual survey and report on the status of signs in nonconformance in Santa Fe. The Officer's report shall be sent to the Planning and Zoning Commission at its first regular meeting of the official municipal year. The Commission shall review the report and shall approve or reject the certification of each sign that the Officer has identified as being nonconforming. Once certified by the Commission as nonconforming, a sign shall be given an alpha-numeric designation for future reference. Upon receipt of the approved certified report from the Commission, the Officer shall notify each tenant and property owner of such nonconforming sign status. 
7.09.08. Amortization of Nonconforming Signs: 
A.	Responsibility of the Board of Adjustment: It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Adjustment to provide a program for the orderly and fair termination of all nonconforming signs in Santa Fe. The board shall cooperate with the Code Enforcement Officer in reviewing the status of certified nonconforming signs for amortization scheduling and termination. 
B.	Public Hearing Required: Prior to the establishment of an amortization schedule for a nonconforming sign, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given in written form to the tenant and owner of the certified nonconforming sign and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Santa Fe. The notice shall state the time and the place of the hearing. The notice shall appear in said newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
C.	Factors to be Used by the Board of Adjustment in Amortization Scheduling: In determining the amortization schedule for the termination of a certified nonconforming sign, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors: 
1.	The length of time required for the user or owner of the sign to amortize his/her capital investment. 
2.	The general condition of the sign. 
3.	The length of time that the sign has been used. 
4.	The land use activities surrounding the sign in question. 
E.	Notification and Recordation: The Board of Adjustment shall send a copy of all approved amortization schedules for the termination of nonconforming signs to the owners and lessees of affected sites. The termination date and the reasons for the schedule term shall be clearly described in the notification. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a permanent record of all amortization schedules for nonconforming signs for the City. 
F.	Violation of an Amortization Schedule: The failure of an owner or a tenant of a certified nonconforming sign to comply with the termination date of a recorded amortization schedule shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall be punishable in accordance with the terms of Article 13, of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 5, 8-25-11) 
Article 8. - Performance Standards 

Sec. 8.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to set forth regulations which protect the public from the potential negative effects of industrial and intense commercial development by regulating smoke and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire or explosive materials, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, open storage, glare, and fuel supply in the vicinity of such sites. These regulations are aimed specifically at achieving the environmental goals described in the Santa Fe Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 8.02. - Application and Effect. 
All permitted uses shall conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards as specified in this Article. In addition, such standards or some portion of them may reasonably be appended to certain other Conditional Use Permits as may be determined to require these protective standards. 
Sec. 8.03. - Noise. 
    At no point at the boundary property line of any use shall the sound pressure exceed the limits outlined in the table below measured in decibels, at one hundred and twenty-five (125) cycles. Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter that has a calibration certificate meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute. 
Decibels Maximum Continuous Time Allowed Up to 85dB 8 hours 86dB to 88dB 4 hours 89bB to 91bB 2 hours 92dB to 94dB 1 hour 95dB to 97dB 30 minutes 98dB to 100dB 15 minutes 101dB to 106dB 4 minutes 107dB to 109dB 1 minute Greater than 109dB Less than 1 minute  
No noise from a commercial operation, facility or use will be allowed between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except as allowed by City Codes. 
(Ord. No. 05-2013, § 1, 3-28-13) 
Sec. 8.04. - Smoke and Particulate Matter. 
8.04.01. Industrial Limits: No industrial operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are: 
A.	In violation of the standards specified by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission including but not limited to those in Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code or the standards specified by the Texas Department of Health including but not limited to those in Title 25 of the Texas Administrative Code; or 
B.	Of such capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in (A.) above, except that when the presence of steam is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the outside atmosphere, performance shall be considered in compliance with this Section of the Ordinance. 
8.04.02. State Regulations Control: The emission of particulate matter from all sources in a district subject to this Article shall not exceed the level specified by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission regulations including but not limited to those in Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code or the regulations specified by the Texas Department of Health including but not limited to those in Title 25 of the Texas Administrative Code. 
8.04.03. Fugitive Dust-Particulate Control: Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter; or which involve dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment including but not limited to paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting, shall be so conducted such that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary property line of the tract on which the use is located. 
Sec. 8.05. - Odorous Matter. 
8.05.01. No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. 
8.05.02. The odor threshold shall be determined by observation. In any case, where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by American Society for Testing Materials ASTMD 1391-57 entitled "Standard Method for Measuring Odor in Atmospheres" shall be used and is incorporated by reference. 
Sec. 8.06. - Combustible or Explosive and Hazardous Material. 
No commercial or industrial use involving the manufacture or storage of petrochemical compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted in the City of Santa Fe, except that chlorates, perchlorates, phosphorous, and similar substances and compounds in quantities of one (1) gallon or less for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists, or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the Zoning Officer and the Santa Fe Fire Department. The storage of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film solvents and petrochemical products for industrial purposes shall be allowed only after a Conditional Use Permit for such use has been granted in conformance with the terms of Article 3, of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 8.07. - Toxic and Noxious Matter. 
No commercial or industrial operation or use permitted under the terms of this Ordinance shall emit toxic or noxious matter in concentrations across the boundary property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located. 
Sec. 8.08. - Vibration. 
No use permitted under the terms of this Ordinance shall at any time create earth borne vibration which when measured at the boundary property line of the source operation exceeds the limits of the displacement set forth in Table 8-A, below: 
TABLE 8-A 
Displacement Limits for Vibration 
Frequency Cycles per Second Displacement in Inches 0 to 10 .0010 10 to 20 .0007 20 to 30 .0005 30 to 40 .0004 40 and over .0003  
Sec. 8.09. - Glare. 
No use or operation shall be located or conducted so as to produce intense glare or direct illumination across the boundary property line from a visible source of illumination nor shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
Sec. 8.10. - Storm water management. 
8.10.01. Detention of Excess Storm Water Runoff: Each development shall provide for the on-site or off-site detention of excess storm water runoff resulting from that development. For the purpose of this Article, "excess storm water runoff" shall include all increases in storm water resulting from: an increase in the impervious surface of the site, including all additions of buildings, roads, and parking lots; changes in soil absorption caused by compaction during development; modifications in contours, including the filling or draining of small depressed areas, alteration of drainage ways, or re-grading of slopes; destruction of forest; alteration of drainage ways or installation of collection systems to intercept street flows or to replace swales or other drainage ways; or the alteration of subsurface flows, including any groundwater dewatering or diversion practices compared with the site in its natural state. 
8.10.02. Limitation on Storm Water Runoff: No development shall cause downstream property owners, water courses, channels, or conduits to receive storm water runoff from proposed development than would have resulted from the same storm event occurring over the site of the proposed land use with the land in its natural, undeveloped condition. For the purposes of this Article, "undeveloped condition" shall mean that all natural retention areas and drainage ways plus existing farm or highway drainage structures shall be included in the flow calculation, all ground covers shall be considered to be meadow or grassland, with the exception that forested areas shall be treated as woodlands. "Channel" or "drainage way channel" shall mean the channels used to convey the 100-year drainage flows between successive retention facilities or to retention facilities from the property. 
8.10.03. Storage capacity: All storm water storage facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacity to accommodate all runoff caused by the development in excess of the runoff which would have resulted from the site if left in its natural, undeveloped condition. The storage capacity of all storage facilities shall be sufficient to store in excess of the excess flow, in each watershed, which would result from the 100-year storm of 24-duration. 
8.10.04. Design and Construction of Storm Water Detention Structures: The design and construction of Storm Water Detention systems and structures shall conform to the provisions of the Dickinson Bayou Watershed Regional Drainage Plan - Drainage Criteria Manual for Galveston County, Texas and Texas Water Development Board, August 1992 Edition. 
8.10.05 Design Regulations: All detention facilities and improvements required by this Section shall comply with the following regulations. 
A.	Storage Volumes: Storage may be provided by wet or dry bottom basins or reservoirs or rooftop storage facilities. 
B.	Maximum Depth: The maximum planned depth of stormwater stored shall not exceed five (5) feet unless natural ground conditions lend themselves to greater depths. 
C.	Outlet Control Structures: Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible and shall operate automatically. They shall be designed to limit discharges into existing or planned downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed existing flow of the site in its natural condition. 
D.	Spillway: Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided unless inflow is controlled to divert flows when the basin is at capacity. 
E.	Fencing Required: A minimum 4-foot high fence is required along all sides of the detention basin with slopes that are greater than 2:1 or have a vertical wall. 
1.	Fences should not have any opening greater than four (4") inches. 
2.	Fences shall provide a self-latching locked gate which provides access to the pond for use by emergency vehicles and for regular maintenance. 
3.	Fences shall be maintained by the Property Owner(s) or Home Owners Association. 
F.	Dry Bottom Basin: For basins designed without permanent pools: 
1.	Interior Drainage: Provisions must be made to facilitate interior drainage, to include the provision of natural grades to outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage facilities, or the installation of subsurface drains. 
2.	Multipurpose Features: These may be designed to serve secondary purposes for recreation, open space, or other types of use which will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding. 
3.	Cleaning: The basins shall be designed for periodic cleaning and removal of sediments, which shall be removed from the site or otherwise disposed of in an appropriate manner. 
4.	Elimination of Standing Water: An impervious pilot channel shall be installed in the bottom of dry detention basins to assure continuous movement of stormwater through the system and avoid standing water in the basins during low volume storm events and dry periods. 
G.	Wet Basins: For basins designed with permanent pools: 
1.	Facilities for Emptying: For emergency purposes, cleaning, or shoreline maintenance, facilities shall be provided or plans prepared for the use of auxiliary equipment to permit emptying and drainage. 
2.	Pollution Abatement: Aeration facilities may be required when the quality of the influent and detention time would result in a lowering of dissolved oxygen content in the basin. 
3.	Slopes: Approach slopes shall be at least 6:1 but not more than 3:1 and shall be at least four (4) to six (6) feet wide and slope gently toward the basin. The side slopes shall be of non-erosive material with a slope of 1:1 or flatter. The ledge shall be four (4) to six (6) feet wide and slope gently toward the water. There shall be a freeboard of twelve (12) to eighteen (18) inches above the high-water elevation on all retention basins. 
4.	Cleaning: The basins shall be designed to include sediment traps in all inlets. Sediment traps shall be designed to permit periodic cleaning and maintenance. A basin maintenance plan shall be developed to insure that the design depths of the basin will remain over time. 
H.	Building Regulations: 
1.	Rooftop Storage: Detention storage requirements may be met either in total or in part by detention on flat roofs. Design specifications of such detention shall be a part of the application for a zoning certificate. These specifications shall include the depth and volume of storage, design of outlet devices and down drains, elevations of overflow scuppers, design loadings for the roof structure, and emergency overflow provisions. Rooftop storage shall not be permitted to drain directly into sanitary sewers or streets. 
2.	Parking Lot Storage: Paved parking lots may be designed to provide temporary detention storage of stormwater on a portion of their surfaces not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent. Outlets shall be designed to empty the stored waters slowly, and depths of storage must be limited so as to prevent damage to parked vehicles. Storage areas shall be posted with warning signs and shall be designed to fill to maximum depth in not less than two (2) hours. 
3.	Detention Storage: All or a portion of the detention storage may also be provided in underground detention facilities. 
I.	Retention in floodplains shall be permitted only in depressed floodplain areas: Retention shall not be permitted in riverine floodplains. 
8.10.06 Maintenance of facilities: The developer or site owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all improvements. Thereafter, all detention improvements shall be maintained in perpetuity and cannot be developed for any other use which would limit or cause to limit the use for detention. 
8.10.07 Inspection of facilities: The developer's or owner's engineer shall be required to inspect all drainage facilities under construction and certify their compliance with approved plans. In addition, a registered engineer, employed by the City of Santa Fe, may inspect all drainage facilities while under construction. When facilities are not constructed according to approved plans, the City has the explicit authority to compel compliance and require correction of any situations which are not according to approved plans. 
8.10.08 Drainage and Detention Administration: 
A.	Definitions 
1.	Small Project Development: for purposes of this section, is defined as: 
[All Single Family Residential Subdivisions.] 
a.	A subdivision of land that meets the definition of Minor Plat as defined by the Santa Fe Subdivision Development Ordinance and is zoned as R-1 Single Family Residential or is zoned as AR Agricultural Residential use, or, 
[All Single Family Construction.] 
b.	Development of a single parcel of land zoned as R-1 Single Family Residential or zoned as AR Agricultural Residential use, and not approved under a Conditional Use or Planned Unit Development, or, 
[All Commercial Subdivisions.] 
c.	All Non-Single Family Subdivisions. A subdivision of land that meets the definition of Minor Plat as defined by the Santa Fe Subdivision Development Ordinance for commercial, industrial or multi-family residential purposes and, 
i.	Is located on a tract of land or lot of less than one (1) acre prior to such subdivision/development, and, 
ii.	The primary building is of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area and, 
iii.	Wherein the aggregate area of all buildings on the site will be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, for the original tract, and, 
iv.	Wherein the aggregate area of all impervious surfaces on the entire original tract will not exceed twenty eight thousand (28,000) square feet or, 
[All Commercial Construction.] 
d.	Development of a parcel of land, existing at the time of passage of this regulation, for commercial or industrial purposes and, 
i.	Is located on a tract or lot of less than one (1) acre and, 
ii.	The primary building will be less than five thousand (5,000) square feet or less in area and, 
iii.	Wherein the aggregate area of all buildings will be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area and, 
iv.	Wherein the aggregate area of all impervious surfaces on the site will not exceed twenty eight thousand (28,000) square feet. 
2.	Large Project Development. Large Project Development shall be all other development not classified as Small Project Development. 
3.	Aggregate Area of All Impervious Surfaces defined: the aggregate area of all impervious surfaces of a development or construction project is the total gross impervious weather surface area of all facets of the site projected vertically to the mean grade and includes but is not limited to building roofs, battered walls, parking lots, sidewalks, hard landscaping features, stabilized soils, compacted soils, improved lay down yards, improved storage yards and similar surfaces. 
4.	Continued development of tracts and subdivision of lands: Continued development of tracts and subdivision of lands that result in conditions exceeding any of the criteria of this section (8.10.08) shall require the design and construction of storm water detention for all increased flows resulting from such continued development. 
5.	Single-Family Residential Construction: Construction of a single-family residential structure on a single tract of land, in any zoning district other than R-1 -Single Family and AR -Agricultural Residential, incompliance with the Zoning Matrix shall be considered Small Project Development for that portion of the site devoted to the single-family use. 
B.	Drainage and Detention Required: Drainage and detention of storm water shall be provided as follows: 
1.	Drainage and detention of small project development shall be designed to standards established in Section 8.10.08.D Small Development Standards . 
2.	Large project development shall be designed and constructed to conform to the provisions of this Article for detention of stormwater. 
3.	Detention and drainage improvements shall be designed to the standards of the Dickinson Bayou Watershed Drainage Criteria Manual for Galveston County and the Texas Water Development Board and the provisions of this Article. Conflicts between the standards of the Dickinson Bayou Watershed Drainage Criteria Manual for Galveston County and the Texas Water Development Board and the provisions of this Article shall be controlled by the provisions of this Article. 
4.	The developer shall be responsible for design and construction of all detention required by Single-Family and Agricultural Residential Large Project Development. 
5.	Multifamily, Multi-Tenant Commercial and Multi-Tenant Industrial Development. The developer shall provide detention and stormwater management for all lots and tracts within Multifamily, Multi-Tenant Commercial and Multi-Tenant Industrial zones. It is the intention of this Section to require the design of stormwater control and detention for the entire tract when the nature of the separate uses are known. Design and construction of the detention for individual lots, when the specific use and building configuration is not known by the developer, may be deferred until each lot is improved; however, the developer shall provide a master drainage and detention plan that makes provision for all future detention and drainage for the site; furthermore, the developer shall bind all future development to the criteria established by the master drainage and detention plan. 
6.	Detention shall not be required when subdivision is created by a court of law or when property is subdivided for agricultural purposes into five (5) acre and larger tracts. 
C.	City/District Jurisdiction: All development and subdivision of land shall be submitted by the developer to Galveston County Drainage District #1 for review, comment and jurisdictional determination. The District shall determine whether the proposed development falls within District jurisdiction or shall determine that the District has no interest in the development's storm water design and construction oversight. The City shall issue building permits for proposed development that is designed to conform to the provisions of this Article for detention of storm water." 
D.	Small Development Standards: Sheet flow shall be limited to the first 150' from the right-of-way line of adjoining streets. Parking lots and other impervious surfaces beyond 150' shall have underground internal drainage structures. Internal drainage shall be conducted to buried storm sewers or to open collector ditches. 
(Ord. No. 10-2004, 5-27-04; Ord. No. 29-2007, § 1, 12-13-07; Ord. No. 12-2008, §§ 1-4, 7-24-08) 
Note- Ord. No. 12-2008, adopted July 24, 2008 provides that failure to comply with any portion the ordinance (sections 8.10.04, 8.10.08B, and 8.10.08C) shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and the violator shall be liable for a fine of not less than $2,000.00, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 8.11. - Water Pollution. 
No emission of water from any land use in Santa Fe, whether by entry into the municipal wastewater system, stormwater control system, a stream or other body of water, shall be permitted if the quality of such emitted water violates the laws of the State of Texas or of the United States. 
ARTICLE 9. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 9.01. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
There is hereby created a Santa Fe Planning and Zoning Commission. The composition and activities of the Commission shall be in accordance with Chapters 211 and 212, respectively, of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members, all of whom shall be residents of Santa Fe, nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Each appointed member of the Commission shall hold that office for a period of three (3) years or until his/her successor takes office. However, during the initial creation of the Commission, three (3) members shall be appointed for three (3) years; two (2) members for two (2) years; and two (2) members for one (1) year. The members of the Commission shall be appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation, and shall serve without compensation. Members may be removed by the City Council only for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. Vacancies, occurring other than through the expiration of terms, shall be filled only for the un-expired term by the Mayor with confirmation by the City Council. 
Sec. 9.02. - Commission Officers. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a chairperson and an associate chairperson and may create and fill other offices as may be deemed necessary. The term of the chairperson and associate chairperson shall be for one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. 
Sec. 9.03. - Meetings of the Vommission. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month. Said meeting shall be open to the public. 
Sec. 9.04. - Rules of Operation and Records. 
    The Commission shall adopt rules of operation and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall become items of public record. 
Sec. 9.05. - Commission Quorum. 
    Four (4) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
Sec. 9.06. - Responsibilities of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
9.06.01. The Comprehensive Plan: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the responsibility for the preparation and maintenance of the City's Comprehensive Plan. As a part of its Annual Report, the Commission shall include an overview of the status of the comprehensive plan and the measures which have been taken during the preceding year to implement the plan. Such an overview shall include, but shall not be limited to the subjects of land use, circulation, public facilities and infrastructure, housing, and public policies. 
9.06.02. Zoning: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity on matters concerning amendments to the Santa Fe Zoning Ordinance text or map, on matters concerning the granting or denial of conditional use permits, and on matters pertaining to planned unit designation under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance. 
9.06.03. Land Subdivision and Platting: The Commission shall be exclusively responsible for the City's review, and approval or rejection of subdivision plats. 
Sec. 9.07. - Financial Support of the Commission. 
    As a part of the City's regular budgetary process the City Council shall provide funds for the necessary and appropriate expenses of the Planning and Zoning Commission. A public accounting of the Commission's expenditures for the preceding year shall be provided in the Commission's Annual Report. The Commission may recommend to the City Council the employment of professionals such as engineers, architects, landscape architects, urban planners, and other individuals to assist in the performance of the Planning and Zoning Commission's duties. 
Sec. 9.08. - Annual Report Required. 
    On or before the first day of September of each year, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall produce and disseminate to the City Council and the citizens of Santa Fe, a report on the activities of the Commission during the past year. Said report shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
A.	The status of the City's Comprehensive Plan, including activities directly related to the implementation of the plan. 
B.	The number, nature, location, and record of approvals/denials of requests for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance text and map. 
C.	The number, nature, location, and record of approvals/denials of requests for Conditional Use Permits. 
D.	The number, nature, location, and record of approvals/denials of requests for subdivision plats. 
ARTICLE 10. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 10.01. - Board of Adjustment. 
    There is hereby created a Santa Fe Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall act in a quasi-judicial capacity. The composition and activities of the Board shall be in accordance with Chapter 211, of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The Board shall be composed of five (5) regular members, and two (2) alternate members, all of whom shall be residents of Santa Fe, nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Alternate members shall serve in the absence of regular Board members. Each appointed member of the Board shall hold that office for a period of two (2) years or until his/her successor takes office. The members of the Board shall be appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation, and shall serve without compensation. Members may be removed by the City Council only for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of terms shall be filled only for the unexpired term by the Mayor with confirmation by the City Council. 
Sec. 10.02. - Board Officers. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairperson and an associate chairperson and may create and fill other offices as may be deemed necessary. The term of the chairperson and associate chairperson shall be for one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. 
Sec. 10.03. - Meetings of the Board. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall hold meetings as necessitated by requests for rulings on ordinance interpretation and variances. Said meeting shall be open to the public. 
Sec. 10.04. - Rules of Operation and Records. 
    The Board shall adopt rules of operation and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall become items of public record. 
Sec. 10.05. - Right to Appeal. 
    Any of the following persons may appeal to the Board of Adjustment a decision made by the Zoning Officer: 
A.	A person aggrieved by the decision; or 
B.	Any officer, department, Board or bureau of the City of Santa Fe. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the Zoning Officer certifies in writing to the Board facts supporting the officer's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the Board or a court of record. 
Sec. 10.06. - Board Quorum. 
    Four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be required for the transaction of business. 
Sec. 10.07. - Responsibilities of the Board of Adjustment. 
10.07.1. Interpretation: The Board of Adjustment may hear an appeal that alleges error in an order or decision of the Santa Fe Zoning Officer pertaining to the City's Zoning Ordinance text or map. 
10.07.2. Variances: The Board shall be authorized to grant variances from the terns of the City's Zoning Ordinance if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions which are not self-imposed, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the Ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done. 
10.07.3. Amortization: Cases involving amortization shall require a report from the Board of Adjustment to the City Council. Said report shall identify the recommendations of the Board associated with any amortization process and schedule. 
Sec. 10.08. - Decisions of the Board. 
    In exercising its authority the Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the Zoning Officer's decision pertaining to the Zoning Ordinance. A concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to: 
A.	Reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Officer; 
B.	Decide in favor or an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to pass under the zoning ordinance; or 
C.	Authorize a Variance. 
Sec. 10.09. - Financial Support of the Board. 
    As a part of the City's regular budgetary process the City Council shall provide funds for the necessary and appropriate expenses of the Board of Adjustment. A public accounting of the Board's expenditures for the preceding year shall be provided in the Board's annual report. The Board may recommend to the City Council the employment of professionals such as engineers, architects, landscape architects, urban planners, and other individuals to assist in the performance of the Board of Adjustment's duties. 
Sec. 10.10. - Annual Report Required. 
    On or before the first day of September of each year, the Board of Adjustment shall produce and disseminate to the City Council and the citizens of Santa Fe, a report on the activities of the Board during the past year. Said report shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
A.	The number, nature, location, and record of approvals/denials of requests for Zoning Ordinance text and map interpretations; 
B.	The number, nature, location, and record of approvals/denials of requests for variances; 
C.	Any activities associated with amortization. 
Sec. 10.11. - Use Variances Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the Board of Adjustment to accept or act on a request for a variance which would allow a land use activity in a zoning district where it is specifically excluded by the terms of the Zoning Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 11. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 11.01. - Applicability. 
(a)	No person shall use, occupy or develop any land, building or other structure, or authorize or permit such use, occupancy or development, except in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)	The owner of any building, structure, land, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person employed in connection therewith, who violates, or assists in or contributes to the commission of a violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of such violation(s) and shall become liable for the penalties herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 11.1, 2-23-06) 
Sec. 11.02. - Approval vacating. 
(a)	The Community Services Director (CSD) or his designee shall give notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit or occupancy authorization in writing up to ten (10) days before suspending or revoking such permit or occupancy authorization. 
(b)	Upon determination a permit, certificate, license or order pertaining to this Ordinance has been "issued in error" or on the "basis of incorrect information", or that there has been "non-compliance with the provisions" of this Ordinance, the CSD may at his discretion, with or without notice suspend such authorization(s) pending compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
    The CSD may revoke an authorization if compliance is not achieved within the stated time authorized in the "notice of violation". 
    This section shall apply to: 
- Certificates of Occupancy; 
- Conditional Use Permits; 
- Planned Unit Development (PUD) designation, including site plan review; and 
- Variances. 
(c)	Written "notice of suspension or revocation" of any of the above shall be provided to the property owner(s) and permit holder(s) of record via certified mail return receipt requested; posted upon the property entrance; and, where feasible, via a face-to-face meeting. 
(d)	A notice to appear (subpoena) in court shall be issued to the property owner(s) and permit holder(s) of record when a permit or certificate of occupancy has been revoked by the CSD and additional non-compliance with this Ordinance is verified to exist at the time of a follow-up inspection by the CSD or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 11.2, 2-23-06) 
Sec. 11.03. - Cease and desist order. 
a.	When the CSD or his designee determines there is non-compliance with any material term, condition or requirement of this Ordinance, the CSD or his designee shall order any person having a proprietary interest in the property or any person engaged in the development of the property to cease and desist such unauthorized activity on the site until such order is released by the CSD or his designee following an inspection to determine compliance with this Ordinance. 
b.	The "cease and desist order" shall be in writing and specifically identify the person or party in violation; nature of the violation(s); specific Ordinance, chapter and section violated; required corrective action; and, authorized compliance date. A copy of such order shall also be mailed to the property owner(s) and permit holder(s) of record if not present at the time the cease and desist order is presented at the site and or posted upon the site. 
c.	Any person or party failing to comply with an order to cease and desist shall at the City's sole discretion have a suit brought upon them in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain and enjoin such non-permitted action from continuing after delivery of a cease and desist order or its posting upon the property in accordance with this chapter. 
d.	The cease and desist order shall remain in effect until the CSD or his designee hand delivers a signed release of the cease and desist order to the property owner(s) or permit holder(s) or provides such person(s) a copy of the release via certified mail return receipt requested. 
e.	A courtesy hearing for relief from a Code Enforcement Officer's decision shall be presented to the Office of the Community Services Director in writing within the specified period for abatement of the violation(s). All such hearings shall be conducted within the specified period for violation abatement and if relief is not granted, violation abatement shall occur within the period specified by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
f.	Appeals of the CSD's decision may be made in writing by any aggrieved party to the City of Santa Fe, Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 11.3, 2-23-06) 
Sec. 11.04. - Warning notice. 
(a)	Upon the City's attention to a violation of this chapter, the CSD or his designee shall cause an investigation to occur and prepare a written report concerning the violation. Such violation notice shall be delivered upon the property owner and person occupying the property. 
    If the property owner or occupant refuses to accept a violation notice, or if no one is present at the time of inspection, the CSD or his designee shall post the violation notice upon the building or property entrance in addition to notifying the property owner. 
(b)	The violation notice shall contain the following: 
1.	Address and Legal description of the property. 
2.	Chapter and Section of Ordinance violated. 
3.	Nature of and Location of the violation. 
4.	Date violation shall be removed or abated. 
5.	Penalty for failure to comply. 
6.	Each notice shall contain the following statement "Warning - a repeat violation of this chapter shall not require additional notice to abate such violation. A court appearance will be scheduled and notice to appear provided the property owner via certified mail" and upon the building or property entrance. 
(c)	For violations where the residence or building is unoccupied, the CSD or his designee shall place a notice of violation upon the building or property entrance inside a protective document protector. 
(d)	In addition to (c), a violation notice shall be sent via certified mail to the property owner of record last known address. 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 11.4, 2-23-06) 
Sec. 11.05. - Repeat violations. 
    After a violation abatement or issuance of a violation notice to the property owner of record and a subsequent violation of the same type occurs on the parcel or particular tract of land owned by the same property owner, no further warning notice need be given to the property owner. This person shall be considered responsible and issued a notice to appear (subpoena) notified via certified and regular mail to appear in the appropriate court of jurisdiction for the violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 11.5, 2-23-06) 
Sec. 11.06. - Failure to act upon warning notice. 
    Upon neglect or failure to act upon the violation notice, the City shall issue a notice to appear and comply with the following procedures: 
(1)	Service of notice to appear. If a violation notice is given and, after the time for removal or abatement has elapsed, the property is re-inspected and the CSD or his designee finds and determines the violation has not been removed or abated, the CSD or his designee shall fill out and sign, as the complainant, a "complaint and information form" or a "notice to appear". The notice to appear shall include the following: 
a.	Name of the occupant, owner, or person in charge of the property. 
b.	The address or legal description of the property on which the violation is occurring. 
c.	This chapter and section the action or condition violates. 
d.	The date on which the case will be on the court docket for hearing. 
e.	Any other information deemed pertinent by the CSD or his designee. 
The original copy of the notice to appear (subpoena) shall be forwarded to the Clerk of Court for inclusion on the court's docket for the date indicated on the notice to appear. 
(2)	Notice to appear. A notice to appear (subpoena) shall be hand delivered by the Clerk of Court or her designee to City residents and via certified and regular mail by the Clerk of Court's office to all non-residents. The notice to appear (subpoena) shall identify the court date the case will appear before the court and the person's last known mailing address as verified with the Galveston County Tax Office. 
(3)	Abatement by City. If the occupant, owner, or person in charge of the property for which a violation notice has been given fails to remove or abate the violation in the time specified in the notice, whether on public or private property, the City may, if conditions exist that affect health, welfare, safety or contribute to environmental degradation, remove the violation and thereby abate the violation. If necessary, the City may lawfully enter upon the property on which the violation remains unabated to remove or abate such violation at the cost of the person responsible for creating or maintaining the violation. The violation will be subject to civil fines reflecting the cost to the City, as prosecuted by the City Attorney. 
(4)	Payment of costs. All costs and expenses incurred by the City in removing or abating any violation on any private property may be assessed against the property as a lien on the property in addition to any other penalties and costs imposed if the person charged either pleads or is found guilty of causing, creating, or maintaining a violation. 
(5)	Violation; first offense. In all cases where the violation is the first offense of the specified chapter violation, a notice of violation shall provide up to fifteen (15) calendar days to abate violations of this ordinance. 
(6)	Violation notice; subsequent offenses. In all cases where the violation on public or private property is a repeat or continued offense on such property, after the expiration of the time period set out in subsection (5) of this section, the warning notice sections of this division need not be observed. Each day a violation continues after the expiration of the warning period to abate such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 11.6, 2-23-06) 
Sec. 11.07. - Penalty. 
    Criminal: Any person, group, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance is unlawful and shall constitute a "misdemeanor". Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance. Violations of this Ordinance are a criminal offense and punishable in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedures, Article 4.14, Jurisdiction of Municipal Court. Fines shall be assessed in accordance with City of Santa Fe, Texas, City Code, Article 1, Section 5, General penalty for violations of code. 
    Civil: The City reserves the right to seek injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation within its jurisdiction as authorized in the Texas Local Government Code, Section 54.012; and or other laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 03-2006, § 11.7, 2-23-06) 
ARTICLE 12. - CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, adopted Apr. 8, 2010, deleted the former Art. 12, §§ 12.01-12-10, and enacted a new Art. 12 as set out herein. The former Art. 12 pertained to Corridor Development Standards and derived from Ord. No. 03-2005, 3-24-05. 

Sec. 12.01. - Objectives. 
    The primary objective of the Planning & Zoning Commission reviewing projects lying within the City of Santa Fe's highway corridors is to establish continuity of each development within the overall corridor system. In addition, design review will promote the following: 
• Protection of architectural & historical heritage of Santa Fe, Texas; 
• Enhancement of the cultural image; 
• Stabilization or strengthening of property values; 
• Attraction of new residents, businesses and tourists; 
• Sense of place & character; 
• Community unity; 
• Climate for attracting investment; 
• Minimalization of sprawl; 
• Protection of open space and natural view sheds. 
Corridor Development review offers protection and guidelines for the unique, special and desired character of the development within and along certain highways in Santa Fe, Texas. The Corridor Development Standards are designed to augment other zoning district requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 12.02. - Core to these bylaws. 
A.	The City of Santa Fe's highway corridors contain valuable historic, environmental, cultural and scenic resources; and, serve as principal thoroughfare routes dissecting the city. 
B.	The city recognizes, poorly designed developments which are incompatible with the character of the city's highway corridors and threatens their economic, historic, cultural and scenic viability. 
C.	If the city's corridors are to continue serving as viable transportation routes and economic nucleuses representative of the many historic and cultural assets of the City of Santa Fe, Texas, comprehensive performance and design standards for development are essential. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 12.03. - The purpose. 
    These standards are designed to protect the City of Santa Fe's desired commercial and community character; and, to promote and establish a progressive high-quality growth and development environment using creative management to guide the following key concepts. 
• Transportation - Access & Parking 
• Landscaping & Community Design 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 12.04. - Applicability. 
    All proposed development within 300 feet of any designated highway corridor or within 300 feet of the right-of-way of the Santa Fe Railroad tracks shall be subject to these standards and review measures described herein. 
    Highway corridors include all applicable lands as described above in the following locations: 
1.	State Hwy 6 
2.	FM 1764 
3.	FM 646 North 
4.	FM 646 South 
No CDS shall act to deny any permitted use in any applicable underlying zoning district within the limits of the overlay district or to establish standards contrary to state law, only to establish specific criteria necessary to ensure quality growth and development along critical transportation routes and at connections essential to the city's economic future. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 12.05. - Review procedures. 
A.	Residential Developments. A zoning permit shall be required for all new minor non-commercial and non-farm construction within the highway corridor system. This permit is required prior to the issuance of a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy. Construction includes the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure. If an existing building is being expanded (horizontally or vertically) or a new use is to occur, a zoning permit shall be required. The Zoning Permit shall be issued by the Building Official for residential developments within the CDS overlay. 
B.	Commercial/Industrial Developments. Proposed commercial or industrial developments located within the applicable highway corridor shall prepare detailed landscaping and site plans for review and approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission. No zoning permit can be issued without prior site plan approval by the Commission. This permit is required prior to the issuance of a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy. Construction includes the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure. If an existing building is being expanded (horizontally or vertically) or a new use is to occur, a zoning permit shall be required. 
1.	Site plans shall be drawn to scale. The following information shall be provided: 
a.	Show building set backs 
b.	Indicate pipeline, railroad and utility easements widths and locations 
c.	Show landscape buffers including locations of existing and proposed trees and shrubs 
d.	Location and square footage of proposed buildings 
e.	Location and screening of accessory structures such as dumpsters, well houses, and storage buildings 
f.	Location of parking spaces including typical widths and lengths 
g.	Locations and widths of driveway entrances, exits and shared access drives 
h.	Elevations of proposed buildings indicating height, roof line, materials to be used and colors to be used, as well as percentage of masonry materials used on each side of structure. 
2.	Submittal Procedure. 
a.	Two (2) copies of the site plan, landscaping plan and elevations shall be submitted to the Building Official for review. 
b.	Plan review comments will be returned within seven (7) working days. All comments must be addressed before the plans will be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission at the next available regular meeting date. 
c.	Five (5) days before the Commission meeting, eight (8) copies of the revised plans and elevations must be provided to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval and issuance of the zoning permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 12.06. - Transportation & parking. 
A.	Transportation. 
1.	Proposed uses shall not degrade the existing levels of service of surrounding roads and intersections. 
2.	Sight distance at any driveway serving at least twenty (20) trips per day shall meet the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards; as well as, those set forth in the Texas Department of Transportation standards. 
3.	The number of curb cuts along any highway corridor shall be minimized. To the maximum extent feasible, access to businesses shall be provided through one (1) of the following means: 
a.	Access through a common driveway serving adjacent lots or premises; 
b.	Access through an existing side or rear street; or 
c.	Access through a cul-de-sac or loop road shared by adjacent lot or premises. 
4.	Existing businesses are encouraged to consolidate existing access points, especially in cases where separate parcels are assembled under one (1) purpose, plan, entity or usage. 
5.	Businesses shall be permitted one (1) access driveway by right. This driveway shall accommodate both ingress and egress paths with "entrance" and "exist" paths clearly identified to clientele. 
6.	Driveways shall be designed to provide entering and exiting motorists with a safe sight distance. 
7.	Shared access is required for all new development, or re-development involving more than 50 percent of the existing structure. Internal circulation among adjoining premises encourages property-to-property pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular movements. 
8.	All driveways shall be separated by no less than one hundred twenty (120) feet in the highway corridor system as measured between the centerline of each access drive at the street line. A variance from this requirement may be issued in cases where pre-existing single lots of record pre-date the adoption of the city's Zoning Ordinance. 
9.	No occupancy permit shall be issued for any proposed development requiring access onto a state highway until a permanent state curb cut permit is issued and all necessary site improvements are in place at the site. 
B.	Parking Standards. 
1.	The city recognizes reliance on rigid parking and loading standards precludes the development of parking lots; and, directs such designs to be sensitive to the city's historic and community character. Yet, the city also recognizes standards for parking and loading lot design are required, provided they can be administered with flexibility given the individual requirements of development proposals and the parcels on which development is proposed within the highway corridor. 
2.	Loading and unloading areas shall be provided of a sufficient size to accommodate the numbers and types of vehicles likely to utilize the premises given the nature of the proposed development. Such areas shall be located and designed to allow vehicles to safely maneuver to and from a public right-of-way and to prevent obstruction or interference with a public right-of-way, parking space or parking isle. 
3.	Loading areas shall be provided to the rear of the lot wherever possible. 
4.	Customer parking areas shall be located to the side or front of the structure. No parking is permitted in the vegetative setback areas. 
5.	To the extent possible, parking areas shall be shared with adjacent businesses and be situated to the front and side of the lot (frontage along highway corridor routes is considered the front yard). 
6.	In cases where shared parking is provided, the Planning & Zoning Commission may grant up to a forty (40) percent reduction in required parking spaces for properties along the railroad side of Hwy. 6 since complementary uses may require less total parking area than each individually due to varying tempo of operations. 
C.	Drainage. Site development drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed to manage and direct storm water runoff to an appropriate discharge point as determined by the State and City regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 12.07. - Landscaping & community design. 
12.07.01 Landscaping. 
A.	Buffer Yards. Buffer-yards shall be required rather than setbacks for all development within the highway corridor system. Where the required setback differs, as in the TR zone, from the buffer-yard requirement for the corridor overlay, the setback may be required by the Planning & Zoning Commission to mitigate development incompatibilities. 
Required buffer-yards shall contain only vegetative landscaping materials except for the following uses: 
• Vehicular access drives and passageways placed approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way; 
• Foot and pedestrian paths; 
• Landscaping sculpture, lighting fixtures, trellises and arbors; 
• Bus shelters; 
• Signage; 
• Utility lines placed approximately parallel to the right-of-way; and, 
• Proposed lagoons and drainage swells located to the rear of a property. 
B.	Buffer Yard Locations. 
1.	Highway corridor buffers shall front a designated highway corridor. This buffer shall be at least six (6) feet in width providing a minimum opacity and desirable vegetative appearance. Frontage roads shall not include any portion of a vegetative buffer and shall be separated from the highway by the vegetative buffer area. 
2.	Perimeter buffers a minimum of six (6) feet in width shall be provided around all side and rear yards. Such buffers shall adequately deflect any lighting occurring from use of said property to avoid the creation of a nuisance condition to any adjoining property. 
3.	Foundation buffers three (3) feet in width and landscaped shall be provided between any structure and the parking or driving area, exclusive of loading and drive-through facility areas, or, where sidewalks and handicap ramps are placed adjacent to the principal building on either side. Foundation buffers are not required in loading areas. 
C.	Buffer Yard Reductions. 
1.	A landscaped vegetative buffer strip six (6) feet in depth where curb and gutter are present shall be provided adjacent to any corridor roadway to visually separate parking and other uses from the roadway. Where the traveled roadway is separated from dedicated parking areas by drainage devices and no curb and gutter are present, a four (4) foot wide landscaped vegetative buffer strip shall be installed adjacent to the highway right-of-way and "in place" curbing to front all parking areas adjacent to the vegetative buffer area shall be installed. 
2.	A landscaped vegetative buffer strip six (6) feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to adjoining uses. Areas providing shared access and parking may reduce this requirement by up to fifty (50) percent. 
D.	Landscaping Requirements. 
1.	The buffer strip shall be planted with a combination of grass, small to medium height hedge shrubs (approximately two (2) to four (4) feet tall of an evergreen variety) and shade trees (planted at least every sixty (60) feet along the road frontage). Shrubs shall be maintained to prevent shrub height from exceeding forty-eight (48) inches in height at any time. 
2.	Trees and shrubs shall be set back at street and driveway entrances, exits or intersections to allow adequate sight distances and ensure vehicular and pedestrian safety while entering or exiting the site. No tree shall be located so as to interfere with any utility line irregardless of its use. Types of trees as determined by developer. 
3.	Existing Trees shall be shown on the proposed site plan presented for site plan design review to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Existing trees may be used to meet tree planting requirements in buffer strips. All building and parking lot design shall provide for the protection of existing onsite mature trees within the proposed landscaping & development plan to the extent practicable without jeopardizing the proposed development's viability or the reasonable preservation of such trees. 
4.	Parking area design shall include landscaping at each ingress and egress location. Vegetative materials in such areas are determined by the developer. 
5.	All landscaped areas shall be regularly maintained; and, shrubs or trees which die shall be replaced during their next growing season. 
E.	Screening. Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and accessory structures; and other unsightly uses shall be completely screened from view from adjoining property lines and roadways using approved plantings, a wall and or opaque fencing of similar building materials used in the primary structure. 
12.07.02. Community Design. 
A.	Building and architectural designs shall be consistent and compatible with the intended character and scale of the adjacent roadway and surrounding neighborhood. While the city encourages variety and diversity, of specific concern are the following issues: mass and size of project, project impact to the site and its setting, harmony of design and the detail within the project. 
B.	Structures shall be so situated as to allow separations between buildings, particularly to encourage open space in the site and reduce the massiveness of a project. The use of bituminous paving shall be minimal. 
C.	The design of all structures to include: habitable structures, walls, fences, signs, light fixtures, accessory and appurtenant structures shall be unobtrusive and of a design, material and color that blend harmoniously with the natural surroundings, and the scale of neighboring architecture, to comply with the intent of this section. Innovative, high quality design and development is strongly encouraged to enhance property values and long-term economic assets along designated corridors. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 12.08. - General Corridor Development Standards. 
A.	All new structures shall comply with the requirements in this section. 
B.	Non-conforming Structures. An existing structure that was lawful before the adoption of this article, but which does not conform to the regulations of this ordinance shall be considered a lawful non-conforming structure. But, repairs, alterations, or additions to a lawful non-conforming structure involving more than fifty (50) percent of the exterior surfaces of an existing structure shall require that the entire structure comply with the requirements in this section. 
C.	Exterior Surfaces. 
1.	Exterior surfaces of all structures, including screening walls, wing walls, columns and supports shall present a stick built appearance detailed with appropriate masonry materials sufficient to balance the overall scale and size of the development. This requirement shall not apply to roofs, awnings, canopies, doors, windows, glass walls and frame assemblies. 
2.	The exterior wall surfaces of all occupied structures visible from the traveled right-of-way shall be constructed of at least two materials that compliment each other, are consistent in style and do not create a disturbing appearance. Alternatively, the exterior surfaces can be 100% stucco, brick or masonry construction materials. 
3.	No long, unarticulated, blank facades are permitted except on building backs that are not visible from either a highway corridor or a residential area. 
D.	Prohibited Exterior Construction Materials. The following construction materials shall be prohibited on the exterior wall surfaces of all structures: 
• Traditional raised rib metal siding 
• Vinyl or aluminum siding 
• Plastic or fiberglass panels 
• Unfired, or under-fired clay, brick 
• Smooth, unfinished or un-textured concrete masonry units 
• Smooth, unfinished, or un-textured concrete 
• Reflective glass 
• Plywood 
E.	Fronts of Buildings. The exterior surfaces on the building front shall be constructed of at least fifty percent (50%) brick or masonry construction materials. Buildings with exterior surfaces constructed of 100% stucco are exempt from the brick or masonry requirement. 
F.	Sides of Buildings. The exterior surfaces on the sides of building that are visible from either a highway corridor or a residential area shall be constructed of at least twenty percent (20%) brick or masonry construction materials. Buildings with exterior surfaces constructed of 100% stucco are exempt from the brick or masonry requirement. 
The remaining exterior surfaces may be constructed of stucco, wood clapboard, wood board and batten, wood shingle siding, or artificial siding material which resembles painted wood clapboard. Wood siding may be painted, stained, or weathered. 
G.	Calculating Exterior Surface Percentages. Exterior surface percentages shall be calculated based on the wall surface area exclusive of windows and doors. 
H.	Chimneys and Fireplaces. Chimneys and fireplaces on external wall surfaces shall be constructed of one hundred (100%) percent masonry construction materials. This requirement shall not apply to chimneys for fireplaces that are not on or part of the external wall. 
I.	Definitions of Construction Materials. 
1.	Masonry construction materials are defined in the International Building Codes Manual, Chapter 21 as a built-up construction or combination of building units or materials of clay, shale, concrete, glass, gypsum, stone or other approved units bonded together with or without mortar or grout or other accepted methods of joining. Acceptable materials include brick, natural stone, and split-face concrete masonry units. 
2.	Stucco is defined as a three step hard coat stucco applied over a masonry or concrete backing. 
3.	Exterior Insulation and Finishing System (EIFS) is a lightweight synthetic wall cladding. EIFS may be used as accent material for window head, sill or cornices around the building. EIFS is not permitted as a primary building material. 
J.	Roofs. Roof overhangs and pitched roofs shall be incorporated into all building designs. Slate shingles, multilayered asphalt shingles, metal (raised seam, galvanized metal, metal tile, etc...) or tiles are encouraged. Flat roofs without a pediment, partial roofs, and long unarticulated roofs are not permitted. 
K.	Colors. Predominant color design shall be compatible and traditional historic colors, earth tones (greens, tans, light browns and terracotta), grays, pale primary and secondary colors, white and cream tones. Accent color design (i.e., black, dark blue, grays and other primary colors) may be used on a limited basis as part of an architectural motif. 
L.	Accessory Buildings. 
1.	The design of accessory buildings and structures, if permitted within an applicable zoning district, shall reflect and coordinate with the general style of architecture inherent in the primary structure for the proposed development. Covered porches, canopies, awnings, trellises, gazebos, street/pedestrian furniture and open wood fences are encouraged. 
2.	Not permitted are unscreened chain-link or metal fencing, exterior storage not completely hidden from view, and the exterior display of merchandise except for landscape structures, plant materials and agricultural products. 
M.	Damage to Exterior Surfaces of a Structure. Any damage to the exterior surfaces of a structure shall be repaired within ninety (90) calendar days from the date of damage occurs. 
N.	Deviations and Exceptions. 
1.	Deviation from the above requirements may be accomplished only through the city's variance process. 
2.	Exceptions. 
a.	Corridor Development Standards shall not apply to a residentially zoned parcel adjacent to an identified highway corridor. 
b.	Corridor Development Standards shall not apply to properties that have received preliminary or final plat approval before the adoption of this article. 
c.	Corridor Development Standards shall not apply to existing dwelling units that are in legal conformance before the adoption date of this article described herein; such dwelling units shall not be considered non-conforming uses due to non-compliance with the standards identified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 03-2010 states: "Penalties, Failure to comply with any portion of this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and the violator shall be liable for a fine of up to $2,000, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
APPENDICES 
Neighborhood Commercial 
Small Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Small Scale (Small Scale Criteria) Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of primary building Maximum: 5000 Square 
feet Gross building area, maximum (all buildings on site) 5,500 Square 
feet Maximum number of stories 1.5 Stories Maximum height 24 Feet  
Small Scale Standards (Small Scale Performance Standards) Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Units Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 50 % PENC 0 Minimum roof pitch (where required) 1::3 PENC 0 Assembly uses (per building code) Not permitted PENC 0 Outside storage of equipment and inventory Limited to business hours when displayed between a line parallel to the street, located at the face of building, and the street right-of-way. PENC 3, 10; 
Note 1 Open space and environmental standards, minimum n.a. Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum 10,000 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, front yard, designated arterials and state highways 30 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others 25 Feet PENC 1 Setback, side yard Minimum set back 15 Feet PENC 0 -With 15 feet setback, maximum building height 12 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 -With 20 feet setback, maximum building height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, side yard, corner lot 15 Feet PENC 0; 
Note 2, 5 Setback, rear yard Minimum 25 Feet PENC 0 Site coverage, above grade building 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general The greater of: 2 trees per building or one tree per 20 required parking spaces, (Note 3.) PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, front yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, side yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, rear yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residentially zoned property and residential uses. 6' opaque screen between any commercial use and any abutting residential district or use. Materials are limited to wood board, masonry, decorative metal, steel wire with decorative slats, concrete or other approved materials; restricted materials: corrugated metal, plywood and stranded wood fiber panels and "found" or scrap materials. Surfaces shall be natural wood, natural masonry, galvanized, factory applied polymers and paints. Finishes and painted surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. PENC 3, 7, 10 Animal control No farm animals or fowl within 150' of street rights-of-way; exception: if farm animals and fowl are kept no less than 100' from adjoining commercial office or mercantile buildings or residences this requirement may be relaxed. Kennels within 200' of any residence or commercial office or mercantile buildings shall be fully enclosed and be designed to restrict sound and odor. All other animals shall be separated from neighboring residences in accordance with the Santa Fe animal control regulations. PENC 3, 10; Note 1 Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, maximum. 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles Limited to business hours when parked between a line parallel to the street, located at the face of building, and the street right-of-way. PENC 3 Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 80 Square 
feet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; no neon; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. (Exception: neon is permitted on buildings and building face mounted signs) PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet shall be mounted to below-grade foundations; signs less than 32 square feet per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a professional engineer. PENC 3  
Small Scale Supplementary Regulations Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire lanes As required by fire marshal Off street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities lighting One foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system N.A. Stormwater off-site disposal Off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and, when required by the Zoning Officer, Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Per Code PENC 3  
Appendix 4-A 
Neighborhood Commercial 
Large Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Large Scale Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of primary building No limits except as limited by building code Square 
feet Gross building area, maximum (all buildings on site) No limits except as limited by building code Square 
feet Maximum number of stories 2 Stories PENC 0 Maximum height 35 Feet PENC 0  
Large Scale Standards Design element Minimum required characteristic Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 50 % PENC 0 Minimum roof pitch (where required) 1::3 PENC 0 Assembly uses Permitted (per Building Code) Outside storage of equipment and inventory Limited to business hours when displayed between a line parallel to the street, located at the face of building, and the street right-of-way. PENC 3, 10; 
Note 1 Open space and environmental standards, minimum N.A. Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum 10,000 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, front yard, designated arterials and state highways 30 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others 25 Feet PENC 1 Minimum set back 15 Feet PENC 0 -With 15 feet setback, maximum building height 12 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 -With 20 feet setback, maximum building height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, side yard -With 30 feet setback, maximum height 35 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, side yard, corner lot 20 Feet PENC 0; 
Note 2, 5 Minimum set back 25 Feet PENC 0 25 feet setback, maximum height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, rear yard 30 feet setback, maximum height 35 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Site coverage, above grade building 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general The greater of: 2 trees per building or one tree per 20 required parking spaces, (Note 3.) PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, front yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, side yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, rear yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residentially zoned property and residential uses. 6' opaque screen between any commercial use and any abutting residential district or use. Materials are limited to wood board, masonry, decorative metal, steel wire with decorative slats, concrete or other approved materials; restricted materials: corrugated metal, plywood and stranded wood fiber panels and "found" or scrap materials. Surfaces shall be natural wood, natural masonry, galvanized, factory applied polymers and paints. Finishes and painted surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. PENC 3, 7, 10 Animal control No farm animals or fowl within 150' of street rights-of-way; exception: if farm animals and fowl are kept no less than 100' from adjoining commercial office or mercantile buildings or residences this requirement may be relaxed. Kennels within 200' of any residence or commercial office or mercantile buildings shall be fully enclosed and be designed to restrict sound and odor. All other animals shall be separated from neighboring residences in accordance with the Santa Fe animal control regulations. PENC 3, 10; 
Note 1 Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, Maximum 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles Limited to business hours when parked between a line parallel to the street, located at the face of building, and the street right-of-way. PENC 3 Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 80 Square 
feet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; no neon; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. (Exception: neon is permitted on buildings and building face mounted signs) PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet shall be mounted to below-grade foundations; signs less than 32 square feet per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a professional engineer. PENC 3  
Large Scale Supplementary Regulations Design element Minimum required characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire lanes As required by fire marshal Off street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 8 Parking facilities lighting One foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system Required by Article 8 PENC 4 Stormwater off-site disposal Off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Provide connections to the water control and improvement district lines or provide fire suppression water and pumping facilities, as approved by the fire marshal PENC 3  
Appendix 4-A "Notes and pre-existing nonconforming (PENC) conditions" 
Note 1: Temporary 72 hour permits may be issued for special event, display and storage, no more frequently than every 90 days. 
Note 2: Any exterior side yard (corner lot) adjacent to a lot fronting the side street shall be increased to match the required setback of that adjacent lot front yard setback For the purpose of this note, adjacent lots include those separated by a public alley. Note: limitations imposed by a pre-existing nonconformity. 
Note 3: Two trees up to 40 spaces; 3 trees 41 to 60 spaces etc. Minimum caliper: two (2) inches, measured at a height of 36" above grade. 
Note 4: Exception: One guard dog is permitted when contained by a 6' high security and containment fence. 
Note 5: The lowest permitted height of a structure resulting from the application of any yard set-back controls maximum height of all structures on the entire site; (i.e.: When any given set back is met, the maximum height of any structure on the site is fixed thereby; furthermore, where various yard set backs result in conflicting maximum heights the least height shall control.) 
Exception 1: Signs are not restricted by this provision. 
Exception 2: When upgrading from small scale to large scale standards: existing structures may be expanded but shall not be increased in height above the small scale provisions. New structures and additions may increase in height when in conformance with large scale provisions. 
Note: All provisions of section 3.06 "nonconformance" apply except as specifically modified below. 
PENC 0: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased (Refer to Paragraph 3.06.03 herein). To proceed with development the pre-existing nonconformity must be removed or corrected. 
PENC 1: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased; Exception: when yard is reduced as a result of street widening the building may be increased in size or value but such increase in size shall occur rearward of the newly created front yard set-back. 
PENC 2: Lots and tracts existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall not be limited by this provision. Lots or tracts included in a subsequent plat or replat shall be in full compliance. 
PENC 3: Entire facility shall be brought into full compliance with this provision, on a schedule as approved by the enforcement authority. 
PENC 4: Provision is mandatory for new and added facilities. 
PENC 5: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 18 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 6: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 36 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 7: Dense landscaping may be substituted for the opaque fence when approved by the zoning officer; failure of the landscaping to adequately screen shall be corrected by an opaque fence if so ordered by the zoning officer. Pre-existing non-conformance shall not be a defense. 
PENC 8: Pre-existing nonconforming parking and access drives shall lose this status and shall thereafter be paved with materials approved in article 6, herein, when any of the following conditions prevail: 
1.	The addition of new mandatory parking, 
2.	When parking is added by owner or tenant on a voluntary basis, 
3.	At the creation of de facto parking. De facto parking shall be demonstrated by the addition of any flexible base material or reclaimed material intended to stabilize the driving surface and improve accessibility to motor vehicles or by damage to vegetation or rutting resulting from repeated access by motor vehicle traffic on a intermittent, but routine, basis for any 90 day period. This provision does not apply to construction sites authorized by a valid development permit. 
PENC 9: The pre-existing nonconformity ceases when the limits imposed by article 8 are exceeded. Refer to section 8.10 "stormwater management" herein. 
PENC 10: Properties with pre-existing nonconforming characteristics under this provision may continue to operate in nonconformity with this provision but may be required to be brought into compliance after complaints, followed by a review of the conditions and a decision by the board of adjustments. This procedure applies only to the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5-2003, 3-27-03) 
Highway Commercial 
Small Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Small Scale (Small Scale Criteria) Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of Primary Building Maximum: 5000 Square 
feet Gross Building Area, Maximum (all buildings on site) 5,500 Square 
feet Maximum number of stories 2 Stories Maximum height 35 Feet  
Small Scale Standards (Small Scale Performance Standards) Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Units Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 0 % Minimum roof pitch (where required) N.A. Assembly uses Permitted (per building code) Outside storage of equipment and inventory No limitations Open space and environmental standards, minimum N.A. Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum 10,000 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, front yard, designated arterials and state highways 30 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others 25 Feet PENC 1 Minimum 15 Feet PENC 0 -With 15' setback, maximum building height 12 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 -With 20 feet setback, maximum height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, Side Yard -with 25 feet setback, maximum height 35 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, side yard, corner lot 15 feet Feet PENC 0 
Note 2, 5 Setback, Rear Yard Minimum set back 25 Feet PENC 0 -With 25 feet setback, maximum building height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 -With 30 feet setback, maximum building height 35 Feet PENC 4 
Note 5 Site coverage, above grade building 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general The greater of: 2 trees per building or one tree per 20 required parking spaces. PENC 4 
Note 3 Landscaping, front yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, side yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, rear yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residentially zoned property and residential uses. 6' opaque screen between any commercial use and any abutting residential district or use. Materials are limited to wood board, masonry, decorative metal, steel wire with decorative slats, concrete or other approved materials; restricted materials: corrugated metal, plywood and stranded wood fiber panels and "found" or scrap materials. Surfaces shall be natural wood, natural masonry, galvanized, factory applied polymers and paints. Finishes and painted surfaces shall be maintained in good condition." Feet PENC 3, 7, 10 Animal control No restrictions. Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, maximum 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles Inoperable, unlicensed or uninspected vehicles must conform to outside storage of equipment and inventory above. PENC 3 Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 100 Square 
feet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet shall be mounted to below-grade foundations; signs less than 32 square feet per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a professional engineer. PENC 3  
Small Scale Supplementary Regulations Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire lanes As required by fire marshal Off street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 8 Parking facilities Lighting One foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system N.A. Stormwater off-site disposal off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and, when required by the Zoning Officer, Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Per Code PENC 3  
Appendix 4-B 
Highway Commercial 
Large Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Large Scale Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of primary building No limits except as limited by building code PENC 0 Gross building area, maximum (all buildings on site) No limits except as limited by building code PENC 0 Maximum number of stories No limits except as limited by building code PENC 0 Maximum height No limits except as limited by building code PENC 0  
Large Scale Standards Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 0 % Minimum roof pitch (where required) N.A. Assembly uses Permitted (per building code) Outside storage of equipment and inventory No limitations Open space and environmental standards, minimum N.A Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum 10,000 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, front yard, designated arterials and state highways 30 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others 25 Feet PENC 1 Minimum 15 Feet PENC 0 -With 15 feet setback, maximum building height 12 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 -With 20 feet setback, maximum building height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, side yard -With 30 feet setback, maximum height 35 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, side yard, corner lot 20 Feet PENC 0; 
Note 2, 5 Minimum set back 25 Feet PENC 0 -With 25 feet setback, maximum building height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, rear yard -With 30 feet setback, maximum building height 35 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Site coverage, above grade building 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general The greater of: 2 trees per building or one tree per 20 required parking spaces. PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, front yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, side yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, rear yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residentially zoned property and residential uses. 6' opaque screen between any commercial use and any abutting residential district or use. Materials are limited to wood board, masonry, decorative metal, steel wire with decorative slats, concrete or other approved materials; restricted materials: corrugated metal, plywood and stranded wood fiber panels and "found" or scrap materials. Surfaces shall be natural wood, natural masonry, galvanized, factory applied polymers and paints. Finishes and painted surfaces shall be maintained in good condition." Feet PENC 3, 7, 10 Animal control No restrictions Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, maximum 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles Inoperable, unlicensed or uninspected vehicles must conform to outside storage of equipment and inventory above. PENC 3 Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 100 Square feet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet shall be mounted to below-grade foundations; signs less than 32 square feet per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a professional engineer. PENC 3  
Large Scale Supplementary Regulations Design element Minimum required characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire Lanes As required by fire marshal Off street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 8 Parking facilities lighting One foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system Required by Article 8 PENC 4 Stormwater off-site disposal off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Provide connections to the water control and improvement district lines or provide fire suppression water and pumping facilities, as approved by the fire marshal PENC 3  
Appendix 4-B "Notes and pre-existing nonconforming (PENC) conditions" 
Note 1: Temporary 72 hour permits may be issued for special event, display and storage, no more frequently than every 90 days. 
Note 2: Any exterior side yard (corner lot) adjacent to a lot fronting the side street shall be increased to match the required setback of that adjacent lot front yard setback For the purpose of this note, adjacent lots include those separated by a public alley. Note: limitations imposed by a pre-existing nonconformity. 
Note 3: Two trees up to 40 spaces; 3 trees 41 to 60 spaces etc. Minimum caliper: two (2) inches, measured at a height of 36" above grade. 
Note 4: Exception -one guard dog is permitted when contained by a 6' high security and containment fence. 
Note 5: The lowest permitted height of a structure resulting from the application of any yard set-back controls maximum height of all structures on the entire site; (i.e.: When any given set back is met, the maximum height of any structure on the site is fixed thereby; furthermore, where various yard set backs result in conflicting maximum heights the least height shall control.) 
Exception 1: Signs are not restricted by this provision. 
Exception 2: When upgrading from small scale to large scale standards: existing structures may be expanded but shall not be increased in height above the small scale provisions. New structures and additions may increase in height when in conformance with large scale provisions. 
Note: All provisions of section 3.06 "nonconformance" apply except as specifically modified below. 
PENC 0: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased (Refer to Paragraph 3.06.03 herein). To proceed with development the pre-existing nonconformity must be removed or corrected. 
PENC 1: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased; Exception: when yard is reduced as a result of street widening the building may be increased in size or value but such increase in size shall occur rearward of the newly created front yard set-back. 
PENC 2: Lots and tracts existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall not be limited by this provision. Lots or tracts included in a subsequent plat or replat shall be in full compliance. 
PENC 3: Entire facility shall be brought into full compliance with this provision, on a schedule as approved by the enforcement authority. 
PENC 4: Provision is mandatory for new and added facilities. 
PENC 5: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 18 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 6: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 36 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 7: Dense landscaping may be substituted for the opaque fence when approved by the zoning officer; failure of the landscaping to adequately screen shall be corrected by an opaque fence if so ordered by the zoning officer. Pre-existing non-conformance shall not be a defense. 
PENC 8: Pre-existing nonconforming parking and access drives shall lose this status and shall thereafter be paved with materials approved in article 6, herein, when any of the following conditions prevail: 
1.	The addition of new mandatory parking, 
2.	When parking is added by owner or tenant on a voluntary basis, 
3.	At the creation of de facto parking. De facto parking shall be demonstrated by the addition of any flexible base material or reclaimed material intended to stabilize the driving surface and improve accessibility to motor vehicles or by damage to vegetation or rutting resulting from repeated access by motor vehicle traffic on a intermittent, but routine, basis for any 90 day period. This provision does not apply to construction sites authorized by a valid development permit. 
PENC 9: The pre-existing nonconformity ceases when the limits imposed by article 8 are exceeded. Refer to section 8.10 "stormwater management" herein. 
PENC 10: Properties with pre-existing nonconforming characteristics under this provision may continue to operate in nonconformity with this provision but may be required to be brought into compliance after complaints, followed by a review of the conditions and a decision by the board of adjustments. This procedure applies only to the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5-2003, 3-27-03) 
Appendix 4-C 
Transportation 
Small Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Small Scale (Small Scale Criteria) Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of primary building Maximum: 5000 Square 
feet Gross building area, maximum (all buildings on site) 5,500 Square 
feet Maximum number of stories 2 Stories Maximum height 35 Feet  
Small Scale Standards (Small Scale Performance Standards) Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Units Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 0 % Minimum roof pitch (where required) N.A. Assembly uses Permitted (per building code) Outside storage of equipment and inventory No limitations Open space and environmental standards, minimum N.A. Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum 10,000 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, front yard, designated arterials and state highways 15 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others N.A. Setback, side yard Minimum 10 Feet PENC 0 Setback, side yard, corner lot 15 Feet PENC 0; 
Note 2, 5 Setback, rear yard 0 Feet PENC 0 Site coverage, above grade building 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general Two (2) trees per building PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, front yard None Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, side yard None Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, rear yard None Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residential zones n.a. Animal control No restrictions Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, maximum 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles No limitations Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 100 Square 
feet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet. shall be mounted to below-grade found-ations; signs less than 32 square feet. per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet. and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a Professional Engineer. PENC 3  
Small Scale Supplementary Regulations Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire lanes As required by Fire Marshal Off-street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 8 Parking facilities lighting One foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system n.a. Stormwater off-site disposal Off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and, when required by the Zoning Officer, Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Per Code PENC 3  
Appendix 4-C 
Transportation 
Large Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Large Scale Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of Primary Building No limits except as limited by Building Code PENC 0 Gross Building Area, Maximum (all buildings on site) No limits except as limited by Building Code PENC 0 Maximum number of stories 2 Stories PENC 0 Maximum height 35 Feet PENC 0  
Large Scale Standards Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 0 % Minimum roof pitch (where required) N.A. Assembly uses Permitted (per building code) Outside storage of equipment and inventory No limitations Open space and environmental standards, minimum N.A. Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum 10,000 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, Front Yard, Designated arterials and state highways 15 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others N.A. Setback, side yard Minimum 10 Feet PENC 0 Setback, side yard, corner lot 15 Feet PENC 0; 
Note 2, 5 Setback, rear yard 0 Feet PENC 0 Site coverage, above grade building 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general Two (2) trees per building PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, front yard None Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, side yard None Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, rear yard None Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residential zones No limitations Animal control No restrictions Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, maximum 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles No limitations Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 100 Square 
feet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet shall be mounted to below-grade foundations; signs less than 32 square ftee per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a professional engineer. PENC 3  
Large Scale Supplementary Regulations Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire lanes As required by fire marshal Off-street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 8 Parking facilities lighting One foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system Required by Article 8 PENC 4 Stormwater off-site disposal Off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Provide connections to the water control and improvement district lines or provide fire suppression water and pumping facilities, as approved by the fire marshal PENC 3  
Appendix 4-C "Notes and pre-existing nonconforming (PENC) conditions" 
Note 1: Temporary 72 hour permits may be issued for special event, display and storage, no more frequently than every 90 days. 
Note 2: Any exterior side yard (corner lot) adjacent to a lot fronting the side street shall be increased to match the required setback of that adjacent lot front yard setback For the purpose of this note, adjacent lots include those separated by a public alley. Note: limitations imposed by a pre-existing nonconformity. 
Note 3: Two trees up to 40 spaces; 3 trees 41 to 60 spaces etc. Minimum caliper: two (2) inches, measured at a height of 36" above grade. 
Note 4: Exception -one guard dog is permitted when contained by a 6' high security and containment fence. 
Note 5: The lowest permitted height of a structure resulting from the application of any yard set-back controls maximum height of all structures on the entire site; (i.e.: When any given set back is met, the maximum height of any structure on the site is fixed thereby; furthermore, where various yard set backs result in conflicting maximum heights the least height shall control.) 
Exception 1: Signs are not restricted by this provision. 
Exception 2: When upgrading from small scale to large scale standards: existing structures may be expanded but shall not be increased in height above the small scale provisions. New structures and additions may increase in height when in conformance with large scale provisions. 
Note: All provisions of section 3.06 "nonconformance" apply except as specifically modified below. 
PENC 0: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased (Refer to Paragraph 3.06.03 herein). To proceed with development the pre-existing nonconformity must be removed or corrected. 
PENC 1: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased; Exception: when yard is reduced as a result of street widening the building may be increased in size or value but such increase in size shall occur rearward of the newly created front yard set-back. 
PENC 2: Lots and tracts existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall not be limited by this provision. Lots or tracts included in a subsequent plat or replat shall be in full compliance. 
PENC 3: Entire facility shall be brought into full compliance with this provision, on a schedule as approved by the enforcement authority. 
PENC 4: Provision is mandatory for new and added facilities. 
PENC 5: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 18 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 6: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 36 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 7: Dense landscaping may be substituted for the opaque fence when approved by the zoning officer; failure of the landscaping to adequately screen shall be corrected by an opaque fence if so ordered by the zoning officer. Pre-existing non-conformance shall not be a defense. 
PENC 8: Pre-existing nonconforming parking and access drives shall lose this status and shall thereafter be paved with materials approved in article 6, herein, when any of the following conditions prevail: 
1.	The addition of new mandatory parking, 
2.	When parking is added by owner or tenant on a voluntary basis, 
3.	At the creation of de facto parking. De facto parking shall be demonstrated by the addition of any flexible base material or reclaimed material intended to stabilize the driving surface and improve accessibility to motor vehicles or by damage to vegetation or rutting resulting from repeated access by motor vehicle traffic on a intermittent, but routine, basis for any 90 day period. This provision does not apply to construction sites authorized by a valid development permit. 
PENC 9: The pre-existing nonconformity ceases when the limits imposed by article 8 are exceeded. Refer to section 8.10 "stormwater management" herein. 
PENC 10: Properties with pre-existing nonconforming characteristics under this provision may continue to operate in nonconformity with this provision but may be required to be brought into compliance after complaints, followed by a review of the conditions and a decision by the board of adjustments. This procedure applies only to the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5-2003, 3-27-03) 
Appendix 4-D 
Light Manufacturing 
Small Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Small Scale (Small Scale Criteria) Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of primary building Maximum: 5000 Square 
feet Gross building area, maximum (all buildings on site) 5,500 Square 
feet Maximum number of stories 2 Stories Maximum height 35 Feet  
Small Scale Standards (Small Scale Performance Standards) Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Units Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 0 % Minimum roof pitch (where required) N.A. Assembly uses Permitted (per building code) Outside storage of equipment and inventory No limitations Open space and environmental standards, minimum N.A. Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum (1 acre) 43,560 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, front yard, designated arterials and state highways Minimum 35 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others Minimum 35 Feet PENC 1 Setback, side yard Minimum 35 feet PENC 0 Setback, side yard, corner lot Minimum 35 Feet PENC 0; Note 2, 5 Minimum set back 25 Feet PENC 0 -With 25 feet setback, maximum building height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, rear yard -With 30 feet setback, maximum building height 35 Feet PENC 4;; 
Note 5 Site coverage, above grade building Maximum 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general The greater of: 2 trees per building or one tree per 20 required parking spaces. PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, Front Yard 15 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, Side Yard 15 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, Rear yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residentially zoned property and residential uses. 6' opaque screen between any commercial use and any abutting residential district or use. Materials are limited to wood board, masonry, decorative metal, steel wire with decorative slats, concrete or other approved materials; restricted materials: corrugated metal, plywood and stranded wood fiber panels and "found" or scrap materials. Surfaces shall be natural wood, natural masonry, galvanized, factory applied polymers and paints. Finishes and painted surfaces shall be maintained in good condition." Feet PENC 3, 7, 10 Animal control No restrictions. Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, Maximum 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles No limitations Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 100 Square 
feet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet shall be mounted to below-grade foundations; signs less than 32 square feet per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a professional engineer. PENC 3  
Small Scale Supplementary Regulations Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire lanes As required by fire marshal Off-street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 8 Parking facilities lighting One-foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system N.A. Stormwater off-site disposal off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and, when required by the Zoning Officer, Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Per Code PENC 3  
Appendix 4-D 
Light Manufacturing 
Large Scale Qualifications and Standards 
Qualifications to Classify Activity as Large Scale Criteria Limit Units Controlling 
Notes Area of primary building No limits except as limited by Building Code PENC 0 Gross building area, maximum (all buildings on site) No limits except as limited by building code PENC 0 Maximum number of stories No limits except as limited by Building Code PENC 0 Maximum height No limits except as limited by Building Code PENC 0  
Large Scale Standards Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Units Controlling 
Notes Foundation Pier with (concrete or masonry) ribbon perimeter wall or concrete slab-on-grade; extend siding downward to top of slab, foundation or footing. PENC 0 Minimum area of pitched roof 0 % Minimum roof pitch (where required) N.A. Assembly uses Permitted (per building code) Outside storage of equipment and inventory No limitations Open space and environmental standards, minimum N.A. Impervious surface area, maximum (see DBRDP Drainage Criteria Manual) 85 % PENC 4 Site area, minimum (1 acre) 43,560 Square 
feet PENC 2 Site width, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Site depth, minimum 100 Feet PENC 2 Setback, front yard, designated arterials and state highways 35 Feet PENC 1 Setback, front yard, all others 35 Feet PENC 1 Setback, side yard Minimum 35 Feet PENC 0 Setback, side yard, corner lot 35 Feet PENC 0; 
Note 2, 5 Minimum set back 25 Feet PENC 0 -With 25 feet setback, maximum building height 24 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Setback, rear yard -With 30 feet setback, maximum building height 35 feet PENC 4; 
Note 5 Site coverage, above grade building 50 % PENC 0 Landscaping, general The greater of: 2 trees per building or one tree per 20 required parking spaces. PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, front yard 15 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, side yard 15 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping, rear yard 5 Feet PENC 4; 
Note 3 Landscaping required adjacent to residentially zoned property and residential uses. 6' opaque screen between any commercial use and any abutting residential district or use. Materials are limited to wood board, masonry, decorative metal, steel wire with decorative slats, concrete or other approved materials; restricted materials: corrugated metal, plywood and stranded wood fiber panels and "found" or scrap materials. Surfaces shall be natural wood, natural masonry, galvanized, factory applied polymers and paints. Finishes and painted surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Feet PENC 3, 7, 10 Animal control No restrictions Accessory structures Including paving and decking shall not be erected on on easements without written permission of utility providers PENC 0 Lighting Security and parking illumination shall be screened to eliminate glare in ajoining residential uses PENC 0 Eave encroachment into setbacks, Maximum 18 Inches PENC 0 Fleet vehicles No limitations Sign, maximum area Maximum faces per sign: 3; 100 Square 
eet 
per face PENC 4 Sign, maximum height Maximum height 25 Feet PENC 4 Signs, multi-tenant facilities, known as "business directory signs 1. No other free standing signs shall be permitted on a multi-tenant property when this optional provision is exercised. (optional area increases) 2. Maximum number of business directory signs on a site: one (1) per street frontage. 3. A business directory sign exceeding the maximum sign area restrictions, stated elsewhere herein, may be added to a multi-tenant property if such sign meets the following criteria:   A. May contain only a single identification element for each tenant and the owner.   B. Maximum sign element size, per face, is ..... 16 
Square 
feet and total maximum area per each tenant or the owner is ..... 32 
Square 
feet   C. Each element shall be of uniform size and shape but may contain a logo in standard colors.   D. All signs erected on multi-tenant commercial properties shall be generally uniform in size and character; but may contain a logo in standard colors. 4. In addition to the business directory signs, tenant signs may be placed on the face of each tenant space. Sign, lighting No spectacular signs; building face mounted signs prohibited above the eave line. PENC 4 Sign, anchorage, all Signs greater than 32 square feet shall be mounted to below-grade foundations; signs less than 32 square feet per face may be anchored with earth anchors. Signs structures greater than 32 square feet and/or 10 feet in height shall be designed by a professional engineer. PENC 3  
Large Scale Supplementary Regulations Design Element Minimum Required Characteristic Controlling 
Notes Fire lanes As required by fire marshal Off-street loading space As required by Article 6 herein PENC 4 Parking facilities As required by Article 6 herein PENC 8 Parking facilities lighting One foot candle average and no point less than 0.1 foot candle at all parking surfaces. PENC 0 Stormwater system Required by Article 8 PENC 4 Stormwater off-site disposal off-site stormwater systems must be repaired or improved from site to an approved outfall ditch; approval is required by the City of Santa Fe and Galveston County Drainage District #1 PENC 0 Fire protection Provide connections to the water control and improvement district lines or provide fire suppression water and pumping facilities, as approved by the fire marshal PENC 3  
Appendix 4-D "Notes and pre-existing nonconforming (PENC) conditions" 
Note 1: Temporary 72 hour permits may be issued for special event, display and storage, no more frequently than every 90 days. 
Note 2: Any exterior side yard (corner lot) adjacent to a lot fronting the side street shall be increased to match the required setback of that adjacent lot front yard setback For the purpose of this note, adjacent lots include those separated by a public alley. Note: limitations imposed by a pre-existing nonconformity. 
Note 3: Two trees up to 40 spaces; 3 trees 41 to 60 spaces etc. Minimum caliper: two (2) inches, measured at a height of 36" above grade. 
Note 4: Exception -one guard dog is permitted when contained by a 6' high security and containment fence. 
Note 5: The lowest permitted height of a structure resulting from the application of any yard set-back controls maximum height of all structures on the entire site; (i.e.: When any given set back is met, the maximum height of any structure on the site is fixed thereby; furthermore, where various yard set backs result in conflicting maximum heights the least height shall control.) 
Exception 1: Signs are not restricted by this provision. 
Exception 2: When upgrading from small scale to large scale standards: existing structures may be expanded but shall not be increased in height above the small scale provisions. New structures and additions may increase in height when in conformance with large scale provisions. 
Note: All provisions of section 3.06 "nonconformance" apply except as specifically modified below. 
PENC 0: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased (Refer to Paragraph 3.06.03 herein). To proceed with development the pre-existing nonconformity must be removed or corrected. 
PENC 1: Pre-existing nonconforming uses, structures or buildings shall not be increased; Exception: when yard is reduced as a result of street widening the building may be increased in size or value but such increase in size shall occur rearward of the newly created front yard set-back. 
PENC 2: Lots and tracts existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall not be limited by this provision. Lots or tracts included in a subsequent plat or replat shall be in full compliance. 
PENC 3: Entire facility shall be brought into full compliance with this provision, on a schedule as approved by the enforcement authority. 
PENC 4: Provision is mandatory for new and added facilities. 
PENC 5: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 18 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 6: Facility must be brought into compliance with provision within 36 months after commencement of improvement or repair or issuance of a building permit for same, whichever occurs earliest. 
PENC 7: Dense landscaping may be substituted for the opaque fence when approved by the zoning officer; failure of the landscaping to adequately screen shall be corrected by an opaque fence if so ordered by the zoning officer. Pre-existing non-conformance shall not be a defense. 
PENC 8: Pre-existing nonconforming parking and access drives shall lose this status and shall thereafter be paved with materials approved in article 6, herein, when any of the following conditions prevail: 
1.	The addition of new mandatory parking, 
2.	When parking is added by owner or tenant on a voluntary basis, 
3.	At the creation of de facto parking. De facto parking shall be demonstrated by the addition of any flexible base material or reclaimed material intended to stabilize the driving surface and improve accessibility to motor vehicles or by damage to vegetation or rutting resulting from repeated access by motor vehicle traffic on a intermittent, but routine, basis for any 90 day period. This provision does not apply to construction sites authorized by a valid development permit. 
PENC 9: The pre-existing nonconformity ceases when the limits imposed by article 8 are exceeded. Refer to section 8.10 "stormwater management" herein. 
PENC 10: Properties with pre-existing nonconforming characteristics under this provision may continue to operate in nonconformity with this provision but may be required to be brought into compliance after complaints, followed by a review of the conditions and a decision by the board of adjustments. This procedure applies only to the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5-2003, 3-27-03) 
Appendix 4-E 
Lot Standards 
District Minimum 
lot size Minimum 
lot width Minimum 
lot depth Maximum 
building size Maximum total 
building area Maximum density Minimum 
front yard Minimum 
rear yard Minimum 
side Yard 1 Maximum 
lot coverage Maximum number 
of stories Maximum 
structural height Maximum 
impervious surface Landscaping Additional 
limitations AR 
Agricultural/ 
Residential 10,000 
square feet 80 feet 100 feet 1 dwelling 
per lot (see exception) 25 feet 15 feet 10 feet 1 40% 
Refer to 4.01.04, Area Regulations 35 feet 2 R-1 
Single-Family 
Residential 7,500 
square feet 60 feet 100 feet 1 dwelling 
per lot (see exception) 25 feet 15 feet 6 feet 1 40% 35 feet R-2 
Medium Density Residential 5000 
square feet per unit equivalent 1,3 Refer to "Type specific restrictions" 4.03.08 Refer to "Type specific restrictions" 4.03.08 Refer to "Type specific restrictions" 4.03.08 25/35 feet 1,3 see 4.03.05 25 feet 1,3 Varies 1,3 40%-66% 
Refer to "Type specific restrictions" 4.03.08 35 feet R-3 
Multi-Family 
Residential 10,000 
square feet 100 feet 100 feet 18 units per acre 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 1 60% 35 feet MH 
Manufactured home 7,500 
square feet 60 feet 125 feet 1 unit per lot 25 feet 15 feet 6 feet 1 50% 35 feet NC 
Neighborhood Commercial 10,000 
square feet 100 feet 100 feet Small: 5000 Large: limited by Code Small: 5500 Large: limited by Code Not applicable Varies; Refer to NC Standards 25 feet Refer to NC standards 50% Small: 1.5 Large: 2 Small: 24 ft. Large: 35 feet 85% See NC Qualifications and Standards See NCQualifications and Standards HC 
Highway 
Commercial 10,000 
square feet 100 feet 100 feet Small: 5000 Large: Limited by Code Small: 5500 Large: Limited by Code Not applicable Varies Refer to HC Standards Varies Refer to HC Standards Varies Refer to HC Standards 50% Small: 2 stories Large: Limited by Code Small: 2 stories Large: Limited by Code 85% See HC Qualifications and Standards See HC Qualifications and Standards TR 
Transportation 10,000 
square feet 100 feet 100 feet Small: 5000 
Large: Limited by Code Small: 5000 
Large: Limited by Code Not applicable 15 feet 5 feet 10 feet 
except corner lot 15 feet 50% 2 stories 35 feet 85% See Tr- 
Qualifications and Standards See Tr- 
Qualifications and Standards LM 
Light 
Manufacturing 1 acre (43560 square feet) 100 feet 100 feet Small: 5000 
Large: limited by Code Small: 5500 
Large: limited by Code Not applicable 35 feet Varies 
Refer to LM Standards 35 feet 50% Small: 2 stories Large: limited by Code Small: 2 stories Large: limited by Code 85% See LM- 
Qualifications and standards See LM- 
Qualifications and standards AU 
Adult uses 10,000 
square feet 80 feet 125 feet Not applicable 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet 1 40% 35 feet PUD 
Planned unit 
development Varies PS 
Public Service Varies  
1. Note exceptions applying to corner lots that require greater side yards. 
2. Note exceptions for certain agricultural structures. 
3. Refer to "Type Specific Restrictions" 4.03.08 
(Ord. No. 08-2013, § 2, 4-25-13) 
APPENDIX 4-F 
ZONING DISTRICT MATRIX [1] 
Zoning Districts 2007 

NAICS 

Code Use/Description Agricultural 
Residential Single-Family 
Residential Medium Density 
Residential Multi-Family 
Residential Manufactured 
Housing Neighborhood 
Commercial Highway 
Commercial Adult Uses Light 
Manufacturing Transportation AR R-1 R-2 R-3 MH NC HC AU LM TR 111000 Agriculture X C C C C 111000 Agriculture, Recreational X X X X X X X X 111000 Farm X 111420 Florist with greenhouses X C X X X 111421 Greenhouse X C X X X 112000 Animal Production X 212000 Mining (except oil & gas) X 213112 Oil field service X X 213112 Oil well drilling company X X 220000 Utilities C C C C C C C 221320 Sewage Treatment Facilities C C C C C C C 230000 Construction 236000 Contractor X X X 237110 Water well drilling and sales X X X 238000 Specialty Trade Contractors X X X 238990 Sign contractors, generally C C X X C X X 310000 Manufacturing X 311119 Feed mill/driers/processors X X X 312130 Winery (production and bottling) X X X 312130 Winery (without vintner) X X X X X 315200 Tailor shop X X X X 321920 Wood products manufacturer C X X 334400 Electronics manufacturer X X 335000 Product assembly plant (manufacturing) X X 336000 Product assembly plant (manufacturing) X X 337000 Cabinet makers millwork shop C X X X 337122 Woodwork shop for artisan crafts C X X X 339116 Dental laboratory X X X X 339950 Sign, manufacturing X X X 420000 Wholesale services X X X 424690 Welding equipment and supplies X X X 440000 Retail Trade 441000 Motor Vehicle and Parts Dealers X X X 442110 Furniture sales X X X 443111 Appliance dealer X X X X 444210 Lawnmowers, retail and repair X X X X 444220 Feed Store C X X X X 444220 Nurseries (with greenhouse) X C X X X 444220 Nurseries (without greenhouse) X X X X X 444220 Plant sales (indoor) X X X X 444220 Plant sales (outdoor) C X X X 445110 Grocery and food store X X X 445120 Convenience store X X X X 445220 Fish and seafood, retail C X X X 445299 Food store, specialty X X X 445300 Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores X X X X 446110 Druggist X X X X 447190 Auto service station (fueling only) X X X X 448130 Clothing store X X X X 451110 Bait and tackle shop X X X 451100 Sporting goods X X X X 452000 General Merchandise Store X X X 453000 Miscellaneous Store Retailers X X X X 453110 Florist without greenhouses X X X X X 453930 Manufactured buildings, sales of X 453930 Manufactured home dealers X 453998 Auction house X X X 453998 Gravestone/tombstone sales X X X 454310 Fuel Dealers X X X 454390 Open air market (all uses within must be allowed per the zone) C X C 484000 Truck Transportation C X 485300 Taxi and Limousine Service X X X 488410 Auto wrecker service (Motor Vehicle Towing) X 492210 Delivery service X X X X 493110 Warehouse C X X 493190 Auto salvage and wrecking yard (Note: Must meet salvage yard ordinance standards. Development plat required.) X 493190 Wrecker yard C C C 511199 Printers and publishers X X X X 512000 Radio/TV studio/production facility X X 512131 Motion picture theater C X X X 517410 Satellite receiving antenna (commercial) X C C X X 519120 Libraries, private C X X X X 522000 Banks and financial services C X X X 522110 Automatic teller machine (Commercial Banking) X X X X 522298 Pawnbroker C X X X 523120 Stock and bond broker X X X X 524210 Insurance agency X X X X 524291 Insurance Adjusters X X X X 531100 Lessors of Real Estate X X 531110 Apartment rental agency X X X X 531120 Office building (multiple tenant) C X X X 531120 Shopping center C X X C 531130 Lessors of mini-warehouses and self-storage units X X X 531190 Manufactured buildings used as: Offices, retail and wholesale sales and storage X 531190 Mobile home parks (development plat required) X 531210 Real estate agents and brokers X X X X 531320 Appraisers X X X X 532112 Auto rental and leasing X X X 532120 Recreational vehicle rental X X X 532120 Truck rental and leasing X X X 532230 Video rental store X X X X 532299 Rental service store (no heavy equipment) C X X X 532420 Rental service (commercial and industrial) 532412 - industrial X X X 532490 Air compressors (commercial) X X X 541000 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services X X X X 541940 Veterinarian and animal clinic C C X X X 561000 Administration and Support Services X X X X 561710 Exterminator and pest control X X X 561720 Janitorial service and supply X X X 561730 Tree Service C X X 561990 State vehicle inspection center X X X 562000 Waste Management X 562991 Septic tank manufacturing and sales X X X 611000 Educational Services 611110 School (parochial) C C C C C X X X 611110 School (private) C X X 611400 Business Schools X X X X 611600 Other Schools and Instruction X X X X 621000 Ambulatory Health Care Services X X X X 621493 Medical emergency clinic C X X X 621910 Ambulance service, private C X X X 622110 Hospital X X 623110 Nursing home C X X 623110 Personal care home for the aged (assisted living) X X X X X X X X 623311 Retirement center/community C X X 623990 Group home X X X X X X X 624000 Social Assistance X X X X 624410 Child care and day nursery center C C C C C X X X 624410 Child care and day nursery family home C C C C C X X 711110 Theater C X X 712110 Museum X X X X 713120 Game room C X X X 713290 Bingo parlor C X X X 713910 Golf course/country club X 713940 Fitness and Recreational Sports X X X X 713950 Bowling alley X X X 713990 Archery Range X X X 713990 Billiard parlor X X X 713990 Dance hall X X X 713990 Stable X 721110 Hotel and motel X X 721211 Recreational vehicle park (development plat required) X X 721310 Bed and breakfast C C C C C C 722110 Full Service Restaurants C X X X 722200 Limited Service Eating Places C X X X 722400 Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages) X X 811000 Repair and Maintenance X X X 811310 Welding shop X X X 811412 Air conditioning parts and service X X X 811420 Upholstery shop X X X 811430 Shoe repair X X X X 811490 Alterations, clothing X X X X 811490 Boat engine repair and service X X X 811490 Boat equipment and supplies X X X 811490 Boat hull repair and construction X 811490 Gunsmith X X X X 811490 Motorcycle repair X X X X 812100 Personal Care Services X X X X 812210 Funeral home, mortuary C X X 812220 Cemetery or mausoleum C C C C C C C C 812310 Laundry, self service, (within multi-family housing and limited to residents) X 812310 Laundry, self service, public X X X X 812320 Dry cleaner (pick up only) X X X X 812320 Dry cleaning and laundry plant X X X 812900 Other Personal Care Services X X X X 812910 Domestic animal grooming (no boarding) X X X X X 812910 Domestic animal training school (no boarding) X X X X X 812910 Kennels, boarding: Indoor C X X X 812910 Kennels, boarding: Outdoor C C C C 812910 Kennels, breeding: Indoor/outdoor C C 812921 Photo finishing, retail X X X X 812930 Commercial parking garage X X X X 812930 Commercial parking lot X X X X 813110 Church or place of worship X X X X X X X X X X 813110 Monastery and convent X 813410 Civic club or fraternal organization C X X 921190 Public use (governmental) X X X X X X X X X X Accessory buildings (all uses within must be allowed per the zone) X X X X X X X X X Accessory Use as a Caretaker Residence C C C C C High-rise, commercial (all uses w/in must conform to the underlying zoning district) C C High-rise, residential (all uses w/in must conform to the underlying zoning district) C Office, general sales X X X X Radio/TV/cellular transmission tower (commercial) C C C C C C C C C Residential, Cluster housing / Zero lot line housing C Residential, Condominium X C Residential, Duplexes C Residential, Manufactured homes X Residential, multifamily, (apartments) (development plat required) X C Residential, multifamily, undivided interest in the land (condominium and similar ownership styles) X C Residential, Private subdivision recreational amenities X X X X X Residential, single family detached X X X X X X X Residential, single family, attached, (townhouses and similar ownership styles) X C Sexually oriented business C  
X = Use-by-right 
C = Conditional Use Permit required 
(Ord. No. 08-2009, § 1, 5-28-09; Ord. No. 07-2010, § 1, 7-22-10; Ord. No. 16-2011, § 1, 11-10-11; Ord. No. 15-2012, § 1, 5-24-12; Ord. No. 02-2014, § 2, 2-27-14) 
Appendix 6 
Parking Area Requirements 
Use Minimum Required Parking Accessory apartments 1 space Accessory buildings (all uses within must be allowed per the zone) Not applicable Accountants 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Adjusters 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Advertising agencies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Agriculture, recreational See "Farm" and "Residential, single family detached". Air compressors 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Air conditioning parts and service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Airline ticket agencies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Alcoholic beverage store 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Alterations, clothing 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Ambulance service 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Antique shops and dealers: Retail, Wholesale 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Apartments See "Residential, multifamily" Apartments, Accessory (See "Residential, Accessory Apartment") Apartment rental agencies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Appliance dealers 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Appraisers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Architects 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Art galleries and dealers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Artist studios 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Arts and crafts supplies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Attorneys 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Auction house 1 space for every 4 seats Auto body painting 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Auto body repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Auto/car wash, automatic, self service and full service 1 space per 300 square feet of office or associated mercantile, plus 2 stacking spaces per wash bay. Auto clean-up and detail service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Auto dealers: New vehicles 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space + vehicle inventory parking. Auto dealers: Used vehicles 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space + vehicle inventory parking. Auto engine repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Auto muffler shop 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Auto parts and supplies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Auto rental and leasing 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Auto seat covers, tops and upholstery 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Auto salvage and wrecking yard (Note: Must meet Salvage Yard Ordinance standards. Development plat required.) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area + inventory storage. Auto service station (fueling only) 2 spaces per bay plus 2 stacking spaces per pump. Auto wheel and brake service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Auto wrecker service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area + inventory storage. Auto undercoating and rust proofing 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Automatic teller machine 2 spaces per walk-up and 2 stacking spaces per drive-up. Bait and tackle shops 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Bakers, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Bakers, wholesale 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Banks or financial services 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area plus 8 stacking spaces per drive-up. Barbeque equipment: Retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Barbers and beauty salons 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Bars 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Bed and breakfast 1 space per bedroom. Bicycle sales and service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Billiard parlor 1 space per 100 sqaure feet of restaurant/bar + 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Bingo parlor 1 space per every 4 seats. Blueprinting and reprographics 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Boat engine repair and service 1 space per 300 square feet of office space + 1 space per 600 square feet of parts/service area + 1space per 1000 square feet of out of water display. Boat equipment and supplies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Boat hull repair and construction 1 space per 300 square feet of office space + 1 space per 600 square feet of parts/service area + 1 space per 1000 square feet of out of water display. Boat sales 1 space per 300 square feet of office space + 1 space per 600 square feet of parts/service area + 1 space per 1000 square feet of out of water display. Book dealers, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Bookkeeping services 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Bowling alleys 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Building material sales 1 space per 300 square feet of gross retail floor area + 1 space per 800 square feet of warehouse space. Cabinet makers and millwork shops 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Cafes 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Candy and confection, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Carpet and rug dealers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Caterers 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Cemetery or mausoleum 1 space per 50 gravesites. Child care andday nursery center 1 space per each 6 children permitted by a valid license as issued by the governing state agency. Child care andday nursery family home 4 spaces Chiropractors 2 spaces per examination room Church or place of worship 1 space per each 4 seats in the primary auditorium. Civic club or fraternal organization 1 space per 100 square feet of restaurant/bar + 1 space per 200 square feet of other floor area. Clothing store 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Cluster housing 2.5 spaces per unit. Coin dealers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Commercial garage Not applicable. Commercial parking lot Not applicable. Computer sales and services 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Condominium See "Residential, multi-family" Contractors 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Convenience stores 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area + 2 stacking spaces per fuel pump. Copy and duplicating services 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Dance halls 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Dance instruction 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Delivery services 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Dental laboratories 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Dentists 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Department stores 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Dinner Theatre 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Discount stores 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Domestic animal grooming 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Domestic animal training schools 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Domestic waste recycling center 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift + 1 space per company vehicle or I space per 800 square feet of gross floor area whichever is greater. Dressmaking 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Drive-ins (prepared food) 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Druggists 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Dry cleaners (pick-up only) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 2 stacking spaces per drive-up. Dry cleaning and laundry plant 1 space per 300 square feet of gross customer floor area plus 1 space for each 600 sq, ft. of process area Electrical equipment and supplies, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Electrical equipment and supplies, whole. 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Electronic, retail: Sales and service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Electronics manufacturer 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift + 1 space per company vehicle or 1 space per 800 square feet of gross floor area whichever is greater. Employment agencies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Engine repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Engineers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Exterminators and pest control 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Fabric shops 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Farm 2 spaces. Feed Store 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area (store) plus 1 space for each 1000 square feet of warehouse. Feed mill/driers/processors 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift + 1 space per company vehicle or I space per 800 square feet of gross floor area whichever is greater plus surge area for 4 tractor-trailer rigs. Fish and seafood, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Florists without greenhouses 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Florists with greenhouses 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Food store, specialty 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Frozen food lockers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Furniture sales 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Funeral home, mortuary 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Game rooms 1 space per 100 square feet of restaurant/bar + 1 space per 200 square feet of other floor area. Gift Shops 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Glass sales, tinting, and replacement 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Golf course/country club 1 space per 100 square feet of restaurant, bar and lobby, 1 space per each 60 square feet of meeting, conference or banquet area, 1 space per 300 square feet of pro-shop and office, 3 spaces per hole. Gravestone/Tombstone sales 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Greenhouse 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Grocery and food stores 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Group home 1 space per every 2 residents. Gunsmiths 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Handicraft shop 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Hardware stores 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Health club 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Heavy machinery sales 1 space per 600 square feet of gross floor area. Highrise, commercial (all uses within must conform to underlying zoning district) as per included uses per parking matrix but no less than 300 square feet per net area. Highrise, residential (all uses within must conform to underlying zoning district) 1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom units, 2 spaces per 2 bedroom units, 2.3 spaces per each 3 bedroom units + spaces in conformance with non-residential uses as listed elsewhere in this parking matrix where applicable. Hospice office 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Hospital 1.5 spaces per bed. Hotels and motels 1 space per room + 1 space per 100 square feet of restaurant/bar + 1 space per 30 square feet of ball/meeting room. Insurance agencies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Interior designer (without showroom) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Janitorial services and supplies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Jewelers, retail and repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Junk and salvage yard 1 space per 300 square feet of office 1 space per 400 square feetof parts storage. Kennels, outdoor 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Keys, lock and locksmiths 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Landscaping, Landscaping materials 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office and showroom floor area, plus 1 space per each 1/4 acre of materials inventory storage yard. Laundry, self service, public 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Laundry, self service, (within multi-family housing and limited to residents) None Lawn mowers, retail and repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. LP gas dealer 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 2 spaces per pump Libraries, private 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Limousine service 1 space per each 2 employees. Lounges 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Lumber sales 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Machine shops and welding 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Mailbox rentals 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Manufactured home 2.5 spaces. Manufactured buildings, sales of 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Manufactured buildings used as: offices, retail and wholesale sales and storage per use as determined elsewhere in this parking matrix Marriage and family counselors 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Massage therapist The greater of 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area or 2 spaces per treatment room. Medical clinics The greater of 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area or 3 spaces per exam. room or operatory. Medical emergency clinics The greater of 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area or 3 spaces per exam. room or operatory. Medical equipment and supplies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Mobile home parks (development plat required) 2.5 spaces per pad or dwelling unit space. Monastery or convent 1 space per every 2 residents. Motion picture theatre 1 space per every 3 seats. Motorcycle sales and repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Museums 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Musical instrument dealers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Needlework and materials 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Newsstands 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Nightclub 1 space per 100 aquare feet of gross area. Notaries Public 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Nurseries (without greenhouses) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Nurseries (with greenhouses) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Nursing homes 1 space per every 5 beds. Office buildings (multiple tenants) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Office furniture and equipment 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Office, general sales 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Office supply stores 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Oil field service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office floor area plus 3 spaces per acre of laydown Oil well drilling company 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office floor area plus 3 spaces per acre of laydown Open air market (all uses within must allowed per the zoning district) 1 space per 300 square feet of net covered area (each booth shall be charged with no less than 100 square feet under cover) + 1 space per 800 square feet of outside display area. Optical goods and opticians 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Optometrists 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Paint stores, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Pawnbrokers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Personal care home for the aged (Assisted Living) 1 space per every 5 beds. Pet shops, indoor only 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Pharmacies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Photo finishing, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Photographic studio 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Physical fitness centers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Physicians Greater of 1 space per 150 square feet of gross floor area or 4 spaces per exam. room or operatory Picture frames and framing 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Plant sales (indoor) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Plant sales (outdoor) 1 space per 1000 squae feet of display area. Plumbing, parts and supplies retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Plumbing, parts and supplies, wholesale 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Plumbing, parts, service and repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Printers and publishers 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Private clubs (as per TABC) 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Private mailing service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Private subdivision recreational amenities the greater of: 2 spaces or 1 space per 1/4 acre Produce, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Product assembly plants (manufacturing) 1 space per 300 square feet of office space + 1 space per each 2 non-office employees on largest shift. Propane/butane dealers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area + 2 spaces per bay plus 2 stacking spaces per pump. Psychologists and psychotherapists 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area + Public use (governmental) N.A. Pumps, industrial sales and service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Quick lube/oil change 1 space per bay plus 2 stacking spaces per bay. Radio communications equipment; retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Radio/TV/cellular transmission tower (commercial) 2 service spaces. Radio/TV/production facilitie 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area + 1 space per 100 square feet of studio Real estate agents and brokers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Recreational vehicle park (development Plat required) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Rec. vehicle sales, rental and repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 spaces per service bay plus 1 space per 600 square feet of warehouse. Rental service stores (no heavy equip,) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Rental service, comm. and industrial 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Residential, Accessory Apartment 1 space Residential, single family, attached, (townhouses and similar ownership styles) 2.5 spaces per unit Residential, Single family detached 2.5 spaces. Residential, multifamily, (apartments) (development Plat required) 1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom units, 2 spaces per 2 bedroom units, 2.3 spaces per each 3 bedroom units. Residential, multifamily, undivided interest in the land (condominium and similar ownership styles). 1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom units, 2 spaces per 2 bedroom units, 2.3 spaces per each 3 bedroom units. Restaurants 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Restaurants (delivery and pick-up) 1 space per employee plus 4 stacking spaces per drive up window. Restaurant equipment and supplies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Retirement center/community 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit. Satellite receiving ant. (commercial) 1 service space. School, parochial K through 10th, 2.5 spaces per classroom; 11th through 12th, 1 space per 80 square feet of classroom; adult 1 space per 20 square feet of classroom and 1 space per 50 square feet of shop and vocational space. School, private (non-parochial) K through 10th, 2.5 spaces per classroom; 11th through 12th, 1 space per 80 square feet of classroom; adult 1 space per 20 square feet of classroom and 1 space per 50 square feet of shop and vocational space. Secretarial and answering services 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Septic tank manufacturing and sales I space per 2 employees Sexually oriented business 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Shoe repair 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Shopping centers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Signs, generally N.A. Signs, manufacturing 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Skating rinks 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. Sporting goods 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Stables 1 space per every 4 stalls. State vehicle inspection center 1 space per 300 square feet of office + 1 space per bay plus 2 stacking spaces per bay. Stationery stores 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Stocks and bonds brokers 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Storage, auto and boat (inside only) 1 space per 600 square feet of gross floor area. Storage, auto and boat (outside) 1 space for each 10 boats. Swimming pool and spa sales and service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Tailor shop 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Taverns 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. Taxicab, office or dispatch 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space for each taxicab parked at site Taxicab, shop or storage yard 1 space per 300 square feet of office floor area plus 1 space for each taxicab parked at site plus 1 space for each service bay Telephone equipment and sales 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Theater 1 space per every 3 seats. Tire dealers and service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Title companies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Tobacco store 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Town house 2 spaces + 0.5 spaces per unit in common area. Travel agencies 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Tree service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Plus I space per 10,000 square feet of property Truck rental and leasing 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office space + the greater of: 4 spaces for each service bay or 1 space per 600 square feet of other gross floor space. Trucking company 1 space per 300 square feet of office space + 1 space per each 2 non-office employees on largest shift. Upholstery shop 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Variety stores 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Veterinarians and animal hospitals (no outside kennels) Small animal: 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area; large animal: 1 space per 800 square feet of gross floor area. Veterinarians and animal hospitals w/ outside kennels Small animal: 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area; large animal: 1 space per 800 square feet of gross floor area. Video rental stores 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Wallpapering and wall covering, retail 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Warehouse 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift + 1 space per company vehicle or I space per 800 sq. f. of gross floor area whichever is greater. Warehouses, office and mini The greater of 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office floor area or 2 spaces for each mini-office suite plus 1space for each 500 sq.ft. of mini-whs. Water well drilling and sales 1 space per 300 square feet of office space + 1 space per 600 square feet of parts/service area + 1space per 1/4 acre of laydown yard. Welding shop 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Welding equipment and supplies 1 space per 300 square feet of office space + 1 space per 600 square feet of parts/service area + 1space per 1000 square feet gross process or warehouse space. Wholesale services 1 space per every 2 employees. Winery (without vintner) 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Winery (production and bottling) 1 space per 300 square feet of display and mercantile floor area. Wood products manufacture 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift + 1 space per company vehicle or I space per 800 sq. f. of gross floor area whichever is greater. Woodwork shops for artisan crafts 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Wrecker yard 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area Zero lot-line homes 2.5 spaces.  
(Ord. No. 17-2006, § 4, 11-9-06) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-2009, § 1, adopted May 28, 2009, deleted in its entirety the former App. 4-F, and enacted a new App. 4-F as set out herein. The former App. 4-F pertained to the zoning district matrix and derived from Ord. No. 10-2003, 4-24-03; Ord. No. 19-2003, 8-28-03; Ord. No. 22-2004, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 05-2005, 5-12-05; Ord. No. 10-2005, 7-14-05; Ord. No. 16-2006, 11-9-06. 

ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the January 23, 2003. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1980 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since May 9, 1996, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 02-2003  1-23-03       Rpld Art. 1, §§ 1.01-1.06 Art. 2, § 2.01 Art. 3, §§ 3.01-3.11 Art. 4, § 4.01-4.15 Art. 5, §§ 5.01-5.08 Art. 6, §§ 6.01-6.04 Art. 7, §§ 7.01-7.08 Art. 8, §§ 8.01-8.11 Art. 9, §§ 9.01-9.08 Art. 10, §§ 10.01-10.11 Art. 11, §§ 11.01-11.07 5-2003  3-27-03 App. 4-A App. 4-B App. 4-C App. 4-D       Added 2.01.31.3 10-2003  4-24-03       Added 2.01.31.1       Added 2.01.74.1 Art. 4, App. 4-F       Added 5.10 11-2003  4-24-03 3.03.05       Added 3.03.12 14-2003  7-10-03 2.01 19-2003  8-28-03 2.01.10       Rpld 2.01.11       Added 2.01.11       Added 5.11 App. 4-F 20-2003  8-28-03 4.04 10-2004  5-27-04 8.10 22-2004 10-14-04 App. 4-F 23-2004 10-14-04 7.04.01 24-2004 12- 9-04 2.01 02-2005  3-10-05 1       Added 2.01.143 2       Added 3.01.015 03-2005  3-24-05       Added 12.01-12.10 05-2005  5-12-05 App. 4-F 10-2005  7-14-05 App. 4-F 03-2006  2-23-06 11.1-11.7 07-2006  4-27-06 4.11 16-2006 11- 9-06 App. 4-F 17-2006 11- 9-06 1 2.01.02 2 4.01.07 3 4.02.06(E) 4 App. 6 04-2007  3- 8-07 4.01.04B 4.02.04B 4.03.08A(2) 4.04.04B 4.05.04C 05-2007  3- 8-08 2.01 06-2007  3- 8-08       Added 2.01 11-2007  5-10-07 4.03.08B9. 12-2007  5-10-07 1 3.08 14-2007  5-24-07 4.01.04A 19-2007  7-26-07 3.08 20-2007  7-26-07 1 4.01.06 2 4.02.06 3 4.03.07 4 4.05.10 5       Dltd 4.03.10 6       Rnbrd 4.03.11, 4.03.12       As 4.03.10, 4.03.11 21-2007  7-26-07 1 5.03.07 2 5.03.09 3 5.03.10 25-2007  9-13-07 1 3.08 29-2007 12-13-07 1 8.10.05 02-2008  1-24-08 1 3.08 12-2008  7-24-08 1 8.10.04 2 8.10.08B 3 8.10.08C 21-2008 10- 9-08 1 3.08 01-2009  1-22-09 1 3.08 07-2009  5-14-09 3.08 08-2009  5-28-09 1       Dltd App. 4-F       Added App. 4-F 17-2009  9-24-09 3.08 18-2009  9-24-09 3.08 19-2009  9-24-09 3.08 24-2009 11-12-09 3.08 03-2010  4- 8-10 1       Dltd 12.01-12.10       Added 12.01-12.08 04-2010  5-27-10 3.08 06-2010  7-22-10 3.08 07-2010  7-22-10 1 App. 4-F  8-2010  8-26-10 1 3.08  9-2010  8-26-10 1 3.08 01-2011  1-13-11 1 3.08 02-2011  1-13-11 3.08 03-2011  2-24-11 3.08 11-2011  8-25-11 1 2.01.102 2 2.01.115 3 2.01.116, 2.01.117 2.01.122 4 7.03-7.08 5       Added 7.09 16-2011 11-10-11 1 App. 4-F 17-2011 12- 8-11 1       Added 5.12 01-2012  1-12-12 3.08 02-2012  1-12-12 3.08 08-2012  2-23-12 1 7.04.03 2 7.04.05 3 7.07.01 4 7.07.03 5 7.08.01 15-2012  5-24-12 1 App. 4-F 16-2012  5-24-12 3.08 18-2012  8-23-12 3.08 22-2012 11- 8-12 3.08 23-2012 12-13-12 3.08 01-2013  1-10-13 3.08 04-2013  3-28-13 3.08 05-2013  3-28-13 1 8.03 08-2013  4-25-13 1 4.01.04 2 App. 4-E 09-2013  6-27-13 3.08 13-2013  7-25-13 3.08 14-2013  7-25-13 3.08 19-2013  9-26-13 3.08 02-2014  2-27-14 1       Added 2.01.03.1 2 App. 4-F 03-2014  2-27-14 3.08 10-2014 10- 9-14 3.08 11-2014 10- 9-14 3.08 12-2014 11-20-14 3.08 13-2014 11-20-14 3.08 13-2015 10- 8-15 3.08 14-2015 12-10-15 1 2.01.96 2 2.01.98 3 6.01.07.A 03-2016  5-12-16 3.08 04-2016  5-12-16 3.08  
