7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/221
City of Seymour
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 20
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 2018-12 adopted 11/15/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.100 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.101 How Code Designated and Cited
The ordinances embraced in this, the preceding, and the following chapters, articles and sections shall
constitute and be designated the “Seymour Revised City Code” or the “Seymour Revised Code of Ordinances”
and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.102 Catchlines of Sections
The catchlines of the numbered and underlined sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.103 Definitions and Rules of Construction
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
City. The words “the city” or “this city” shall mean the City of Seymour, in the County of Baylor and State of
Texas.
City Council. Whenever the words “city council” are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of
Seymour, Texas
City Secretary, Chief of Police, or other city officers. The words “city secretary, chief of police, or other city
officers” or “departments” shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Seymour, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in
computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
County. The words “county,” “the county,” or “this county,” shall mean Baylor County, Texas.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
Highway. The term “highway” shall include any street, alley, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct,
tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/221
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officer or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “sear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words
“affirm” and “affirmed.”
Or, and. “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Preceding, following. The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Roadway. The word “roadway” shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed for or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the
roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. The words “signature” or “subscription” shall include a mark when a person cannot
write.
State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The term “street” shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge,
viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Written or in writing. The words “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.104 Amendments or Additions to Code
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code which amend, repeal or in any way affect
this code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such
repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time that this code and subsequent ordinances number or omitted are readopted
as a new code by the city council.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific
reference to the section number of this code in the following language:
“That section __________ of the Seymour Revised City Code is hereby amended to read as
follows: . . . .” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/221
(c) In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language shall
be used:
“That the Seymour Revised City Code is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
_____, which said section reads as follows: . . .”
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.105 Supplementation of Code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or
other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
articles or sections inserted into the code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.106 General Penalty for Code Violations*
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful
or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) except for violations of ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, public health and sanitation,
including dumping of refuse, which cases shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this code or of
any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.107 Severability of Parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this code are severable and, if any article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/221
phrase of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this code since the same would have been enacted by the city council
without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.108 Enforcement
The ordinances of the city shall be enforced by police officers, code compliance officers, animal control officers,
building officials, building inspectors, health inspectors and the fire marshal of the city, and each shall have the
authority to issue citations for any violations that fall within the scope of their duties and responsibilities.
(Ordinance 2008-03 adopted 1/17/08)
ARTICLE 1.200 FORM OF GOVERNMENT†
(a) The City of Seymour hereby changes to a Type A general-law municipality.
(b) A copy of this article shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing body of the city, and a copy of
the same, signed by the mayor and attested by the secretary under the corporate seal shall be filed in the office
of the County Clerk of the County in which the town is situated.
(c) The official name of the city shall hereafter be known as the City of Seymour, and its governing body shall
hereafter be known as the city council.
(Ordinance 90-7 adopted 7/5/90)
ARTICLE 1.300 PLACE SYSTEM ADOPTED
(a) Commencing with the next election at which members of the city council of the City of Seymour are
elected, and continuing thereafter at all such elections, city council members will be elected under a place
system;
(b) As soon as possible after the passage of this article, the city council shall assign place numbers to each
city council office. Those members of the city council whose terms are to expire in 1994 shall be assigned
Places One, Three and Five. Those members of the city council whose terms are to expire in 1995 shall be
assigned Places Two and Four.
(c) When incumbent city council member's terms expire, any candidate for the office of city council shall file
an application for a specific place on the city council such as “COUNCIL MEMBER, PLACE NO. 1.”
(d) The ballot for an election under the Place System hereafter must show each office of council member as
a separate office designated by Place number.
(e) The city council finds that the date on which this article is passed, as indicated below, is a date prior to the
60th day before the date of the first regular municipal election of city council members under the Place system.
(Ordinance 93-3 adopted 6/10/93)
ARTICLE 1.400 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY DISPOSAL
Sec. 1.401 Sale of Unclaimed Property Authorized
All abandoned, stolen or recovered property of every kind, which shall remain unclaimed with the city for a
period of thirty (30) days, without being claimed or reclaimed by the owner, whether known or not, may be sold
or disposed of as provided for in Section 1.402. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 12, Article 2, Section 12-
21)
Sec. 1.402 Sale Procedure
All unclaimed property as heretofore described in Section 1.401 shall be sold by sealed bids. The city
administrator shall be authorized to set a minimum amount for each item to be sold for expenses incurred for
storage of said items. A list of all items shall be made available to the public and inspection of the items shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/221
permitted. In the event a minimum bid is not received on any item to be sold, the items shall be disposed of in
such manner as the city administrator shall prescribe. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 12, Article 2, Section
12-22)
Sec. 1.403 City Held Harmless
The city and its respective agents, servants and employees, shall be held harmless and indemnified, from and
against any and all claims for damage or injuries to persons or property of whatsoever kind or character,
whether real or asserted, arising out of or incident to the selling of said unclaimed property and other operations
arising under or otherwise incident to the provisions of this article. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 12,
Article 2, Section 12-23)
ARTICLE 1.500 SALE OF SURPLUS PROPERTY
Sec. 1.501 Definition; Control of Property
The city administrator shall be in control of and supervise the use of any personal property owned by the city.
Personal property shall consist of, but not be limited to, automobiles; land machinery; mechanically driven
apparatus; office machinery, furniture or related items; and scrap metallic or wood items. Any personal property
owned by the city which is worn out, scrap or obsolete, which has been declared surplus by the city
administrator shall be disposed of as provided for in Section 1.502. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 12,
Article 3, Section 12-28)
Sec. 1.502 Sale Procedure
Any item of personal property which has been declared obsolete or surplus by the city administrator shall be
disposed of according to the following procedure:
(1) The personal property to be disposed of shall be reviewed by the city administrator to
determine the value of said property. If available, the city administrator shall utilize comparative type
property sales as a basis for determining the sale of said property. After establishing a value for the
personal property and if the property is valued at one thousand dollars ($1,000) or less, then the city
administrator shall negotiate a selling price to any prospective buyer interested in said property. The
city administrator shall obtain the best price possible, disposing of the personal property on a
“whereas” and “as is” basis.
(2) If the personal property to be disposed of is valued at one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
greater, then the sale at any negotiated price shall be approved by the city council in the form of a
resolution.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 12, Article 3, Section 12-29)
ARTICLE 1.600 NOTICE OF CLAIMS AGAINST CITY*
Sec. 1.601 Notice Requirement
The City of Seymour shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such
personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the
event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by
reason of such death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days or within six (6) months for good cause shown from
the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following
facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or
property was at the time when the injury was received.
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/221
(5) The amount for which each claimants will settle.
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date
the claim is presented.
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who,
according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or
any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim
was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of
the damage or any part thereof.
(Ordinance 89-5 adopted 7/20/89, Section 1)
Sec. 1.602 Plaintiff Required to Prove Council's Denial
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the City of Seymour unless the
plaintiff therein shall ever prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city
council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of
the city council refused. (Ordinance 89-5 adopted 7/20/89, Section 2)
Sec. 1.603 Service of Notice
All notices required by this article shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city administrator at the
following location:
City Hall
301 North Washington
Seymour, Texas,
and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above.
(Ordinance 89-5 adopted 7/20/89, Section 3)
Sec. 1.604 Waiver in Certain Instances Allowed
The above written notice requirements shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or
property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual
knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the
authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the city. (Ordinance 89-5 adopted 7/20/89, Section 4)
Sec. 1.605 Notice to be Sworn
The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or
by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not
render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a
factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(Ordinance 89-5 adopted 7/20/89, Section 5)
ARTICLE 1.700 AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 1.701 Permission Required to Conduct Commercial Activities
No person shall use the Seymour Municipal Airport for the purpose of carrying on any commercial activity; for
the carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express, or mail; for the instruction in aviation in any of its branches;
for the conduct of any phase of any aviation activity; for the sale of fuel or refreshments; or for any other
commercial purpose unless by express written permission from the City of Seymour, or its duly authorized
agent. (Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section I)
Sec. 1.702 Aircraft Rules
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/221
(a) Itinerant Operations. The aircraft operator of all scheduled or non-scheduled air carrier aircraft shall
provide the City of Seymour, at the city hall, with his name and the address and telephone number of the local
place he may be reached in the event he leaves his aircraft unattended at the airport for any period of time.
Carriers maintaining offices at the airport are exempt from this requirement.
(b) Local Options. The basing of personal and company owned aircraft at the airport shall be subject to
registration with the city administrator.
(c) Disassembled Aircraft. Except in hangars, no disassembled aircraft shall be permitted at the airport.
(d) Disabled Aircraft. When an aircraft is damaged or otherwise disabled on the landing field or airport, the
pilot, its owner, or the agent of the owner shall promptly have the aircraft removed to a hangar for the necessary
repairs. This provision shall not apply to aircraft which, by virtue of size, cannot be accommodated within airport
service hangars. The City of Seymour, at its city hall office, shall be notified in the event that an aircraft is
disabled and the pilot, its owner, and/or agent of the owner shall leave an address of the registration of the
aircraft.
(e) Other Aircraft/Glider Activity. When use of the airport facility for glider activity is scheduled, glider pilots
shall notify the dispatcher of the City of Seymour in order to confirm their activity to that office. All glider
operations and activities shall be in conformance with guidelines established by the FAA.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section II)
Sec. 1.703 Vehicle Operation
(a) All persons operating vehicles within the airport shall be subject to municipal, state, and federal laws and
these airport regulations for the control of all vehicles.
(b) Pedestrians and aircraft in motion shall at all times have right-of-way over vehicular traffic.
(c) All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft and, clearance permitting, shall pass no nearer than
twenty (20) feet, horizontal distance, from any wing or tail section of a parked aircraft.
(d) Vehicles shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour when operating on ramps and taxiways of the airport.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section III)
Sec. 1.704 Safety
(a) Combustible Refuse and Waste/
(1) No persons will dump or dispose of any refuse, oil waste, or soil waste, fuels, paint solvents, or
acids in any storm sewer, drainage ditch, or natural drains, within or adjacent to the airport property,
nor in any hangar, nor on any ramp area of the airport, provided that such drainage of fuel as
required in the conduct of pre-flight inspections shall be permitted.
(2) Lessee and tenants of hangars, shops, and other maintenance areas shall provide metal
receptacle, with self-closing covers, for storage of oily wastes, rags, and other rubbish.
(3) All such receptacles shall be stored away from sources of heat and the contents shall be
removed from the premises by such lessees and tenants.
(4) No person shall keep any uncovered trash container in any outside area.
(b) Fire Extinguishers. All tenants or lessees shall supply and maintain such adequate and readily accessible
fire extinguishers as are approved by fire underwriters for the particular hazard involved. All fire extinguishers
shall be maintained in first class operable condition and regularly inspected.
(c) Fire Hazards.
(1) No person shall use inflammable, volatile liquids having a flash point of less than one hundred
(100) degrees Fahrenheit in the cleaning of aircraft, aircraft engines, parts, appliances, or for any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/221
other purpose unless such operations are conducted in the open air away from structures and
equipment.
(2) No person shall start any open fires of any type, including flair pots or torches on any part of
the airport except as authorized by the city.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section IV)
Sec. 1.705 Conduct of Public
(a) Sanitation. No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse, or other materials within the airport
boundaries except in receptacles and facilities to be provided for that specific purpose.
(b) Abandonment of Personal Property. No person shall willfully abandon any personal property at the
airport.
(c) Preservation of Property.
(1) No person shall destroy, injure, deface, or disturb in any way buildings, signs, equipment,
marked facilities, or other structure, trees, flowers, lawns, or other property at the airport.
(2) No person shall alter, make additions to, or erect any buildings or signs, or make any
excavations within the airport without the permission of the city.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section V)
Sec. 1.706 Construction Guidelines and Standards for New Aircraft Hangar Installations
(a) Hangar Specifications and Approval.
(1) Any owner of an aircraft requesting space for a hangar shall submit a letter of request to the
mayor. The size of the hangar and the type of construction shall meet the requirements as set forth
in the section on hangar construction.
(2) Upon acceptance of the aircraft owner's request, the mayor shall authorize the city
administrator to designate the space to be utilized by the aircraft owner. The aircraft owner shall
have sixty (60) calendar days in which to construct a completed hangar.
(3) A lease agreement shall be signed by the aircraft owner prior to the start of construction of his
hanger.
(b) Hangar Construction.
(1) For those aircraft owners having one airplane, the front width of the hangar shall be forty-five
(45) feet, with the depth of the hangar not to exceed fifty (50) feet. For those aircraft owners having
two airplanes, the front width of the hangar shall not exceed sixty (60) feet, with the depth of the
hangar not to exceed fifty (50) feet. Any variances shall have to be approved by the mayor and city
administrator.
(2) The hangar shall have a hard surface floor, either of asphalt or concrete.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section VI)
Sec. 1.707 Lease Agreements
A written lease agreement shall be signed by all aircraft and/or glider owners who base their aircraft and/or
gliders at the Seymour Municipal Airport on a permanent basis. The agreement shall state the length of the
lease and the terms of the lease. Terms of the lease shall be modified as needed from one lease year to the
next in order to provide for proper planning of the airport. The mayor is hereby authorized to sign said leases as
requests are submitted by aircraft owners regulating hangar space and aircraft owners requesting space not
requiring a hangar. (Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section VII)
Sec. 1.708 Rates, Rentals, and Charges Prescribed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/221
(a) Rates Applicable. All rental rates shall be set by the city administrator, subject to periodic review by the
city council. The city administrator is authorized to set separate rates applicable to permanently based
commercial operators, non-based commercial operators, non-commercial aircraft and/or glider owners, and
aircraft and/or glider owners not having fixed hangar buildings but utilizing parking space on a permanent basis.
(b) Payment Dates and Late Penalty Charges. Payment of all fees shall be due on March 1st of each year.
For each thirty (30) day period that passes after the initial due date of the payment of fees as established by
this article, and no payment is received, there shall be assessed a five percent (5%) penalty charge on the
unpaid balance.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section VIII)
Sec. 1.709 Enforcement
(a) General. Where the penal laws of the State of Texas and/or the United States of America prescribe any
punishment for the violation of any provision of this article, the state and/or the federal penal provisions shall
apply to the prohibited act or conduct therein.
(b) Aircraft. It is the intention of the city that the provisions of this article pertaining to the operation, storage,
repair, and parking of aircraft herein are to be enforceable as follows:
(1) Where the city administrator or any representative of the city, fixed base, or aviation operator
observes or suspects any act or situation involving aircraft which is or is deemed to violate the
regulations of this article pertaining to aircraft operation, storage, parking, repair and other such use,
the person observing the violation, or suspected violation, shall notify the aircraft owner, pilot,
operator, possessor, user, or bailee of the provisions of this article deemed applicable, and/or of the
suspected violation requesting voluntary compliance with the applicable provisions hereof.
(2) It is provided, however, that after such notice as required hereinabove, any person or persons
willfully violation any provision of this article governing unlawful aircraft under the article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section IX)
Sec. 1.710 Penalty
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 96-3, adopted 3/21/96, Section X)
Sec. 1.711 Unlawful to Trespass Upon Airport Properties
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to enter upon any of the land or other properties of the
Seymour Municipal Airport for any purpose whatsoever without first having obtained permission to do so from
the city secretary, mayor or city councilmen, or any one of such officials for said city; and the term “trespassing”
also includes any person who drives any vehicle upon any lands or airstrips of said airport without having first
obtained permission as above set forth unless said vehicle is being operated over designated and marked
roads or driveways at said airport and that such vehicle is being operated during such times as said airport
roads and driveways are open to such traffic. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 2, Section 2-30)
ARTICLE 1.800 TAXATION*
Sec. 1.801 General Sales Tax Adopted†
There came on to be considered the returns of an election held on the 10th day of February, 1972, upon the
question of the adoption of a local sales and use tax for the benefit of the city in accordance with the provisions
of House Bill No. 207, 60th Legislature, Regular Session, 1967, and it appearing that said election was in all
respects legally held and that said returns were duly and legally made and that there were cast at said election
422 votes, of which number 273 votes were cast “FOR adoption of a one percent (1%) local sales and use tax
within the city,” and 149 votes were cast “AGAINST adoption of a one percent (1%) local sales and use tax
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/221
within the city,” and said question or proposition having been approved. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7,
Article 1, Section 7-1)
Sec. 1.802 Residential Gas and Electricity Sales Tax Retained*
The City of Seymour does hereby elect to continue the imposition of the one percent (1%) city sales tax on gas
and electricity sold for residential use within the city limits. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7, Article 1,
Section 7-2)
Sec. 1.803 Cable Company Payments to City
(a) In order to compensate the city for its superintendency of its franchise and as the cash consideration for
same, the cable company agrees to pay to the city annually during the continuance of this franchise a sum of
money equal to three percent (3%) of its gross subscribers revenues per year from cable television operations
in this community, excluding state, county, independent school district and other special district taxes, if any,
and city taxes on its facilities, equipment, and operations within the corporate limits of the city. The payment
shall be made on March 15 of the year during the term of its franchise. In connection herewith, the remittance of
the cable company is to be accompanied by a statement, certified by a certified public accountant, of its annual
gross receipts and state, county, independent school district and other special district taxes, if any, and city
taxes assessed against said cable company upon its equipment, facilities, and operations within the corporate
limits of the city. Should the city so desire, the cable company agrees that it will permit its records, books and
files to be inspected and verified at any reasonable time by the city or its duly designated agent. The cable
company shall maintain an office in the city and an authorized agent, and shall keep the city secretary or
counterpart of the city notified at all times of the address of the office and the name of said agent.
(b) The grantor is the owner of certain utilities and in the event grantee desires to use any poles belonging to
grantor they shall pay to grantor the sum of one-and-one-half dollars ($1.50) per year rental for each such pole;
all installation to be made by grantee at grantee's cost; all repairs, upkeep and maintenance of any attachments
to grantor's poles shall be at grantee's sole expense and if grantor should remove or change any such poles
with attachments of grantee, grantee shall make such changes so far as their attachments are concerned at
their sole cost. The grantee is to use all of grantor's poles that are available for use.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7, Article 1, Section 7-3)
Sec. 1.804 Taxation of Telecommunication Services*
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city.
(b) For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of
the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the
point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other
communication is billed.
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local
Sales and Use Taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas.
(d) This section shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city and shall
not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances except insofar as the provisions thereof might be
inconsistent or in conflict with this provision, in which event such conflicting provisions, if any, in such other
ordinances are hereby repealed.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7, Article 1, Section 7-4)
Sec. 1.805 Hotel Occupancy Tax†
(a) Definition of terms. The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purpose of this article, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows:
(1) Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging
houses, inns, rooming houses, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/221
furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums
or nursing homes, or private residences or apartments, unless such private residences or
apartments are rented on a nightly basis and not occupied by permanent residents.
(2) Consideration. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facilities
in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the
occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy, and shall not
include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency.
(3) Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, space
or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose.
(4) Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess
any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right
of access, license, contract or agreement.
(5) Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or
controlling any hotel.
(6) City Secretary. The city secretary of the City of Seymour.
(7) Monthly Period. Monthly period shall be the calendar month.
(8) Permanent Resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room
or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the
current calendar year or preceding year.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7, Article 2, Section 7-11)
(b) Levy of Tax; Rate; Use; Exceptions.
(1) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any rooms or space furnished by
any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day. Such
tax is to be equaled to seven percent (7%) of the price paid by the occupant of such room, space or
facility to such hotel or motel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental
agencies. (Ordinance 2001-21 adopted 10/18/01)
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the city council, the funds received from the tax levied under
subsection (1) shall be placed in the general fund of the city.
(3) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(4) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earning of which
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7, Article 2, Section 7-12)
(c) Collection. Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax
imposed in subsection (b) herein for the city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7, Article 2, Section 7-13)
(d) Reports. On the last day of the month following each calendar monthly period, every person required to
collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the city secretary showing the consideration paid for all
room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies and any other
information as the city secretary may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such
occupancies at the time of filing such report. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 7, Article 2, Section 7-14)
(e) Penalties. If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein or shall fail to file a report as required
herein, or shall fail to pay to the city secretary the tax as imposed herein, when said report for payment is due,
or shall file a false report, be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
Section 1.106 of this code. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the
time required shall forfeit 5% of such tax, provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than $1.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/221
Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of 7% per annum, beginning 60 days from the due date.
(Ordinance 2001-21 adopted 10/18/01)
Sec. 1.806 Leased Motor Vehicles
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11.252(f) of the tax code of the State of Texas, it is hereby
provided that all motor vehicles leased for personal use shall not be exempted from ad valorem taxation by the
city. (Ordinance 2001-24 adopted 12/20/01)
ARTICLE 1.900 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.901 Organization
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such
execution shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers
and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well
as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan.
Sec. 1.902 Emergency Management Director – Powers and Duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of
such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed
necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be
disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general
public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with
the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/221
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal,
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and
with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Texas Government code
chapter 418.
Sec. 1.903 Emergency Management Plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management of the state. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and
terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When
approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan
and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency
management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of
a disaster.
Sec. 1.904 Interjurisdictional Program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge in the formation of an emergency management
council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency
management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers
necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may
affect the city.
Sec. 1.905 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith.
Sec. 1.906 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part
or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/221
practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not
be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
Sec. 1.907 Commitment of Funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person
have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city
council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit
public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property.
Sec. 1.908 Offenses; Penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or
the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this article.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 2003-02 adopted 1/16/03)
Secs. 1.909–1.930 Reserved
Division 2. National Incident Management System (NIMS)
Sec. 1.931 Adopted
The city council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. (Ordinance
2005-11 adopted 7/21/05)
ARTICLE 1.1000 PARKS AND RECREATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.1001 Park Shed Rentals
(a) If any person or persons, representing family reunions, or similar groups desire to use the city park
facilities located in the city, and desire to use the sheds or cooking facilities located in the park, may do so, by
reserving their choice of shed at the city office, depending upon the availability of said facilities. The fees for the
use of sheds shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in Appendix A of this code.
(b) Fees for park sheds will be due in full when reserved in person, if reservations are made by telephone or
mail, they will be allowed ten (10) days.
(c) No alcohol beverages are allowed at the city park.
(Ordinance 2008-07, sec. 1, adopted 7/17/08)
Sec. 1.1002 Reservations and Rental Fees
(a) Portwood Art and Civic Center.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/221
(1) Reservations for the Portwood Building are only allowed one calendar year in advance, i.e., on
the first business day in January. Reservations are allowed for any day in the new calendar year,
and the next calendar year. In-person reservations will take precedence over mail-in or telephone
requests received the first business day of the year.
(2) Reservations will be made on a first-come, first-serve basis with one-half of the total fee to be
paid at the time the reservations are made (telephone requests will be allowed ten (10) days).
Remainder of fees shall be paid two (2) weeks prior to reservation date.
(3) Written reservations by mail will also be accepted when accompanied by the required one-half
of the total fee.
(4) The fees set for the Portwood Art and Civic Center shall be as provided for in the fee schedule
found in Appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 2008-07, sec. 2, adopted 7/17/08)
(b) Portwood Pavilion.
(1) It is prohibited to give out keys for the Portwood Pavilion, except as provided herein, the only
persons authorized to have keys are: city administrator, city secretary. Building maintenance person
and key in safe is to be used by authorized city personnel or persons doing maintenance on
building. Anyone making a reproduction of the key is in violation of this section.
(2) Building will be opened and closed at times indicated, when the reservations were made,
unless, the city office is notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance. No exception.
(3) If the person listed cannot be there at the time indicated to open, please make sure someone
is there. The attendant will stay for 15 minutes after scheduled time, if no one arrives at the
scheduled time, the building will be locked up and you will be responsible in finding the attendant to
let you in.
(4) No alcohol beverages are allowed in or at the Portwood Pavilion Building.
(5) Requirements.
(A) Tables and chairs should be returned to its original place. Chairs should be stacked in
increments of 10. Any furniture that is moved during the rental must be put back in its original
place.
(B) Range, countertops, tables, microwave, sink and lavatories should be cleaned, along
with the restrooms.
(C) Floors should be swept and mopped.
(D) Wastebaskets in kitchen and restrooms should be emptied, along with any litter outside.
(E) Portwood Building will be opened no earlier than 6:00 am and closed no later than 12:00
midnight.
(F) Portwood Center should not be left unattended at any time. If you need to close before
the time your reservation indicated, call the telephone number posted by the telephone for the
attendant to come and lock the building. You are responsible for the building and any damage
done until it is locked for the night. Your deposit will be forfeited, if not left in order.
(G) No one is allowed to spend the night in the building.
(H) No pets are allowed in the building.
(I) You are responsible for bringing your own utensils.
(J) The city will not be responsible for anything left in the building overnight.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/221
(K) Any person or persons reserving the use of the park or Portwood facilities shall be
responsible for keeping the area and facilities used by them clean and free of trash and other
debris, and shall be liable for the destroying of any city property.
(L) Horseshoes or similar games are to be played only in designated areas in the northeast
portion of the city park.
(M) The city requests that the council chambers area be off-limits during the use of the
Portwood Pavilion. Please respect these wishes.
(N) If a reservation is cancelled and a request is made, in advance, for a refund, the
reservation will be cancelled and the money refunded only if the city is able to rent the facility
to another party, otherwise the prepaid amount will be forfeited.
(Ordinance 2008-07, sec. 3, adopted 7/17/08)
Sec. 1.1003 Penalty
Anyone found in violation of the provisions of this division may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per day, and each day constitute a separate and distinct violation and punishable as such. (Ordinance 2008-07,
sec. 4, adopted 7/17/08)
Secs. 1.1004–1.1025 Reserved
Division 2. R.V. Park
Sec. 1.1026 Fee to Park
A fee to park a vehicle in the city park R.V. park is provided for in the fee schedule found in Appendix A of this
code.
Sec. 1.1027 Time Limit
Each customer shall be limited to no more than three (3) nights per stay in said city park R.V. park.
(Ordinance 2003-01 adopted 1/16/03)
Secs. 1.1028–1.1040 Reserved
Division 3. Stream Mitigation
Sec. 1.1041 Description; Terms and Conditions
The stream mitigation area:
(1) Is defined as the portion of Seymour Park owned by the city as described in Exhibit A attached
to Ordinance 2006-07 adopted December 14, 2006, and excludes all other portions of the park.
(2) Is subject to terms and conditions of the United States Corps of Engineers (USACE) Section
404 Nationwide Permit #14 as modified by special conditions dated October 6, 2005, and July 5,
2005, for Project #200500261 as well as the approved mitigation plan dated May 10, 2006, and titled
“Conceptual Mitigation Plan” (Exhibit B attached to Ordinance 2006-07 adopted December 14,
2006). Terms and conditions include:
(A) The mitigation area is dedicated in perpetuity as a stream mitigation site associated with
the construction of the U.S. 277 reroute project around the city.
(B) The mitigation area shall not be disturbed, except by those activities that would not
adversely affect the intended extent, condition, and function of the mitigation area or those
activities specifically provided for in the mitigation plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/221
(C) The mitigation area must be maintained according to the long-term management plan as
outlined in the mitigation plan.
(D) No contrary use of the intended restoration of functions and values as determined in the
mitigation plan will be authorized by the city without first contacting the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) Ft. Worth District for approval. Examples of contrary uses include
widening or deepening Seymour Creek for flood management or watershed management
purposes, cutting of woody vegetation within the protected riparian corridor, selling or
conveying interest in Seymour Park to a third party, or any other acts that could jeopardize the
perpetual intended function and value of the components of this mitigation plan.
(E) The perpetual restriction shall not be removed from the mitigation area without written
approval from the USACE Ft. Worth District.
(F) The conveyance of any interest in the property shall be subject to the restrictions
described above.
Sec. 1.1042 Agreement
The city:
(1) Agrees to grant access to the state department of transportation (TxDOT) and its contractors
to accomplish the construction work, monitoring, and remediation if necessary as outlined in the
mitigation plan.
(2) Understands that TxDOT agrees to construct the mitigation features as outlined in the
mitigation plan and that costs associated with the design, and construction are the sole responsibility
of TxDOT.
(3) Understands that representatives of the USACE have the right to inspect work on the
mitigation area at any time during construction and to make final inspection upon completion.
(4) Understands that TxDOT will monitor the mitigation area for a period of five (5) years after
initial construction or the most recent remediation to ensure success criteria are met as outlined in
the mitigation plan.
(Ordinance 2006-07 adopted 12/14/06)
ARTICLE 1.1100 FAIR HOUSING*
Sec. 1.1101 Declaration of Policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures,
the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national
origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(b) It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each
individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, parenthood, age; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations
based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status,
parenthood, or age is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes
an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility
of government to prevent.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 1)
Sec. 1.1102 Definitions
As used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section unless the context requires otherwise:
Age. Means the calendar age of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or over.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/221
Creed. Means any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to
or maintained by a person.
Director. Means the director of the human relations department or authorized assistant.
Discriminatory Housing Practice. Means an act which is unlawful under this article.
Dwelling. Means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. Means a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major Life Activities. Means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Marital Status. Means as individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person.
Parenthood. Means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of
eighteen (18).
Person. Means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint stock companies, trust, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers and fiduciaries.
Physical or Mental Handicap. Means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
major life activities.
Physical or Mental Impairment. Shall include:
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting
one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs;
respiratory including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome,
emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
To Rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
Senior Adult. Means a person fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 2)
Sec. 1.1103 Interpretation and Effect
This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or
substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights act of 1968, as amended or
the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.D. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted
to them to Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
In construing this article, it is the intent of the city council that the court shall be guided by Federal Court
Interpretations of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit
Opportunity Act, where appropriate. (Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 3)
Sec. 1.1104 Discrimination in the Sale or Rental of Housing
Except as exempted, it shall be unlawful:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the
sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable, or deny a dwelling to any person because of race,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/221
color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or
age.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a
dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because or race, color,
creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(3) To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or
advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation
or discrimination based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, parenthood, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical
or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or
age.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 4)
Sec. 1.1105 Discrimination in Housing Financing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other
financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color,
creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of such
person or such persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age or the present or prospective owners, lessees,
tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made
or given. (Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 5)
Sec. 1.1106 Discrimination in Providing Brokerage Service
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of
such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. (Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section
6)
Sec. 1.1107 Unlawful Intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm damage or otherwise penalize any individual,
group or business because such individual, group or business has complied with the provisions of this article or
has exercised in good faith rights under this article, or has enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because such
individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in
any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 7)
Sec. 1.1108 Exemptions and Exclusions
(a) Nothing in this article shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/221
(A) Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at
any one time; and,
(B) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most
recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period; and
(C) Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned
or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express voluntary agreement, title to or any
right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such
single-family houses at any one time; and
(D) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities
or services of any person in the business of selling or renting of dwellings, or of any employee
or agent of any such broker, agent salesman, or person; and
(E) The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of this article; but nothing in this provision shall
prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by
no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting
dwellings if:
(1) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(2) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale
of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two
(2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5)
or more families.
(c) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution
or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association
or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(d) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose,
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members.
(e) Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which
rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, which such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such
housing accommodation.
(f) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and
operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further
restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital
status.
(g) Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings whether located
on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/221
dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided however, in the event that
said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating, or controlling said rental
dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of
the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 8)
Sec. 1.1109 Violations
No person shall violate any provision of this article, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this article.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 9)
Sec. 1.1110 Enforcement
The director of the human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing
this article. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated
city employees. (Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 10)
Sec. 1.1111 Complaints
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as
the “charging party”) may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify
the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall
state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall
prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.
(b) The director shall receipt and accept notification and referral complaints from the U. S. Attorney General
and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act
of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed
pursuant to subsection (2) of this section.
(c) All complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the occurrence of an alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of
the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (Hereinafter referred to as
the “respondent”) who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing
practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written
complaint.
(d) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer
oaths.
(e) If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probably cause to
believe that any person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint
has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in
his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a
person aggrieved.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 11)
Sec. 1.1112 Investigation and Conciliation
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt
and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes
accepted for investigative proposes, the director or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the
charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charge comes within the
provisions of this article. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not
come within the provisions of this article, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of
the reasons why it does not.
(b) If the director determines that there is not probably cause to believe that a particular alleged
discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the director shall take no further action with respect to that
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/221
alleged offense.
(c) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the director
shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by
informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing
practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this article. Nothing
said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the director, the commission, the
investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding without the written consent of all person concerned.
(d) Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory
housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable
conciliation agreement, then the human relations commission of the city must, upon a majority vote, refer the
case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court or to other agencies as appropriate. With such
recommendation of the director and the referral of the human relations commission, the director shall refer his
entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to whether to
proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court.
(Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 12)
Sec. 1.1113 Penalty
If a discrimination housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred to
municipal court, the respondent shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 94-13, adopted 12/15/94, Section 13)
ARTICLE 1.1200 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.1201 Definition of City Records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 1,
adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1202 Additional Definitions
City Secretary. The office that by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city
that creates or receives records.
Essential Record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent Record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given
as permanent.
Records Control Schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records Management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purpose of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records Management Officer. The person designated in Section 1.1205 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/221
Records Management Plan. The plan developed under Section 1.1206 of this article.
Retention Period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 2, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1203 City Records Declared Public Property
All city records as defined in Section 1.1201 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
city official or employee has by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even
though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or
use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 3, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1204 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and
accepted records management practice. (Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 4, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1205 Designation of Records Management Officer
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the
city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as
applicable. (Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 5, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1206 Records Management Plan to be Developed; Approval of Plan; Authority of Plan
(a) The records management officer and the city secretary/city administrator shall develop a records
management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures
designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be
designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and
the city council effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department
head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of
this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as
a basis for refusal to participate in the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the
department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 6, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1207 Duties of Records Management Officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in
its implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems standards, and
procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/221
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records
of the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records inventories in preparation for the development of records
control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of
the city is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13); and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city
personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 7, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1208 Duties and Responsibility of Department Heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out
the requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs,
and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 8, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1209 Designation of Records Liaison Officers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/221
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the
implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer
determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer
should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison
officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be
thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to
all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or
removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department
head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records
liaison officer for his or her department. (Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 9, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1210 Duties and Responsibilities of Records Liaison Officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in
preparation for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 10, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1211 Records Control Schedules to be Developed; Approval; Filing with State
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall
prepare records control schedules on a department by department [basis listing all records created or received
by the department] and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such
other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that is continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved
by the department head and the city secretary/city administrator.
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 11, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1212 Implementation of Records Control Schedules; Destruction of Records Under Schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under Section 1.1207,
shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and
procedures of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record; the subject matter of record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or
the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city secretary/city administrator.
(Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 12, adopted 10/18/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/221
Sec. 1.1213 Destruction of Unscheduled Records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its
destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the
records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved
destruction authorization request. (Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 13, adopted 10/18/07)
Sec. 1.1214 Micrographics
Unless a micrographics program in a department specifically exempted by order of the city council, all
microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer.
The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records,
including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the
microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The
plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for
ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject
to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and
compliance with the commission rules. (Ordinance 2007-09, sec. 14, adopted 10/18/07)
ARTICLE 1.1300 MUNICIPAL COURT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.1301 Collecting Delinquent Fines
(a) In accordance with Article 103.0031 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, there shall be imposed an
additional fee of thirty percent on all debts and accounts receivable, i.e.: fines, fees, restitution, other debts, and
costs that are more than sixty days past due and have been referred to an attorney for collection. (Ordinance
2005-16 adopted 11/17/05)
Secs. 1.1302–1.1330 Reserved
Division 2. Technology Fund†
Sec. 1.1331 Establishment and Use
(a) This article provides for the establishment of a technology fee upon conviction of a misdemeanor offense
in municipal court of offenses committed on or after the effective date of this article and before September 1,
2005, in the amount of four dollars ($4.00) for the municipal court technology fund. In accordance with Article
102.0172, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, the fund may be used only to finance the purchase of
technological enhancements for the municipal court, including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; and
(8) Docket management systems.
(b) A person is convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/221
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) All such fines and fees collected under this article shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and
benefit of the city or as the laws of the state direct and shall be administered by or under the direction of the
governing body of the municipality.
(Ordinance 2000-09 adopted 10/19/00)
ARTICLE 1.1400 WHITESIDE CENTER OF PERFORMING ARTS
Sec. 1.1401 Reservations and Rental Fees
(a) Reservations will be made on a first-come, first-serve basis with one-half of the total fee to be paid at the
time the reservations are made (telephone requests will be allowed seven (7) days). Remainder of fee shall be
paid two (2) weeks prior to reservation date. All reservations are made though the city hall located at 301 North
Washington Street Seymour, Texas 76380 or call 940-889-3148.
(b) Written reservations by mail will also be accepted when accompanied by the required deposit (one-half of
the total fee).
(c) The fees shall be set for the Whiteside Center of Performing Arts as provided for in the fee schedule
found in appendix A of this code.
Sec. 1.1402 General restrictions
(a) It is prohibited to give out keys to the Whiteside Center of Performing Arts except as provided herein, the
only persons authorized to have keys are: mayor, city administrator, city secretary, economic development
director, the city chamber of commerce director, building maintenance person, and audio/visual technician. The
key is to be used by authorized personnel, audio/visual technician, or persons doing maintenance on the
building. Anyone making a reproduction of this key is in violation of this article.
(b) Building will be opened and closed at times indicated on rental contract, at the time reservations were
made, unless the city office is notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance and other arrangements are made. No
exception.
(c) If the person listed cannot be there at the time indicated to open, please make sure that someone is
there. The attendant will stay for 15 minutes after scheduled time. If no one arrives at the scheduled time or
within the 15-minute window, the building will be locked up and you will be responsible for finding the attendant
to let you in.
(d) No alcoholic beverages are allowed in or at the Whiteside Center of Performing Arts.
Sec. 1.1403 Requirements
(a) Any furniture that is moved during the rental must be put back in its original place. Please note that the
piano is not to be moved for any reason.
(b) Lavatories should be cleaned, along with restrooms.
(c) Floors should be swept and a damp mop, using only water, should be used to clean the floors.
(d) Wastebaskets should be emptied and any/all litter outside needs to be collected and disposed of as well.
(e) Refreshments allowed in the auditorium are as follows: Plastic bottles of water or other drinks with screw
cap lids and pre-popped popcorn.
(f) The Whiteside Center of Performing Arts will be opened no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and closed no later than
12:00 a.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/221
(g) At no time during the rental shall the building be left unattended. If you need to close before the time
indicated on your contract, call the telephone number posted for the attendant to have them come and lock the
building. If unable to reach this contact, please call the police department at 940-889-3333. You are responsible
for the building and any damage done until it is locked for the night. Your deposit will be forfeited if not left in
order or left unattended.
(h) No one is allowed to spend the night in the building.
(i) No pets allowed in the building. If an attendee has a service dog, you must indicate on your contract that a
service dog will be on/in the premises.
(j) The city will not be responsible for anything left in the building overnight.
(k) Thermostats are not to be set lower than 67 degrees for cooling or higher than 75 degrees for heating.
(l) No defacing, taping, or use of tacks or nails will be allowed on walls or any other part of the auditorium. No
hangings of any kind will be allowed on the lighting sconces.
(m) Do not leave children unattended during rental time or allow them to go up and down the stairs
repeatedly during the use of the auditorium. Children left unattended could result in injury.
(n) In the event that the reservation is cancelled, deposits and any other prepayments for building
reservations will only be refunded if the facility is rented out by another party replacing the cancelled reservation
and a refund is requested by the original reservation maker. Otherwise the prepaid amount is forfeited.
(o) Any exception will need to be approved before reservation date by the city administrator.
Sec. 1.1404 Fines
Anyone found in violation of the provisions of this article may be fined up to one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars
per day, and each day constitutes a separate and distinct violation and is punishable as such.
Sec. 1.1405 Signed Affidavit
Person(s) reserving the facility must sign the provided contract agreeing to pay actual replacement costs for
any and all damages to the facility and fixtures that are caused by said renters, above and beyond the deposit
fee.
(Ordinance 2016-11 adopted 12/15/16)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Animal. Any live domestic creature, including livestock and fowl, unless indicated otherwise. When used in this
article, the term animal shall include dogs and cats.
(1) Dog is defined as a domesticated carnivore, Canis Familiaris, bred in a great many varieties,
any animal belonging to the same family Canidae.
(2) Cat is defined as a domesticated carnivore, Fells Domestica, bred in a number of varieties.
At-Large. Not restrained or confined by adequate physical means indoors or confined in a securely enclosed
and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner or harborer and not under the control of the owner
or harborer, either by leash, chain, cord or other suitable material attached to a collar or harness.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/221
Official Notice. Written notice personally delivered by the chief of police or his designee or mailed by certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the recipient.
Owner. Any person, partnership, company, or corporation owning, keeping, maintaining, harboring, or having
the care, custody, or control of one or more animals within the city limits shall be deemed the owner thereof.
Public Nuisance. Any animal which:
(1) Molests persons or vehicles passing by;
(2) Attacks other animals;
(3) Trespasses on school grounds;
(4) Is at-large three or more times during a twelve-month period;
(5) Damages private or public property;
(6) Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion;
(7) Is unconfined in-season; or
(8) Is a dangerous animal not confined as required by this article.
Vicious Animal. Any animal meeting the criteria to be declared a “dangerous dog,” as defined in article 2.300
herein (vicious dog and “dangerous dog” are considered synonymous for the purposes of this chapter), or any
animal that, by reason of its behavior, would constitute a physical threat to human beings or other animals. An
animal that has, without intentional provocation, attacked or bitten a human being or attacked another animal,
or has, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approached any person in an apparent attitude of attack, shall be
considered vicious.
Vicious Animal (Wildlife). Any nondomestic creature, including, but not limited to: mammals, amphibian, reptile,
or fowl, which is of a species which is wild by nature and which can normally be found in the wild state and
which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or disposition, or which, because of its size, vicious
nature, or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property. Such creatures shall
include, but not be limited to, snakes, both poisonous and nonpoisonous, and nonhuman primates. Hamsters,
gerbils, ferrets, and domesticated breed of rabbits, guinea pigs, rats, and mice shall be excluded from this
definition.
ARTICLE 2.200 RUNNING AT-LARGE*
(a) Running At-Large Prohibited. The running at-large of any animal within the city is prohibited and no
owner, possessor, or harborer shall allow the same to run at-large (as defined in article 2.100).
(b) Owners shall securely confine female dogs while in season within an enclosure in a manner that will
prevent the attraction of male dogs to the vicinity.
ARTICLE 2.300 DANGEROUS DOGS†
Sec. 2.301 Health and Safety Code
The following provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state, chapter 822, relating to dangerous dogs,
are hereby adopted as follows.
Sec. 2.302 Definitions (§822.041)
Animal Control Authority. A municipal animal control office.
Dangerous Dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other
than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/221
dog from leaving the enclosure on its own;
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those
acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person; or
(3) Any dog that, by reason of its behavior, would constitute a physical threat to human beings or
other animals. A dog that has, without intentional provocation, attacked or bitten a human being or
attacked another animal, or has, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approached any person in an
apparent attitude of attack, shall be considered a vicious/dangerous dog.
Dog. A domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family.
Secure Enclosure. A fenced area or structure that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the local animal control
authority.
Owner. A person who owns or has custody or control of the dog.
Sec. 2.303 Requirements for Owner of Dangerous Dog (§822.042)
(a) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the
person shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the municipal animal control authority;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a
secure enclosure;
(3) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least
$100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury
to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to
the municipal animal control authority; and
(4) Comply with an applicable municipal regulation, requirement, or restriction on dangerous dogs.
(b) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dog to the
animal control authority not later than the 30th day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(c) If, on application of any person, the municipal court finds, after notice and hearing as provided by section
822.0423, that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with subsection (a) or (b), the court shall
order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The
authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and
humane conditions.
(d) The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the municipality related to the seizure, acceptance,
impoundment, or destruction of the dog. The governing body of the municipality may prescribe the amount of
the fees.
(e) The court shall order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not
complied with subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/221
authority. The court shall order the authority to return the dog to the owner if the owner complies with
subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the authority.
(f) The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before
the 15th day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog.
(g) For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in section 822.041(s)(A) or (B);
(2) The owner receives notice that municipal court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog
under section 822.0423; or
(3) The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog under
section 822.0421.
Sec. 2.304 Determination that Dog is Dangerous (§822.0421)
(a) If a person reports an incident described by section 822.041(2), the animal control authority may
investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the municipal judge
determines the dog is a dangerous dog, the court shall notify the owner of that fact.
(b) An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is
a dangerous dog, may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other cases
from the justice, county, or municipal court.
Sec. 2.305 Registration (§822.043)
(a) The city animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of:
(A) Liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section 822.042;
(B) Annual rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and
(C) The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; and
(2) Pays an annual registration fee provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code.
(b) The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The
owner must place the tag on the dog's collar.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later
than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the municipal animal control authority in which
the new address is located. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag
and payment of a fee provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code, the municipal animal
control authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar.
(d) An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered
of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people.
Sec. 2.306 Attack by Dangerous Dog (§822.044)
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an
unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.
(b) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or
death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor.
(c) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog
destroyed by a person listed in section 822.003.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/221
(d) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. An attorney having civil jurisdiction in the municipality where the offense
occurred may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this
subsection shall be retained by the municipality.
Sec. 2.307 Violations (§822.045)
(a) A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails
to comply with section 822.042 or section 822.0422(b) or an applicable municipal regulation relating to
dangerous dogs.
(b) Except as provided by subsection (c), an offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor.
(c) An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the
defendant has previously been convicted under this section.
ARTICLE 2.400 ANIMAL BITE PROCEDURE
Any animal that bites, scratches, or otherwise injures a person shall immediately be quarantined at the owner's
expense by city personnel at a licensed veterinarian office or at the city's animal shelter for a period of not less
than ten (10) days or more than twelve (12) days from the date the injury occurred. Provided, however, that an
animal which is not located, apprehended, or picked up within the ten (10) to twelve (12) day period from the
date of the injury, shall immediately upon apprehension be taken to a licensed veterinarian for the purposes of
testing or checking the animal for rabies or any other communicable diseases. Any animal that bites, scratches,
or otherwise injures a person shall immediately be examined by a licensed veterinarian or other rabies control
specialist for rabies or other communicable disease.
(1) Quarantine shall mean that the animal be secured in such a manner that prohibits the animal
from being exposed to any other person during the ten (10) to (12) day period. The chief of police or
his designee shall determine if the quarantine facility is adequate to prevent exposure of the animal
to any other person.
(2) A licensed veterinarian or rabies control specialist shall inspect any animal that bites,
scratches, or otherwise injures a person as soon as possible after the injury occurs. The licensed
veterinarian or rabies control specialist may also inspect the animal at any time during the
quarantine period. The licensed veterinarian or rabies control specialist shall also inspect the animal
before the animal is released from quarantine and shall authorize the release of the animal from
quarantine.
ARTICLE 2.500 TRAPPING OR DETENTION
The chief of police for the city, or his designee, is authorized to use and/or employ the use of humane cage
traps for the purpose of capturing animals or wildlife at-large. Authorized persons may also use a catch noose
or tranquilizer darts to seize animals when necessary.
ARTICLE 2.600 RECORDS
The animal control officer shall keep records giving the description of all animals and wildlife seized and/or
captured. Records shall reflect the description of the animal, location seized or captured, date of impoundment,
date of reclaim, date of euthanasia or adoption, amount realized for the sale and reclaim, and name of
purchaser. The animal control officer shall also maintain records concerning the daily operation of the animal
shelter and/or rabies quarantine facility.
ARTICLE 2.700 FACILITIES*
The city administrator may select and establish suitable animal shelter or shelters for the impoundment of
animals or wildlife seized or impounded by the city.
ARTICLE 2.800 TEMPORARY PERMIT - RELEASE ORDER
(a) The city magistrate may issue a permit for the care, keeping and protection of an infant or injured wild
animal, native to this area, which has been deemed incapable of surviving in the wild on its own.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/221
(b) The city magistrate shall have the power to order the release of any infant or injured animal kept under
the temporary permit. Said animal shall be released to the Wichita County Humane Society or to the owner for
relocation.
ARTICLE 2.900 NOISE
No person shall keep any animal of any kind that makes an unreasonable disturbance to the peace of the
occupants of adjacent premises or vicinity thereof. Noises include, but are not limited to, howling, barking, and
bawling. The chief of police, or his designee, shall give notice to correct the disturbance and prevent its
reoccurrence. Failure to correct the disturbance and prevent the reoccurrence is a violation of this article and is
subject to the appropriate fine. Each day that the reoccurrence occurs is a separate offense.
ARTICLE 2.1000 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY
(a) Any person violating any prohibition, requirement, duty, or provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) If any person be found guilty of cruelty to any animal or wildlife under municipal, state or federal law, that
person's permit or permits to keep, harbor, or have custody of any animal or wildlife shall be deemed
automatically revoked and no new permit or permits may be issued.
ARTICLE 2.1100 LICENSING FEES
(a) It shall be the duty of any person who is the owner of any dog or cat, whether male or female, within the
corporate limits of the city, to license such animal each year. Each license shall be valid from a period beginning
July 1st and each license shall expire June 30th. Licenses shall be obtained from the city secretary. It shall be
the duty of the city secretary to cause to publish in the primary newspaper of the city the provisions of this
article that inform the citizens of the requirement to license dogs and cats. Publication shall be made on two (2)
different occasions during the month of June of each year.
(b) The cost of the license shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(c) Said license shall consist of a metallic tag with a number stamped thereon, and said license tag will be
stamped with the current calendar year thereon. Said license tag shall be attached to the collar on the neck of
any dog or cat at all times.
ARTICLE 2.1200 IMPOUND AND SHELTER*
Sec. 2.1201 Fees
(a) Impoundment fee shall be provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code and shall be
paid before the animal is released to the owner.
(b) Shelter fee shall be provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code for each full or
partial day an animal is kept in the shelter and shall be paid before the animal is released to the owner.
(c) Animals that are not licensed with the city shall be licensed as required under article 2.1100 of this
chapter before being released from the animal shelter.
(d) Owners/adopters must show proof of current rabies vaccination before an animal will be released. If the
owner/adopter cannot show proof of current rabies vaccination, then the animal shall be vaccinated against
rabies and a fee provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code or applicable fee for the
vaccination shall be paid before the animal is released.
(e) An adoption fee provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code shall be charged for the
adoption of any animal by a private individual. This fee includes the cost of rabies vaccination and city tags if
applicable. If the rabies vaccination, city tag, or both is not required, the adoption fee will still be set as provided
for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(f) Any animal adopted from the city animal shelter shall be spayed or neutered before said animal is
released from the animal shelter. The person or persons adopting the animal shall pay the fee for said spaying
or neutering before the animal is released from the animal shelter. A sterilization agreement may be signed in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/221
lieu of sterilization before the animal is released. Said agreement must be followed through with as set forth in
said agreement.
(g) All fees shall be paid at the City of Seymour City Police Department, 102 West California Street,
Seymour, Texas 76380.
(h) All fees received pertaining to this article and article 2.1100 shall be deposited in the general account fund
of the city.
(i) An adoption fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code per animal will be
charged for an adoption by a city approved private kennel. This fee covers the cost of rabies vaccination and
city tags for the private kennel in adopting/rescuing an animal from euthanization no other cost will be assessed
for such adoptions.
(j) The city and its assigned designee has final determination regarding the availability of an animal for
adoption.
(k) All adoptions be it an individual or a private care facility must sign a liability waiver, have said animal
vaccinated against rabies, and sterilize or sign sterilization agreement prior to any animal being released from
the city dog pound.
Sec. 2.1202 Rules and Regulations
(a) Animals that are impounded by the city who are wearing a tag as described in article 2.1100 of this
chapter shall be kept for a period of ten (10) days, exclusive of the day of impoundment and the day of
disposition, before city officials dispose of the animal.
(b) Animals that are impounded by the city who are not wearing a tag as described in article 2.1100 shall be
kept for a period of five (5) days, exclusive of the day of impoundment and the day of disposition, before city
officials dispose of the animal.
(c) If an animal that has been impounded by the city has any type of tag, license, collar, or such item that
identifies the owner of the animal, then the city will make a reasonable effort to notify the owner that the animal
has been impounded. It will be assumed that a reasonable effort has been made to contact the owner if, on at
least three separate occasions, the city has attempted to contact the owner either in person at the last known
address or has attempted to contact the owner by telephone at the last published telephone number.
(d) Unclaimed animals will be disposed of by euthanasia by a licensed veterinarian or properly trained animal
control officer.
(e) The health officer for the county and the city is authorized and empowered to issue public proclamations
and instructions as he shall deem necessary to the public generally to protect the health and safety of the public
from any rabies infestation within the city and the county, and strict compliance shall be required of any public
proclamations or instructions issued by the county health officer to cope with any cases or suspected cases of
rabies affecting any animals in the city or county.
(f) If shall be the duty of every person to report to the county health officer any and all cases of rabies which
the person comes into contact with or to which their attention has been directed. This report shall be made
immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of such cases of rabies.
(g) Any animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or that has had positive exposure to rabies, shall
immediately be impounded by the animal control officer, secured and quarantined until a licensed veterinarian
directs the animal control officer to release or properly dispose of the animal.
(h) Every dog and cat kept or maintained in the city shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian or
approved anti-rabies clinic with rabies vaccine. Except as otherwise provided by any rule promulgated by the
state board of health, the owner of each dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by the
time the dog or cat is four (4) months of age and at regular intervals thereafter as prescribed by rule of the state
board of health.
(i) No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which any animals are induced or
encouraged to perform for entertainment through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/221
in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. All equipment used on a
performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition.
ARTICLE 2.1300 ANIMAL CARE
(a) Every owner or keeper of any animal shall provide sufficient good food and water, adequate shelter and
protection from weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and shall treat every animal
humanely.
(b) No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse
any animal or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or
between animals and humans.
(c) No person shall abandon an animal.
(d) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately notify the
animal's owner or keeper of such injury or death. If the owner or keeper cannot be located, the operator shall
report the incident to the animal control officer for the city.
(e) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the
same may be eaten or ingested by any domestic animal or by a person. This does not mean to prohibit the
prudent use of herbicides, insecticides, or rodent control materials. No person shall expose an open trap of the
metal jaw type that shall be liable to injure any domestic animal or any person.
ARTICLE 2.1400 LIVESTOCK, FOWL, OTHER ANIMALS*
(a) No person shall keep a wild animal as a pet. For the purposes of this article, wild animal shall be defined
as lions, tigers, cougars, panthers, bears, wolves, wolf-hybrid, cat-hybrid, and other nondomestic animals of an
untamable disposition, not withstanding that their natural wildness may be intermittently dormant, as said
wildness is likely to be awakened at any time, suddenly and unexpectedly. The failure to list any animal in this
subsection will not preclude such animal from being deemed an innately wild animal of untamable disposition.
The keeping of wild animals constitutes a danger to the safety, health, and welfare of the citizens of the city and
the keeping of wild animals within the corporate limits of the city is hereby prohibited.
(b) No person shall be permitted to keep, quarter, keep penned in any pen, pigsty, or any type of enclosure,
or keep under restraint in any way, within the corporate limits of the city, any hog or hogs. Hog or hogs is
defined and intended to include and mean swine and any and all types of animals commonly classified in such
category. Provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for anyone to transport hogs through the city, in the usual
course of business, nor shall it be unlawful for anyone to carry on a meat processing plant after having obtained
a city permit and said plant being operated in compliance with all city ordinances, state and federal statutes and
regulations.
(c) For the purpose of this article, the terms:
Animal or Animals. Unless otherwise specified, shall include all of the following: any horse, mule, jack, jenny,
cow, cattle, sheep, goat, or similar animal, and any chicken, turkey, geese, guinea, duck, pigeons, pheasant, or
similar fowl, and monkey, raccoon, opossum, skunk, chinchilla, and similar animals, regardless of sex.
Owner. Any person, firm, or corporation owning, keeping or harboring, or having control of any animal or
animals.
Permit. The permit as described in subsection (e) below, authorizing the keeping of animal or animals in the city
limits.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any animal or animals within the city limits, unless such owner
has obtained and has in his possession a permit issued and authorized by the city administrator. No person
shall keep any animal or animals in any type of enclosure, pen, stable, parcel of land, etc. within two hundred
feet (200') of any other building belonging to another, that is occupied at any part of the day or night, unless an
affidavit consenting to the placement of the animal is signed by the owner and/or occupant of said building.
Said affidavit(s) must be presented to, and a copy given to, the city administrator when the application for
permit is prepared.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/221
(e) Permit Procedure. Any owner desiring to keep animal or animals within the corporate limits of the city,
shall make application to the city administrator, on such application form provided by the city, containing the
following information:
(1) Name of owner and date of application;
(2) Description of and number of animals to be kept;
(3) Legal description of property and address where animal or animals will be kept.
(f) The city administrator shall approve or reject any animal permit as the city administrator deems to the best
interest, health, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. No permit shall be issued which is injurious to the
health, well-being, and general welfare of the citizens, nor shall any animal permit be issued to any person who
permits obnoxious odors, flies, insects, or unclean conditions to exist on the premises where such animals are
kept. The owner will be notified by certified mail, sent to the address listed on the application, that the permit
has been denied and/or cancelled. Appeals of denial and/or cancellation of a permit must be made to the city
council within ten (10) business days from the date of mailing of the certified letter by contacting the city
administrator and requesting a public hearing before the city council. The decision concerning the appeal shall
rest with the city council and shall be final.
(g) The annual permit fee for the owners of animals as required by this section shall be as provided for in the
fee schedule found in appendix A to this code. Permits will expire on December 31st of each year and are not
transferable from person to person.
(h) At least once every six (6) months the city administrator, or his authorized designee, shall inspect every
area or place for which a permit has been issued for the keeping of animals. Owners will be given a reasonable
amount of time to remedy any violations noted during the first inspection before a second inspection is made. If
the violations noted in the first inspection have not been remedied before the second inspection, the permit will
be immediately suspended.
(i) Any person who violates this section is subject to penalties under article 2.1000 for each offense. Each
and every day shall constitute a separate offense.
(j) Every owner of animals shall cause the litter and droppings to be disposed of in a manner approved by the
city administrator.
(k) Every owner shall provide adequate feed and water for animals. Feed shall be stored and kept in a rat
proof, fly tight building, box, container, or receptacle.
(l) The following are exempted from this section:
(1) Veterinary hospitals, clinics, and related practices of veterinary medicines;
(2) Stock shows, pet fairs, pet shops, humane societies, slaughter houses, auction pens, rodeo
arenas, riding stables, circuses, public zoos, governmental agencies, laboratories, research
facilities, and underdeveloped areas of the city.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) above must receive approval of the city administrator before being
exempt.
(m) There is hereby established a fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code for
the collection and disposal of dead animals removed from and by the city.
ARTICLE 2.1500 TETHERED ANIMALS AND KENNELS
(a) It shall be unlawful to stake a cat outside on a leash, rope, chain or any other similar tethering apparatus.
(b) It shall be unlawful to stake a dog outside on a leash, rope, chain or any other similar tethering apparatus
unless:
(1) A person is holding the tethering device; or the dog's owner or handler remains outside, within
50 feet of the dog, throughout the entire period of restraint.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/221
(2) Any dog that is maintained outside unattended will be confined within fencing appropriate for
the size and/or breed of the animal and will be provided adequate shelter at all times. Food and
water will be placed in bowls, containers, buckets, etc., that are constructed, made or adapted in a
manner that prevents said bowls, containers, buckets, etc., from being turned over, spilled, dumped,
urinated in, or otherwise disrupted. Water will be sufficiently provided to the animal during the entire
period the animal is maintained outside within the required fenced-in area. Shelters shall be
constructed, made, adapted, placed, etc. in a manner that enables the animal to seek shelter at all
times and will be constructed of adequate materials to provide sufficient protection from the
elements at all times. Any conditions concerning animal welfare within the city limits are subject to
periodic evaluations by the city administrator or designated representative(s) at which time any
corrective actions deemed necessary to maintain acceptable animal welfare standards will be
addressed and enforced.
(c) A “kennel” shall mean an establishment where animals, as defined in article 2.100, are bred, raised,
trained, kept, boarded, or in any way maintained. Any owner, who keeps, harbors, boards, raises, breeds, or in
any way maintains more than three (3) animals, as defined in this article, of the same or like species, and who
is not operating a for-profit business is hereby determined to have a “nonbusiness kennel.” Any owner who is
determined to have a kennel, as defined herein, and who operates such kennel as a for-profit business,
whether or not there are animals at the kennel and regardless of the number of animals that can be kept at the
kennel at any time, shall be determined to have a “business kennel.”
(d) Any owner who is determined to have a kennel, as defined in subsection (b) above, shall make
application to the city administrator, on such application form provided by the city, containing the information as
required in article 2.1400(e). The city administrator shall approve or deny any kennel permit as described in
article 2.1400(f).
(e) Kennels shall also be governed by the procedures set out under article 2.1400(h).
(f) Permit fee(s) for a kennel shall be established as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of
this code and shall be valid for one (1) calendar year, effective on July 1st and expiring on June 30th of each
year.
(g) No owner of a kennel, as defined in subsection (b) above, shall have more than six (6) animals, as
defined in article 2.100, of the same or like species unless prior approval is obtained from the city administrator.
Puppies and kittens under the age of four (4) months are exempt from this subsection.
(h) Exemptions apply to all city approved private care facilities as set forth in article 2.1700.
ARTICLE 2.1600 BEEKEEPING
Sec. 2.1601 Findings
The city council finds that honeybees are of benefit to mankind by providing agriculture, fruit, and garden
pollination services and by furnishing honey, wax, and other useful products; domestic strains of honeybees
have been selectively bred for desirable traits, including gentleness, honey production, and tendency not to
swarm; and gentle strains of honeybees can usually be maintained within populated areas in reasonable
densities without causing a nuisance if the bees are properly located and carefully managed.
Sec. 2.1602 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this section unless
the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning.
Apiary. A place where one (1) or more bee colonies are kept.
Bee. Any stage of the common domestic honeybee, apis mellifera species.
Colony. A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen, and brood.
Hive. A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.
Tract. A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/221
Undeveloped Property. Any idle land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with
residential, commercial, industrial, church, park, school, or governmental facilities, or other structures or
improvements intended for human use occupancy and the grounds maintained in association therewith. The
term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property, used for
commercial agricultural purposes.
Sec. 2.1603 Certain Conduct Declared Unlawful
(a) The purpose of this article is to establish certain requirements of sound beekeeping practices, which are
intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas,
especially protection of persons from personal injury.
(b) Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
beekeeper to keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy
condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others, or interfere with the
normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others.
Sec. 2.1604 Hives
All bee colonies shall be kept in Lang troth-type hives with removable frames, which shall be kept in sound and
usable condition.
Sec. 2.1605 Fencing of Fly-ways
In each instance in which any colony is situated within twenty-five feet (25') of a public or private property line of
the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line,
the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet (6') in height consisting of a solid
wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends ten feet
(10') beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet (6')
above ground level over the property lines in vicinity of the apiary. It is a defense to prosecution under this
section that the property adjoining the apiary tract in the vicinity of the apiary is undeveloped property for a
distance of at least twenty-five feet (25') from the property line of the apiary tract.
Sec. 2.1606 Water
Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the bees so that the
bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcock, pet watering bowls, bird baths, or other water sources
where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact.
Sec. 2.1607 General Maintenance
Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials that might attract bees to the location are left
upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be
disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
Sec. 2.1608 Queens
All hives shall be re-queened annually when a quarantine or regulated area declared by the Texas Apiary
Inspection Service is in effect. In addition, in any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive
characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation, or exhibits an unusual disposition
towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly re-queen the colony. Queens shall be
selected from stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics. Queens must be obtained from a
nonquarantined area.
Sec. 2.1609 Colony Densities
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number of colonies on any tract within the city, based
upon the size of configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated:
(1) One-quarter (1/4) acre or less tract size: Two (2) colonies;
(2) More than one-quarter (1/4) acre, but less than one-half (1/2) acre tract size: Four (4) colonies;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/221
(3) More than one-half (1/2) acre, but less than one (1) acre tract size: Six (6) colonies;
(4) One (1) acre or larger tract size: Eight (8) colonies;
(5) Regardless of tract size, where all hives are situated at least two hundred (200) feet in any
direction from all property lines of the tract on which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to
the number of colonies;
(6) Regardless of tract size, so long as all property, other than the tract upon which the hives are
situated, that is within a radius of at least two hundred feet (200') from any hive remains
undeveloped property, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies.
(b) For each two (2) colonies authorized under colony densities (subsection (a)), there may be maintained
upon the same tract one (1) nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one (1) standard nine and fiveeighths
inch (9-5/8") depth ten-frame hive body with no supers attached as required from time to time for
management of swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony
within thirty (30) days.
Sec. 2.1610 Marking Hives; Presumption of Beekeeping
(a) In apiaries the name and telephone number of the beekeeper shall be branded, painted, or otherwise
clearly marked upon the structure of at least two (2) hives and placed at opposite ends of the apiary. Instead of
marking the hives, the beekeeper may conspicuously post a sign setting forth the name and telephone number
of the beekeeper. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that a colony is kept upon the same tract
upon which the owner resides.
(b) Unless marked in accordance with subsection (a) above, it shall be presumed for purposes of this article
that the beekeeper is the person or persons who own or otherwise have the present right of possession and
control of the tract upon which a hive or hives are situated. The presumption may be rebutted by a written
agreement authorizing another person to maintain the colony or colonies upon the tract setting forth the name,
address, and telephone number of the other person who is acting as the beekeeper.
Sec. 2.1611 Inspection
(a) The animal control officer shall have the right to inspect any apiary. Presence of an apiary constitutes
consent for the animal control officer to enter the premises. Where practicable, prior notice shall be given to the
beekeeper if he resides at the apiary or if his name is marked on the hives.
(b) The authority provided for in this article is only for the general protection of the public health and safety.
Neither the city nor any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this article shall owe any duty to
any person in carrying out any provision of this article, nor shall any of them be liable to any person for any act
or omission in carrying out any provision of this article. Nothing herein shall waive any immunity from liability of
the city or any of its officers or employees, or imply any duty or liability in any area of city operations.
Sec. 2.1612 Compliance
(a) Upon receipt of information that any colony situated within the city is not being kept in compliance with
this article, the animal control officer shall cause an investigation to be conducted. If he/she finds that grounds
exist to believe that one (1) or more violations have occurred, he/she shall cause a written notice of hearing to
be issued to the beekeeper.
(b) The notice of hearing shall set forth:
(1) The date, time, and place at which the hearing will be conducted;
(2) The violation(s) alleged;
(3) That the beekeeper may appear in person or through counsel and present evidence; and
(4) That the bees may be ordered destroyed or removed from the city if, after the hearing, the
animal control officer finds that they have been kept in violation of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/221
Notices shall be given by certified United States mail or personal delivery. However, if the animal control officer
is unable to locate the beekeeper, then the notice may be given by publication one (1) time in a newspaper of
general circulation, at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
(c) The hearing shall be conducted by the municipal court judge. The burden shall be on the city to
demonstrate by a preponderance of credible evidence that the colony or colonies have in fact been kept in
violation of this article. If the municipal court judge finds that the colony or colonies have been kept in violation
of this article then he/she may order that the bees be destroyed or removed from the city, within a period not to
exceed twenty (20) days, and that bees shall not thereafter be kept upon the tract for a period of two (2) years.
In instances where the municipal court judge finds that the violations were not intentional and that the
beekeeper has employed corrective actions that will probably be effective to cure the violations alleged, then
he/she may issue a warning in lieu of ordering the bees destroyed or removed. Upon failure of the beekeeper to
comply with the order, the municipal court judge may cause the bees to be destroyed and the hive structures to
be removed. In each instance in which a bee colony is destroyed, all usable components of the hive structure
that are not damaged or rendered unhealthy by the destruction of the bees shall, upon the beekeeper's request,
be returned to the beekeeper, provided that the beekeeper agrees to bear all transportation expenses for their
return.
(d) The decision of the municipal court judge may be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal
with the city secretary within ten (10) days following the date that the municipal court judge announces his/her
decision, or if the decision is not announced at the conclusion of the hearing, then within fifteen (15) days
following the date that the hearing officer places written notice of his decision in the mail to the beekeeper. The
decision of the city council shall be final.
(e) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require the conduct of a hearing or any right of
administrative appeal for the destruction of:
(1) Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping;
(2) Any swarm of bees;
(3) Any colony residing in a standard or manmade hive, which by virtue of its condition has
obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper; or
(4) Where immediately necessary to protect the public health or safety.
ARTICLE 2.1700 PRIVATE CARE FACILITIES (RESCUE SHELTERS)
Sec. 2.1701 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this section unless
the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning.
Private Care Facility. A facility that houses animals for adoption that have been rescued or owner surrendered
that has been approved and recognized as a rescue or private care facility by the city.
Sec. 2.1702 Certain Conduct Declared Unlawful
(a) The purpose of this article is to establish certain requirements of sound animal care which are intended to
avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of animals namely dogs in populated areas,
especially protection of persons from personal injury.
(b) Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
private care facility to keep any animal in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause unhealthy condition,
interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others, or interfere with the normal use
and enjoyment of any public property or property of others.
Sec. 2.1703 Permits
(a) The annual permit fee for the owners of animals as required by this section shall be as provided in the fee
schedule found in appendix A of this code for nonprofit private care facilities that have shown proof of nonprofit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/221
status or application, or for private care facilities that do not have a nonprofit status. Permits will expire on July
1st of each year and are not transferable from person to person.
(b) At least once every six (6) months the city administrator, or his authorized designee, shall inspect every
area or place for which a permit has been issued for the keeping of animals. Owners will be given a reasonable
amount of time to remedy any violations noted during the first inspection before a second inspection is made.
The allotted time to correct any violations will be as followed: 1st notice will be given with 10 days to correct
violation, a 2nd notice of violations will be issued if needed with an additional 10 days to correct violation, if
compliance is not met by the end of the ten days after the second violation, if than a final notice will be issued
notifying the private care facility that the animal permit is voided and the private care facility must reduce the
number of animals to (3) animals as allotted in the city ordinance for private individuals without a city approved
permit.
(c) Any disputes regarding compliance issues if unable to be settled between the private care facility and the
city's authorized designee will be presented to the municipal court to find if the private care facility is in violation
of city ordinance.
(d) Any person who violates this section is subject to penalties under article 2.1000 for each offense. Each
and every day shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 2.1704 Adoption Fees and Guidelines
(a) Applicable fees that apply to a private care facility in regards to adopting an animal is as provided in the
fee schedule found in appendix A of this code, previously stated in section 2.1201(i).
(b) All adoptions will have to be vaccinated for rabies, obtain a city tag, and be sterilized or have a
sterilization agreement signed and sterilization compliance must be met.
Sec. 2.1705 Animals Permitted
(a) The city sets forth that a minimum amount of space required for each animal housed at a private care
facility be one hundred (100) square feet per animal.
(b) Maximum number of animals allowed at a private care facility shall not exceed twenty (20) animals not
including puppies from the same litter under the age of four (4) months regardless the size of the private care
facility unless prior approval is obtained from the city council.
Sec. 2.1706 Standards
(a) Running water must be present on the premises.
(b) All structures must be sound and periodically checked for integrity and soundness.
(c) Food must be stored in a dry area that is free of any and all pest.
(d) Food and water bowls must be clean.
(e) All dog food must be dry (if it is dry dog food) and free of pest.
(f) Shelter must be provided from the elements.
(g) A shaded area must be provided that has adequate air flows.
(h) Pens must be kept clean of trash, junk, brush and feces.
(i) Fences and pens must be maintained and have no grass/weeds in excess growing.
(j) Multiple shelter option should be available for sleeping in or escaping the elements.
Sec. 2.1707 Foster Homes
It is allowable for a private care facility to foster our animals from this facility as long as the following occurs:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/221
(1) The private care facility will notify the city what animals are being kept and where the foster
location is.
(2) A foster home may not have more than three (3) animals.
(3) Any foster home will be treated the same as an individual citizen owning an animal, therefore,
must comply with all regulations and ordinances set forth for an individual.
ARTICLE 2.1800 ANIMAL WASTE
(a) An owner or person having custody of any animal(s) with the exception of city owned animals, shall not
permit said animal to defecate on any public property including public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, or any
other public grounds within the city unless said defecation is removed immediately.
(b) An owner or person having custody of any animal, with the exception of city-owned animals, shall not
permit said animals to defecate on any private property unless defecation is removed immediately, other than
the premises of the owner or person having custody of said animal.
(c) Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $165.00, and will not
exceed more than $500.00.
(Ordinance 2016-03 adopted 4/21/16)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING & CONSTRUCTION
ARTICLE 3.100 STANDARD CODES
Sec. 3.101 Codes Adopted
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully:
Standard Building Code – most recent edition
Standard Existing Building Code – most recent edition
Standard Fire Prevention Code – most recent edition
Standard Gas Code – most recent edition
Standard Mechanical Code – most recent edition
Standard Plumbing Code – most recent edition
National Electrical Code – most recent edition
(Ordinance 2001-26 adopted 12/20/01)
Sec. 3.102 Responsible Official
Within said codes, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated
official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned. (Ordinance 92-2
adopted 3/12/92, Section 2)
ARTICLE 3.200 BUILDING, PLUMBING, AND ELECTRICAL*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/221
Sec. 3.201 Adoption of Building Code
There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the
construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of
buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain building code known as the Standard
Building Code, 1985 edition with 1986 revisions thereof, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions
as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now
are filed in the office of the city secretary as public record and duly authenticated by the city secretary, and the
same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which
this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and
structures contained within the city limits. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 5-1)
Sec. 3.202 Definitions
(a) Wherever the word “Municipality” is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the City of
Seymour, Texas.
(b) Wherever the term “Corporation Counsel” is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the
attorney for the city Texas.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 5-5)
Sec. 3.203 Review Required to Minimize Flood Damage
Proposed subdivisions and land use areas shall be reviewed to assure that (a) all proposals for construction
provide for methods to minimize flood damage; (b) all public utilities and facilities such as sewage, gas,
electrical service and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(c) adequate drainage is provided for so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Seymour City Code, Chapter
5, Article 1, Section 5-8)
Sec. 3.204 New Water/Sewer Systems Design
All new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the flood waters.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 5-9)
Sec. 3.205 Saving
Nothing in this article or in the building code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued
or existing, under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this article. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 5-11)
ARTICLE 3.300 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 3.400 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 3.500 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS†
Sec. 3.501 Electrical, Mechanical Codes Adopted
There is hereby adopted the 1987 National Electrical Code and 1985 Standard Mechanical Code (with 1986
revisions) as they apply to the City of Seymour's electrical codes and ordinances (Seymour City Code, Chapter
5, Article 3, Section 5-70)
Sec. 3.502 Application of Provisions; Exceptions
(a) The provisions of this article shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices and
fixtures, hereinafter referred to as “electrical wiring and apparatus,” within or on public and private buildings and
premises, with exceptions as provided in Sections 3.507 and 3.508 [sic] and with the following general
exceptions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/221
(1) The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations in mines, ships or railway cars or to
automotive equipment;
(2) The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations used by electricity supply or
communications agencies in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or for the
operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, and located within or on thoroughfares;
except that meters and metering apparatus shall not be excepted from the provisions of this article;
(3) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the installations or equipment employed by a
railroad utility in the exercise of its functions as a utility, and located outdoors or in buildings used
exclusively for that purpose;
(4) The provisions of this article shall apply to electrical equipment used for radio transmission in
amateur radio transmitting stations and shall apply to all electrical equipment used for power supply
to radio transmitting equipment, but shall not apply to other electrical equipment used for radio
transmission.
(b) As used in this article, “reasonably safe to persons and property” as applied to electrical installations and
electrical equipment, means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended
without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 3, Section 5-71)
Sec. 3.503 Standards for the Installation of Electrical Equipment
(a) All installations of electrical wiring and apparatus shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in
conformity with the provisions of this article and the applicable statutes of the state, and all orders, rules and
regulations issued by authority thereof.
(b) Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the National
Electrical Code, National Electrical Safety Code, or electrical provisions of other safety codes which have been
approved by the American Standards Association, shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are
reasonably safe to persons and property.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 3, Section 5-74; Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 4/20/17)
Sec. 3.504 Electrical Wiring Apparatus Defined
The words or terms “electric wiring and apparatus” as used in this article shall be construed to include all
materials, devices, machinery, appliances, appurtenances or conductors used in connection with the production
of electric lights, heat or power or the transmission of electrical signals except where specifically limited to one
or more of them and then only as specifically limited. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 3, Section 5-75)
Sec. 3.505 Conduit, Tubing Required for Certain Installations
All wiring for electric light or power hereinafter installed in churches, theaters, other places used for public
gatherings within the fire limits in the city, and all commercial establishments shall be installed in suitable
electrical metallic tubing or rigid conduits, and all such wires hereafter installed in unfinished basements in all
buildings other than dwellings designed for the occupancy of not more than three (3) families, shall be likewise
placed in the same type tubing or conduits; provided it shall be permissible to use armored cable for flexible
connections of not more than four (4) feet in length. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 3, Section 5-87)
ARTICLE 3.600 UNSAFE, DANGEROUS, OR HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES*
Sec. 3.601 Declaration of Purpose
It is the purpose of the provisions of this article to provide a just, equitable, and practical method, to be
cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby buildings or structures which are
dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, or are a menace to the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety,
and general welfare of the people of the City of Seymour, or which tend to constitute a fire hazard, may be
required to be repaired, vacated, or demolished.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/221
Sec. 3.602 Public Nuisance Defined
(a) All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or are dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation, or unoccupied by its
owners, lessees, or other invitees, and are unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that they could be
entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage, or could be entered or used by
children, or constitute a danger to the public by reason of inadequate maintenance, neglect, decay, dilapidation,
obsolescence, abandonment, or act of God, for the purpose of this article, are declared to be a public nuisance
and shall be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished as hereinafter provided.
(b) For the purpose of this article any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed a dangerous building:
(1) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient
width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
panic for all persons housed or assembled therein who would be required to, or might, use such
door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit;
(2) Whenever any portion, or member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail or become
detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property;
(3) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in
place as to be capable of resisting a normal wind pressure;
(4) Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that the walls or other structural
portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of new
construction;
(5) Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation,
deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of
the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or some other
cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning
is likely to fall or give way;
(6) Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used;
(7) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle third of
the base;
(8) Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three percent
(33%) or more damage or deterioration to a member or members, or fifty percent (50%) of damage
or deterioration to a non-supporting, enclosing, or outside wall or covering;
(9) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or flood,
or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who
might play therein to their danger, or to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons,
or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing nuisance or unlawful or
immoral acts;
(10) Any building or structure which has been constructed or which now exists, or is maintained in
violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure of the
building regulations and the fire code of this city, when so determined and reported by the fire
marshal, health officer, or code enforcement officer, or any law or ordinance of this state or city
relating to the condition, location, and structure of buildings;
(11) Any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws
or ordinances, has, in any non-supporting part, member, or portion, less than fifty percent (50%), or
in any supporting member, less than sixty-six percent (66%) of the strength, fire resisting qualities, or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/221
characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics, required by law or ordinance in the
case of a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location;
(12) Whenever a building or structure used, or intended to be used, for dwelling purposes,
because of dilapidation, decay, damage, or faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is
unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease
when so determined by the health officer, or is likely to work injury to the health, safety and general
welfare of those living within;
(13) Whenever the building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes has
light, air, and sanitation facilities inadequate to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of
persons living within;
(14) Whenever any building or structure, by reason of obsolescence, dilapidated condition,
deterioration, damage, electric wiring, gas connections, heating apparatus, or other cause, is in such
condition to be a fire hazard and is so situated as to endanger life or other buildings or properties in
the vicinity, or provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread and intensity of fire arising from
any cause;
(15) Whenever any building or structure exists in violation of any provision of the Building Code or
Fire Code of the City of Seymour, or other ordinances of the City of Seymour.
Sec. 3.603 Definitions
Fire Marshal. This shall mean the fire marshal of the City of Seymour, or his authorized agents, assistants,
deputies, or representatives.
Health Officer. This shall mean the duly appointed health officer of the City of Seymour, or his authorized
agents, assistants, deputies, or representatives.
Code Enforcement Officer. This shall mean the code enforcement officer of the City of Seymour, or his
authorized agents, assistants, deputies, or representatives.
Hearing Officer. This shall mean the city administrator or the city attorney of the City of Seymour, or other
person so appointed by the mayor of the City of Seymour.
Sec. 3.604 Notice to Repair, Vacate and Repair, or Demolish
If the fire marshal, health officer, or code enforcement officer finds that any building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is a fire hazard or is dangerous and unsafe, he shall prepare a notice, in writing, to such effect, and
cause the written notice to be served upon the owner thereof and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by
registered mail or by personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been determined to be in a
dangerous condition and that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering
the building or by demolishing it, and that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice must contain the
following:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of municipal standards that is present at the building;
(3) A statement that the owner will be required to submit at a public hearing, proof of the scope of
any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance, and the time that it will take to
reasonably perform the work;
(4) A statement that the City of Seymour will vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building, or
relocate the occupants of the building if it is determined, after a public hearing, that such action is
warranted;
(5) The time, date, and place at which a public hearing will be held to determine whether the
terms of this article have been violated and, further, to consider any plans of the owner to comply
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/221
with the terms of this article, said public hearing to be at least seven (7) days, but not more than
twenty-one (21) days, after said notice has been mailed to the owner or personally delivered to him.
Sec. 3.605 Service and Posting of Notice
(a) The fire marshal, health officer, or code enforcement officer shall cause copies of the notice to be served
upon each of the following: The person, if any, in real or apparent charge or control of the premises involved;
the owner of record title; the holder of any mortgage, trust deed, or other lien or encumbrance of record; the
owner or holder of any lease of record; the record holder of any other estate or interest in or to the building or
structure, or the land upon which it is located.
(b) The notice shall be served personally upon any person entitled thereto if he can be found within the city
limits of the City of Seymour. If any person entitled thereto is not found within the city limits, service shall be
made by depositing a copy of said notice in the United States Post Office, properly enclosed in a sealed
envelope, and with the postage thereon fully prepaid. Said mail shall be registered or certified, return receipt
requested, and addressed to the person entitled thereto at the address of such person as it appears on the last
assessment tax roll of the City of Seymour, or as known to the fire marshal, health officer, or code enforcement
officer. If no such address appears or is known, then a copy shall be addressed to such person at the address
of the building or structure involved. Service by registered or certified mail shall be complete on the day of
mailing. The failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the
validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.
(c) One copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted on the building or structure involved.
(d) Upon giving notice, as herein provided, the fire marshal, health officer, or code enforcement officer shall
file with the city secretary an affidavit certifying to the time and manner in which such notice was given and
posted. He shall also file therewith any receipt card which may have been returned to him in acknowledgment
of the receipt of such notice by registered or certified mail.
(e) Any notice herein provided will be mailed or served to those parties for which it is provided that notice
must be sent only if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file in
the office of the County Clerk.
(f) Additionally, the fire marshal, health officer, or code enforcement officer may file notice of the hearing in
the official public records of real property in Baylor County, Texas. Such notice shall contain the name and
address of the owner of the affected property, if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of
the instruments on file in the office of the County Clerk, a legal description of the affected property, and a
description of the hearing. The filing of this notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other
transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes
notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest
after the filing of the notice.
Sec. 3.606 Public Hearing
(a) All public hearings provided for in this article shall be at least seventy-two (72) hours after notice of such
public hearing is posted by the city secretary, as required under the Public Meetings Act of the State of Texas.
The city secretary shall also provide a copy of the notice to any newspaper which requests to be notified of said
hearings and agrees to pay the cost of such notification.
(b) The public hearing herein provided shall be held before a hearing officer. At such hearing, the fire
marshal, health officer, or code enforcement officer shall present evidence of the alleged violation of this article
and the property owner or other affected person may present evidence that this article has not been violated
and/or present evidence concerning proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the
ordinance and the time that it will take to reasonably perform the work.
Sec. 3.607 Order of the Hearing Officer.
(a) Within ten (10) days after the close of the public hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written order
containing the findings, conclusions, and order of the hearing officer. After the issuance of such order, the
municipality shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of
the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The City of Seymour shall use its best efforts to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/221
determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building through the records of
the County Clerk of Baylor County, Texas, and through any other sources available to the City of Seymour.
(b) In conducting the hearing, if it is determined that this article has been violated, the order shall require the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to, within thirty (30) days:
(1) Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or
(2) Repair, remove, or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the
hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days.
(c) If the hearing officer allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair,
remove, or demolish the building, the hearing officer shall establish specific time schedules for the
commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure
the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined
by the hearing officer. The hearing officer may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety
(90) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, or fully perform all work required to comply with the order
unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee:
(1) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(2) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety (90)
days because of the scope and complexity of the work. If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee is
allowed more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or
demolish the building, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee shall be required to regularly submit
progress reports to the hearing officer to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has
complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The
order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the hearing officer, or the
hearing officer's designee, to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
(d) In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the standard set out in this article, the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(e) If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not
relocated within the allotted time, the hearing officer may order the vacation, securing, removal, or demolition of
the building, or relocate the occupants at the expense of the City of Seymour.
Sec. 3.608 Notice of Order
Within ten (10) days after the date that the order is issued, the City of Seymour shall:
(1) File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and
(2) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Seymour a notice containing:
(A) The street address or legal description of the property;
(B) The date of the hearing;
(C) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(D) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
Sec. 3.609 Standards for Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolition
The following standards, where applicable, shall be followed in substance by the hearing officer in ordering the
repair, vacation, or demolition of any building or structure. Any order to demolish rendered pursuant to this
section shall not indicate an alternative permission to repair; however, an order to repair may be satisfied by
demolition.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/221
(1) If the unsafe building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of
the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired.
(2) If the unsafe building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, moral safety,
or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated and repaired.
(3) If the unsafe building is fifty percent (50%) damaged, decayed, or deteriorated, it shall be
demolished.
(4) In all cases where an unsafe building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this article, it shall be vacated and demolished.
(5) In cases where an unsafe building is a fire hazard, as specified by the Fire Code of the City of
Seymour, existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article, or any other ordinance of this
city, or statute of the State of Texas, it shall be repaired, except where the cost of such repairs would
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of such unsafe building, in which case, it shall be
demolished.
(6) In such case in which the building is declared to be unsafe for habitation, and where such
building is inhabited, the occupants may be ordered to be relocated.
Sec. 3.610 Hearing Officer may Request Reports from Other Departments
Whenever, in the course of any proceedings taken hereunder, the hearing officer shall have cause to request
additional information, the same may be requested of the Fire Department, the Water or Sewer Department, the
Health Department, or any other agencies charged by law with enforcement of health or safety requirements of
local or state law. Additionally, the hearing officer may request additional information from any source deemed
appropriate by the hearing officer and the hearing officer may, at his discretion, call witnesses to testify at the
public hearing.
Sec. 3.611 Violations
(a) The owner, or any other person having charge or control over any building or structure determined by the
hearing officer to be unsafe and a public nuisance, who shall fail to comply with any order to repair, vacate and
repair, or demolish said building or structure, or any portion thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each
day shall be a separate offense for which a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
Section 1.106 of this code.
(b) The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any order to vacate said building or
structure, or any portion thereof, in accordance with any order given as provided in this article, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, each day being a separate offense, and may be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Sec. 3.612 Sale, Repair, or Demolition
(a) Whenever an order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or any portion
thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the hearing officer, the fire marshal, health officer, or
code enforcement officer shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, to:
(1) Cause the building or structure ordered to be repaired to be vacated until such time as the
necessary repairs have been made. No person shall thereafter occupy, or permit to be occupied,
any such building until and unless the necessary repairs have been made and the fire marshal,
health officer, or code enforcement officer has approved the same and issued a permit to reoccupy
said building or structure.
(2) To cause the building or structure to be demolished and the land restored to a reasonably
clear and level condition, including the filling of any excavation to the finished grade of the
surrounding area.
(b) In such event, the City of Seymour may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building at its own
expense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/221
Sec. 3.613 Lien of City
If the City of Seymour incurs expenses under any section of this article, the city may assess the expenses on
and have a lien against, unless it is homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which
the building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in
the legal title to the property reimburses the city for its expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at
the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the County Clerk of Baylor County, Texas.
The notice must contain the name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined with a
reasonable effort, a legal description of the property on which the building was located, the amount of the
expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. If the notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the
tenants of the building or to repair, remove, or demolish the building is afforded to each mortgagee and
lienholder, as authorized herein, the lien is a privilege lien, subject only to tax liens.
Sec. 3.614 Liability of Officers, Agents, or Employees
No officer, agent, or employee of the City of Seymour shall be personally liable for damage incurred, or alleged
to be incurred, as a result of any act required, permitted, or authorized to be done or performed in the discharge
of his duties pursuant to this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the City of
Seymour as a result of any act required, permitted, or authorized in the discharge of his duties under this article
shall be deemed an action against the city and shall be defended by the City of Seymour.
Sec. 3.615 Fire Prevention Code and Building Code Provisions Unaffected Hereby
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to repeal by implication any other ordinances of the Fire Code
of the City of Seymour, the Building Code of the City of Seymour, or any other ordinance of the City of Seymour,
and the adoption hereof shall not be deemed to affect or diminish the power or authority of any officer or
employee of the city to condemn any building or structure erected or maintained in violation of any other
provision by the Fire Code of the City of Seymour, the Building Code of the City of Seymour, or any other
ordinance of the City of Seymour.
Sec. 3.616 Penalty for Violations; Continuing Violations
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code. Each day during which such violation continues shall be a separate and
distinct offense and each such separate offense shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable as aforesaid.
(Ordinance 96-10 adopted 11/96)
ARTICLE 3.700 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.701 Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315,
delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the city, does ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.702 Findings of Fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise
protected from flood damage.
Sec. 3.703 Statement of Purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/221
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.704 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.705 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial Fan Flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at
the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant Structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of Future Conditions Flood Hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual
chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/221
map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-
30, VE or V.
Base Flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical Feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing Construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Elevation Study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the
boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been
designated as zones A, M, and/or E.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/221
Flood Protection System. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes, These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or Floodprone Area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway. [sic]
Functionally Dependent Use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee System. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such
as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/221
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New Construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of Construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub, L. 97348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure
to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/221
the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of
the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
Sec. 3.706 Lands to Which This Article Applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.707 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), community number, 480025, dated October
15, 1985, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.708 Establishment of Development Permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.709 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.710 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.711 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.712 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/221
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 3.713 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The emergency management coordinator is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and
Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.714 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.707, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
sections 3.717–3.719.
Sec. 3.715 Permit Procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/221
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.718(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.714(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all
of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
Sec. 3.716 Variance Procedures
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures
set forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.715(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article (section 3.703).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/221
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for
other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 3.717 General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and
substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/221
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Sec. 3.718 Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in sections
3.707, 3.714(8), or 3.719(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 3.715(a)
(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to, flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured Homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FIRM, shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/221
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
Sec. 3.719 Standards for Subdivision Proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with sections 3.701, 3.702, 3.703, and 3.704 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of sections 3.708, 3.715, and the
provisions of sections 3.717–3.719 of this article.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.707 or section 3.714(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 3.720 Penalties for Noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ordinance 2012-07 adopted 11/15/12)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS & COMMERCE
ARTICLE 4.100 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4.101 Definition of Terms
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/221
For the purpose of this article, all definitions of words, terms and phrases as set forth in the Texas Liquor
Control Act are hereby adopted and made a part of this article. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-1)
Sec. 4.102 Permit to Manufacture, Sell, Distribute or Store
No person shall manufacture, sell, distribute or store any intoxicating alcoholic beverage, or engage in any
other activity with relation to the same, for which a permit is required by the Texas Liquor Control Act, within the
city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city. The fee for such license shall be an amount equal to
one-half (1/2) the permit or license fee charged by the state under the Texas Liquor Control Act. (Seymour City
Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-2)
Sec. 4.103 Prerequisite to Issuance of Permit
No permit required under the terms of this article shall be issued to any person until he shows that he holds a
state permit for the particular phase of liquor traffic in which he desires to engage in the city, and until the fee
required by the city for such permit shall have been paid to the city. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-
3)
Sec. 4.104 Duration of Permit
All permits issued under the terms of this article shall expire at the time shown in the state permit presented by
the applicant. If a permit sought is issued for a period of time of less than one year, only a proportionate part of
the annual fee shall be exacted and collected; provided, however, a fractional part of any month shall be
counted as one month in calculating the fee which is to be paid. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-4)
Sec. 4.105 Location Restricted
No beer shall be sold within the corporate limits of the city and no license or permit shall be issued for the sale
of same, except in the areas in which sales are authorized by this article.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or engage in the business of selling intoxicating beer
within the city where the place of business of such person is situated within three hundred (300) feet
of any church, school, other educational institution, or public hospital or clinic; the measurement to
be along the property line of the street front, and from front door to front door, and in direct line
across intersections where they occur.
(2) The sale of beer, in unbroken original containers, to consumers for off-premise consumption is
authorized at any location abutting on any of the following streets which are presently designated as
state highways, and such sales shall be made from a building of which one main wall is located no
more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the right-of-way line of such street, to-wit:
Highway From To
(A) U.S. 277, 183, and 283
(Main Street)
The east right-of-way line
of south Oak Street
The south right-of-way
line of east California
Street
(B) U.S. 277, 183, 283, and 82
(Main Street)
The south right-of-way line
of east California Street
The north city limits
(C) S.H. 114 (Ingram Street) The east right-of-way line
of U.S. Highways 277, 183,
and 283 (Main Street)
The east city limits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/221
(3) There is hereby established a “Limit I Area” which shall be adjacent to a portion of the area
described in subsection (C), above; such “Limit I Area” will consist of the area within the following
described boundaries:
Beginning at a point which shall be the northeast corner of Block 12 of Original Town Addition.
THENCE, north along the west right-of-way line of East Street to a point in the centerline of an
east-west alley, said point being one hundred and forty-five (145) feet north of the southeast corner
of Block 5, Original Town Addition.
THENCE, west along the centerline of said east-west alley, a distance of one hundred fifty (150)
feet;
THENCE, south to a point in the south right-of-way line of Miller Street, said point being one
hundred fifty (150) feet from the northwest corner of Block 12, Original Town Addition.
THENCE, east one hundred fifty (150) feet to the place of beginning.
(4) The sale of beer which may legally be sold under the laws of the State of Texas, is hereby
authorized within the areas described in subsections (B) and (C); such sales may be for off-premises
consumption only.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-5)
Sec. 4.106 Hours for Sale of Beer
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer or offer the same for sale during the following times:
(1) Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12 noon on Sunday.
(2) On any day at any time between the hours of 12 midnight to 7:00 a.m.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-6)
Sec. 4.107 Hours of Consumption
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place, or for any person to
possess any alcoholic beverage in any public place for the purpose of consuming the same in such public place
between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 12 noon on Sunday and on all other days at any time between the hours of
12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-7)
Sec. 4.108 Private Clubs
It shall be unlawful for any private club to cause, permit or allow any person to consume, or to be served, any
alcoholic beverage on private club premises at any time on Sunday between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 12
noon and on any other day between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3,
Section 3-8)
Sec. 4.109 Drunkenness
Whoever shall get drunk or be found in a state of intoxication in any public place, or at any private house except
his own, shall be guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to regulations as set forth in Section
4.116 hereafter. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-9)
Sec. 4.110 Consumption on Streets, Sidewalks, and In Parks
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while on any street, sidewalk, or other
public way of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, or drink any beer or intoxicating
liquors of any kind or nature whatever within the City of Seymour municipal parks. (Seymour City Code,
Chapter 3, Section 3-10)
Sec. 4.111 Sale to Intoxicated Persons Prohibited
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/221
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor for off-premises consumption. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-11)
Sec. 4.112 Purchase by Minors Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to purchase any alcoholic
beverage. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-12)
Sec. 4.113 Possession and Consumption by Minors Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to consume any alcoholic
beverage in any public place unless, at the time of such possession or consumption, such person is
accompanied by his parent, guardian, adult husband or adult wife, who is actually visible and personally
present at the time such alcoholic beverage is possessed or consumed by such person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-13)
Sec. 4.114 Possession at School Athletic Events Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or carry into any enclosure, field or stadium where athletic events
sponsored or participated in by any public school are being held, any alcoholic beverage or to have any
alcoholic beverage in his possession while in, or on, such enclosure, field or stadium. (Seymour City Code,
Chapter 3, Section 3-14)
Sec. 4.115 Unlawful Conduct on Premises Where Beer is Sold
Conduct that is lewd, immoral or offensive to public decency by any person at a place of business where the
sale of beer at retail is authorized is hereby declared to include, but not be limited to, the following prohibited
acts (and it shall be unlawful for any person engaged in such business-or any agent, servant or employee of
such person-to engage in or to permit such conduct on the premises of the retailer):
(1) Using-or permitting the use of-loud, vociferous, obscene, vulgar, indecent or abusive
language.
(2) Exposing of one's person or permitting any persons to expose their bodies.
(3) Displaying or permitting any person to display a pistol or a deadly weapon or switchblade knife
in a manner calculated to disturb the inhabitants of such place.
(4) Soliciting of any person for coin to operate musical instruments or devices.
(5) Becoming intoxicated on the licensed premises or permitting any intoxicated person to remain
on the premises.
(6) Permitting solicitation of persons for immoral or sexual purposes or relations.
(7) Failing or refusing to comply with, or failing or refusing to maintain the retail premises in
accordance with the sanitary or health provisions of the city.
(8) Possessing any narcotics.
(9) Possessing any equipment used or designed for the use of administering any narcotics.
(10) Permitting any person on the licensed premises to possess any narcotics or any instrument
used for, or designed for, the use of administering any narcotics.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-15)
Sec. 4.116 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/221
this code. Each transaction in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3-16)
ARTICLE 4.200 AMUSEMENTS, CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES*
Sec. 4.201 Permit Required
(a) No person, firm or organization shall establish a carnival, circus, skating rink or any place of amusement
in connection with a carnival show or circus without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city.
(b) Application for a permit shall be made at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the establishment of such
activity. A permit shall be granted only if the stipulations in Section 4.202 are met.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 2, Section 6-11)
Sec. 4.202 Requirements for Locating Amusements
(a) No carnival, circus, skating rink or any place of amusement in connection thereof shall be located within
three hundred (300) feet of a residence.
(b) Written consent shall be required from the property owner on which the amusement activity will be
located.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 2, Section 6-12)
Sec. 4.203 Law Officers to Have Access to Premises
All law enforcement officials shall be allowed on the premises of any amusement activity for the purposes of
maintaining order and surveillance of any unlawful activity. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 2, Section 6-
13)
Sec. 4.204 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of
this code. Each transaction in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 2, Section 6-14)
ARTICLE 4.300 JUNK YARDS AND SCRAP YARDS
Sec. 4.301 Definitions
A motor vehicle salvage, wrecking and junk yard shall be defined as any business or place of storage or deposit
which displays five (5) or more vehicles which are defined as junk vehicles or those not licensed by the State of
Texas and retaining a valid state inspection sticker. In addition, a motor vehicle salvage, wrecking and junk yard
shall further be defined as a business or place of business where used parts of vehicles and discarded or
second-hand material which has been or was intended to be a part of any motor vehicle, are stored and
deposited. A scrap yard shall be defined as any place of storage or deposit of items such as old iron, pipe
metal, glass, paper cordage or other waste, that is intended for use as scrap or salvage. (Seymour City Code,
Chapter 6, Article 3, Section 6-21)
Sec. 4.302 Compliance With Article Required
No new business consisting of motor vehicle salvage, wrecking or junk yards shall be established, operated
and maintained within the corporate limits of the city without complying with the terms of this article. (Seymour
City Code, Chapter 6, Article 3, Section 6-22)
Sec. 4.303 Requirements for Establishing New Business
All operator/owners of motor vehicle salvage, wrecking and junk yards or scrap yards established within the
corporate city limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall be required to make application to
the city council for a permit to locate said business or operation in the city. All lots, parcels and acreage within
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/221
the city not presently being used in the aforementioned business activities shall be subject to the above
application. Application shall be made in the office of the city secretary with all necessary information required
by the city to be supplied by the applicant. Upon receipt of said application and filing of a permit fee as provided
for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, the city shall send a letter to all property owners
located within three hundred (300) feet of applicants' lot or tract as shown by tax office records, notifying them
of the scheduling of a public hearing on the application at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 3, Section 6-23)
Sec. 4.304 Permit Application Hearing
The city council will hear testimony from said applicant, any and all property owners within three hundred (300)
feet of applicant's location, and any other concerned citizen who may wish to address the council at the public
hearing. The city council shall determine whether a permit will be granted for the proposed business, taking into
consideration all applicable state and local laws, health and safety considerations and incompatibility with
surrounding land that would tend to depreciate property values or cause urban blight. Said applicant will
present all plans and specifications as to compliance with fencing and screening requirements as outlined in
Section 4.305 of this article. The decision of the council as to approval or disapproval of the permit shall be
final. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 3, Section 6-24).
Sec. 4.305 Screening Required
Each motor vehicle salvage, wrecking, and junk yard or scrap yard, other than a building in which such
business is carried on, shall be surrounded by a solid fence or other similar structure not less than six (6) feet in
height and shall be constructed as required so as to block vision from the traveling public. A chain link fence in
which slats of metal or other material which blocks vision have been woven shall be considered a solid fence
under this section, as well as any natural foliage, terrain or other natural features provided said fences, natural
barriers or buildings and screening shall be maintained in good condition as required so as to block vision from
the traveling public. Fencing and screening requirements shall be enforced and maintained along all state and
federal highways, including all farm-to-market roads, both within the corporate city limits and the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city. Existing motor vehicle salvage, wrecking and junk yards or scrap yards prior to May 1,
1984 shall comply with the fencing and screening requirements of this article within two years from date of
passage. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 3, Section 6-25).
Sec. 4.306 Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. In addition to said
penalties, the offender's permit shall be forfeited. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 3, Section 6-26)
ARTICLE 4.400 REGULATION OF PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT VENDORS*
Sec. 4.401 Business License
(a) License Required. Before any person engages in the occupation of a peddler or transient vendor within
the City of Seymour, such person shall first obtain from the city secretary or her designated representative, a
license to engage in such occupation. Any such license granted to any person is issued with the express
provision that the licensee shall not make any false or fraudulent representation as to the goods being sold
and/or services being provided, or his authority to sell such goods or provide such services or his identity. A
separate license and application shall be required for each person who engages in such activities and shall
include each employee, agent, or consignee who engages in such activity.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Transient Vendor. Is defined to mean and include a person, or the agent, consignee or employee of a person,
who within the city, engages in the temporary business of exhibiting, delivering, selling, or offering for sale any
goods and/or services or exhibiting brochures, sales literature or price lists for the purpose of taking orders for
the sale of goods and/or services, and who has no fixed place of business within the city that is used, occupied,
hired, rented or leased for a period of at least one month for the purpose of operating or conducting such
business thereon.
Itinerant Merchant. Is defined to mean and include a person, or the agent, consignee, or employee of a person
who moves stocks of goods or samples of goods into the city for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/221
taking orders for the sale of such goods and/or services with the intention of removing such samples or the
unsold portion of such goods away from the city before the expiration of one (1) month, and who has no fixed
place of business within the city for which definite arrangements have been made for the use, occupancy, hire,
rental or lease of such place for a term of at least one (1) month.
Peddler. Is defined to mean and include a person, or agent, consignee, or employee of a person who carries
goods and/or services upon a truck or other vehicle on the streets of the city for the purpose of exhibiting,
selling or offering for sale such goods and/or services from such truck or other vehicle, or who within the city,
goes from door to door of residences, offices or places of business to display, sell, offer for sale, or take orders
for the sale of goods and/or services, or to exhibit brochures, sales literature, or price lists for the purpose of
taking orders for the sale of goods and/or services or who within the city, exhibits, sells, offers for sale or takes
orders for the sale of goods and/or services from a vacant lot, parking lot, tent, boat, storage bin, stall or
unenclosed structure.
Commercial Traveler. Is defined to mean a person who is employed by or who represents a manufacturer,
wholesaler or importer who sells or exhibits goods to parties who engage in the business of purchasing such
goods for the purpose of resale to the general public, or who provides services.
Goods. Is defined to mean and include tangible chattels of every kind and character and includes any required
services associated with such goods.
Person. Is defined to mean an individual natural person and does not include any corporation, firm, association,
partnership or joint venture.
This section does apply to transient vendors, itinerant merchants and peddlers involved in interstate commerce,
as the council finds the license procedure and fee does not unduly burden interstate commerce.
Service or Services. Is defined to mean:
(1) A system or arrangement that performs work or offers a service for customers;
(2) The serving of goods;
(3) To maintain or repair;
(4) Services shall include, but not be limited to:
(A) Wireless communications;
(B) Repairs or improvements on homes, businesses or other real property;
(C) Activities involving manual or skilled labor.
(c) Exceptions. This article shall not apply to any of the following:
(1) Commercial travelers.
(2) Sales or exhibits at fairs, rodeos, conventions or events sponsored by one or more city civic
organization, school, church or the Chamber of Commerce.
(3) Charitable solicitation.
Sec. 4.402 Application for License
(a) Contents of Application. Application for a license required hereunder shall be made in person by the
persons requesting such license upon forms available in the office of the city secretary or her designated
representative. Such application form shall provide a space for the following information which must be
furnished by the applicant:
(1) The name, current and former residence and business address, current residence and
business telephone number and occupation of applicant. If applicable, the local address and
telephone number where applicant may be reached.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/221
(2) The social security number and birth date of the applicant, valid driver's license number,
expiration date and state issuing it.
(3) A physical description of the applicant which includes race, sex, height, weight, hair and eye
color.
(4) A valid state driver's license. Only non-drivers may submit other positive identification issued
to the applicant by a governmental agency and the state issuing it (i.e. birth certificate).
(5) A description of the goods to be sold, including brand name, if any, or services to be provided.
If the goods are to be shipped, the name, address and telephone number of the manufacturing
location and/or shipping location.
(6) The address of the location from which such goods and/or services shall be displayed to the
public or offered for sale, or a statement that applicant will travel from door to door for the purpose of
exhibiting or offering goods or services for sale.
(7) If the goods and/or services to be sold are transported in or are displayed or offered from a
vehicle, the vehicle owner's name, address and telephone number, and the vehicle make, model,
color, description, identification number and license number.
(Ordinance 2001-13 adopted 4/19/01)
(8) Statement that applicant has not been convicted within the last ten 10 years of an offense:
(A) Involving narcotics, dangerous drugs, or crimes with dangerous weapons;
(B) Involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another when the offense is
designated as a felony in the state;
(C) Of fraud, misrepresentation, embezzlement, forgery, or theft when such offense is
designated as a felony in the state;
(D) In a court of proper jurisdiction of violating this article at any time.
(Ordinance 2003-07 adopted 4/17/03)
(9) Such other information as may be required to complete an investigation as to the fitness of the
applicant to conduct such business operation.
(b) Applicant Swears to Truth of Information. Each person making application for a license required
hereunder shall swear or affirm that the information given on the application form is true and correct.
(c) Other Documents Attached to Application.
(1) Permit From Land Owner. If applicant proposes to display goods or provide services to the
public, or to offer such goods or services for sale from a designated location, such applicant's
application form shall be accompanied by a written permit signed by the owner or the duly
authorized agent of the owner of the property at the location from which the applicant proposes to
display or to offer for sale any goods or services. Such permit shall state that said owner consents
that the applicant may use and occupy such property for the purpose of selling or offering for sale
such goods or services.
(2) State Sales Tax Permit. If state statute requires that sales tax must be paid upon the purchase
of such goods or services as the applicant proposes to offer for sale, the application for license shall
be accompanied by a valid sales tax permit issued by the office of the comptroller of public accounts
of the State of Texas.
(d) Official Approval Required.
(1) Building Code Compliance. Each application form for a license required hereunder shall bear
the signature of the city secretary or her designated representative, indicating that applicant's
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/221
proposed use of property complies with the occupancy requirements of the city building codes or
that such requirement is inapplicable because the applicant will be authorized by said license only to
travel from door to door.
(2) Security Check by Police. Each application for a license required hereunder shall be approved
by the chief of police or his authorized representative before such license is granted. The chief of
police shall have a reasonable time to conduct an investigation of an applicant for such license, but
such an investigation shall not be longer than two (2) business days. After inspection or
investigation, the chief of police shall either approve or disapprove the application for license and, if
disapproved, shall give the applicant, upon request, a written statement setting forth the reasons for
such disapproval and notifying said applicant of his right to appeal.
Sec. 4.403 Denial or Revocation of a License
(a) Grounds to Revoke or Deny. The city secretary or her designated representative may deny or revoke a
license for a peddler, itinerant merchant or transient vendor for any of the following reasons:
(1) The applicant does not present a valid state driver's license or, if allowed, other positive
identification by a governmental agency;
(2) The applicant does not complete the application form and procedure;
(3) The applicant or the proposed activity of the applicant does not comply with applicable city
ordinances and codes, including building codes and health codes, or county or state health laws;
(4) The applicant makes false or fraudulent statements on the application form;
(5) The applicant or licensee is found after investigation by the chief of police to be
misrepresenting or making false statements in regard to his authority to sell such goods and/or
services;
(Ordinance 2001-13 adopted 4/19/01)
(6) Within the last ten (10) years the applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense
involving narcotics, dangerous drugs, or crimes with dangerous weapons;
(7) Within the last ten (10) years the applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense
involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another when the offense is designated
as a felony in the state;
(8) Within the last ten (10) years the applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense of
fraud, misrepresentation, embezzlement, forgery, or theft when such offense is designated a felony
in the state;
(9) Within the last ten (10) years the applicant or licensee has been convicted in a court of proper
jurisdiction of violating this article at any time;
(Ordinance 2003-07 adopted 4/17/03)
(10) Upon recommendation from the chief of police that the license be revoked because the
conduct of the licensee or the manner in which the licensee is conducting his business operation
endangers the health or safety of a citizen of the City of Seymour.
(b) Appeals From Decisions of City Secretary or Chief of Police.
(1) Written Notice of Appeal by Applicant. If the applicant for a license under this article or the
holder of such a license is dissatisfied with any holding or finding of the city secretary or chief of
police, he shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of such appeal
with the city secretary within ten (10) days from the decision by the city secretary.
(2) Hearing by City Council. Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, the application for the permit
and all papers possessed by the city secretary in connection with such application and such permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/221
may be delivered to the city council and such matters as may be in controversy shall be heard by the
council at its next regular meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. The city council shall have
the same powers and authority at such hearing on such appeal as is vested in the city secretary by
this article.
Sec. 4.404 License
(a) License Content. A license issued under the provisions of this article shall contain the following:
(1) The name of the applicant and his address;
(2) A physical description of the applicant;
(3) The date the license was issued and the date it expires, with the signature of the city
secretary;
(4) The location from which such person is licensed to conduct the business operation authorized
by such license;
(5) The fact that the licensee is a peddler who is authorized to go from door to door of residences,
offices or places of business to display, sell, offer for sale or take orders for the sale of goods and/or
services or to exhibit brochures, sales literature or price lists of goods and/or services.
(b) License Records. The city secretary or her designated representative shall keep a record of each such
license issued.
(c) License Fee and Duration.
(1) Fee. Any person who is required to obtain a license by the provisions of this article may apply
for either a thirty (30) day license or a six (6) month license. When a thirty (30) day license is issued
to any such person, such licensee shall pay to the city secretary or her designated representative, a
license fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, which sum shall
be used to defray part of the expense of administration and enforcement of this article. When a six
(6) month license is issued to any such person, such licensee shall pay to the city secretary or her
designated representative a license fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of
this code, which sum shall be used to defray part of the expense of administration and enforcement
of this article.
(2) Duration. No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be issued for a longer
period than six (6) months.
(d) Not Assignable. Such license shall not be assignable and shall not authorize more than one person to
engage in the occupation of peddler, itinerant merchant or transient vendor within the city.
Sec. 4.405 Violations and Penalties
(a) Property Owner. Any property owner who knowingly allows his property to be used or occupied by a
peddler or itinerant vendor who conducts thereon a business operation, or who exhibits or offers for sale goods
or services without first obtaining a license as required by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(b) Hours and Places of Solicitations. All solicitations to private residences, including but not limited to
homes, duplexes, mobile homes, rooming houses and apartments, shall occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted by the private property owner or by someone with apparent authority to
act for the owner. This regulation does not apply where the solicitor is on the property by express, prior
invitation of the person residing on the premises.
(c) Unlawful Use of Streets and Sidewalks.
(1) Streets. No peddler or any other person, corporation, association or organization shall have or
maintain in a stationary location any truck, trailer, booth or any other kind of structure on any public
street or alley in the City of Seymour for the purpose of selling, exhibiting or soliciting orders for any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/221
goods, services, wares or merchandise, or cold drinks, hot drinks, or food, nor for the purpose of
exhibiting any kind of exhibit.
(2) Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any of the goods or
services on the sidewalks of the City of Seymour unless such goods or services are offered for sale
or sold by a person owning, occupying or controlling the premises adjoining or adjacent to the
sidewalk, and then such goods or services shall be exposed and sold in the usual course of trade in
accordance with all municipal laws of the city.
(3) Unlawful Parking on Streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any
motor vehicle, truck trailer or vehicle of any kind on any public street or alley in the City of Seymour
for the purpose of selling, exhibiting, or soliciting orders for any goods or services, wares,
merchandise, cold drinks, hot drinks or food, for a period of longer than fifteen (15) minutes.
(d) License Mandatory Prior to Solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person required by this article to
secure a license to engage in the activities set forth in this article without a license.
(e) Trespass.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under this article to enter upon the land
or premises of another after receiving, immediately before such entry, notice from the owner,
resident, occupant or adult person acting for such person exercising possession that such entry is
forbidden.
(2) A sign on the premises stating approximately “No Solicitors, Commercial or Charitable” or “No
Solicitors Except for Non-Profit Organizations based in Baylor County, Texas” shall constitute notice.
(3) Further, it shall be unlawful for any such license holder to remain on the premises of another
after receiving notice from the owner, resident, occupant or adult person acting for such person
exercising possession, to depart such premises.
(f) Penalty.
(1) Misdemeanor. A violation shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is
punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this
code. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense.
(2) A conviction for the violation of subsection (e) above shall result in the automatic revocation of
such convicted person's peddler's and solicitor's license.
(3) The police department for the City of Seymour shall enforce this section.
(Ordinance 2001-13 adopted 4/19/01)
ARTICLE 4.500 PRIVATE AMBULANCES
Sec. 4.501 Definition
As used herein, “ambulance” shall mean any vehicle, privately owned, equipped or used for transporting the
wounded, injured, sick and dead, and shall include emergency vehicles used for such purposes and invalid
coaches, but shall specifically exclude funeral coaches. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 5, Section 6-51)
Sec. 4.502 Permit Required
No person shall operate an ambulance upon the streets of the city without first obtaining a permit as hereinafter
provided from the city council. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 5, Section 6-52)
Sec. 4.503 Application for Permit; Contents
Applications for a permit hereunder shall be made upon blank forms furnished by the city administrator and
shall contain:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the ambulance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/221
(2) The number and description of the ambulances, including make, model, year of manufacture,
State of Texas license number for current year.
(3) The location and description of the place or places from which it is intended to operate.
(4) Such other information as the city administrator shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair
determination of whether the terms of this article have been complied with.
(5) Agreement of the operator that in the event the permit is granted, sixty (60) days notice of
discontinuance of ambulance service to be rendered by the operator under such permit shall be
given to the city administrator in the event the operator for any reason determines after the issuance
of such permit to discontinue ambulance service. Further, the city council shall have the power to
revoke and cancel said permit after sixty (60) days written notice to the holder of the permit, and
after a hearing before the city council by the permittee if he so desires a hearing.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 5, Section 6-53)
Sec. 4.504 Issuance of Permit
The city council shall deny the application for a permit hereunder unless it finds:
(1) That the public convenience and necessity requires the proposed ambulance service for which
application has been submitted.
(A) In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the issuance of a
permit for the proposed ambulance service, the city council shall consider whether the public
is, at the time, adequately served; the financial responsibility of the applicant; the number, kind
and type of equipment; the schedule of rates proposed to be charged; the increased traffic
congestion on the city streets; the demand for increased parking space, if any, on the streets;
whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be
preserved; and such other facts as the city council shall consider relevant.
(B) That the applicant proposes to maintain a sufficient number of ambulances with
adequate equipment to efficiently serve the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, under
the terms and provisions hereof. The permit shall be conditioned that the holder of such permit
shall comply with all state and municipal laws and ordinances relating to operation of an
ambulance service in the city; also that the personnel operating such ambulances and service
are properly qualified and fit persons to work at such business.
(2) That the applicant proposes to offer twenty-four (24) hour ambulance service, and to accept
city originated emergency calls.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 5, Section 6-54)
Sec. 4.505 Territorial Limits of Article
This article shall not apply to ambulance calls or service originating outside of the city, and all ambulances
carrying persons from outside the city limits to a point within the city limits or through the city shall not be
subject hereto. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 5, Section 6-55)
Sec. 4.506 Penalty
Any person who shall operate any ambulance upon the public streets of the city in violation of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 5, Section 6-56)
ARTICLE 4.600 OIL REFINERIES
Sec. 4.601 Refinery Operation Offensive
The operation of a refinery of crude oil is a nauseous, offensive and unwholesome business. (Seymour City
Code, Chapter 6, Article 6, Section 6-61)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/221
Sec. 4.602 Refinery Defined; Unlawful to Construct or Operate
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to erect, construct and/or operate and/or
maintain within the city limits an oil refinery. Within the meaning of this article an oil refinery is defined to be any
structure or device in which and by the operation thereof crude oil is transformed or changed into different
forms such as extracting gas or gasoline or kerosene or lubricating or fuel oils or other products from the crude
oil. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 6, Section 6-62)
ARTICLE 4.700 PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIOS
Sec. 4.701 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to canvass for, solicit for and/or make photographs or
photographic reproductions and/or operate a studio, and/or call from house to house in the city for the purpose
of exposing negatives or positives, without first having obtained a permit in writing from the city secretary.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 7, Section 6-73)
Sec. 4.702 Application; Fee
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to do or perform any of the things enumerated in Section 4.701 shall
file with the city secretary an application in writing, stating the name and address of such person, firm or
corporation and which one or more of such things is desired to be done or performed. At the time such
application is filed there shall be paid to the city secretary by the applicant a fee as provided for in the fee
schedule found in the appendix of this code which sum shall be used to pay the expenses of investigating the
reputation, reliability and dependability of such applicant. The application shall stay on file for a period of fifteen
(15) days and if, at the expiration of said fifteen (15) days it shall have been determined that said applicant is of
reasonably good reputation, is reliable and dependable, and has not in the past made and/or developed
obscene photographs, and has not solicited photographs or photographic reproductions and failed to deliver the
same after having received an order and partial payment for the same, the city secretary shall issue the
applicant a permit in writing to do and perform one or more of the things enumerated in Section 4.701.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 7, Section 6-74)
Sec. 4.703 Bond Required
Provided, however, that the city secretary shall not issue a permit to any person, firm or corporation to do or
perform any of the things enumerated in Section 4.701, until and unless the applicant shall have deposited with
the city secretary the sum of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) as a bond to guarantee said applicant's
good, honorable and lawful possession and proper and legal distribution of negatives and/or positives and/or
photographs or photographic reproductions for the same, exposed and/or reproduced by order of individuals.
Said deposit to be returned to said applicant upon written evidence, supported by affidavit of the applicant, that
such guarantee has been fully complied with, and that the applicant has not made and/or developed any
obscene photographs. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article 7, Section 6-75)
Sec. 4.704 Exemptions
Provided further, that any applicant who has been actively engaged in the business of photography in the city
for a period of one year or longer before the effect of this article, and who shall file with the city secretary
affidavits by at least four (4) persons well known to the city secretary, stating that said affiants have been
customers of said applicant during the two (2) years previous, and that said applicant is honest, dependable,
reliable, and of good reputation, shall not be required to pay the fee mentioned in Section 4.702 for investigative
purposes, and shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 4.703 hereof. (Seymour City Code, Chapter 6,
Article 7, Section 6-76)
Sec. 4.705 Obscene Photographs Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person to make and/or develop any obscene photographs. (Seymour City Code,
Chapter 6, Article 7, Section 6-77)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/221
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PROTECTION*
ARTICLE 5.100 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 5.101 Fire Department Committee Created; Duties
There is hereby created a standing committee known as the “Fire Department Committee” composed of the
superintendent of the water and light system, the fire chief and the mayor, which shall be a standing committee
until it is further enacted, whose duty it shall be to immediately organize a voluntary fire department for the city
by securing members therefor, organizing the same and superintending the election of officers therefor, and
setting up an organization. Such committee shall continue to act as the Fire Department Committee for the
purpose of keeping in touch with the organization and aiding it and the city council in maintaining and providing
and keeping in operation a well-equipped fire department, the organization to consist of one or more companies
as necessity demands. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 5, Section 9-71)
Sec. 5.102 Officers and Their Election
The officers of the fire department shall consist of engineers, assistant engineers and a secretary-treasurer.
The chief engineer shall be designated the fire chief, and the assistants as first assistant chief, second assistant
chief, etc. to rank according to the number of the company to which they belong. All officers of the fire
department shall be elected by majority vote of all of the members of the fire department except that the
assistant chiefs shall be elected by the members of the respective companies, should there be more than one
company. The members of the fire department may, if they choose, elect additional assistant chiefs as they may
provide in their by-laws. Officers are to be elected every two (2) years at the first meeting in September every
second year and must be approved by the city council and commissioned by the mayor. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 9, Article 5, Section 9-72)
Sec. 5.103 Duties of Officers
(a) The chief shall be the executive and commanding officer of the department and shall be responsible for
the care and supervision of the property of the city and fire apparatus that shall come into his possession, and
shall direct the preventing and fighting of fires and shall be considered the general commanding officer of the
fire department with the usual duties incumbent upon a commanding officer or fire chief. During the fighting of
fires, he shall have authority and it shall be his duty to issue orders and direct such proceedings and he shall
have the power to control the crowds and person or persons around any fire, and may make or establish fire
lines and call to his aid any officers of the city or commission any bystander to perform any duties that to him
may seem necessary.
(b) Assistant chiefs. The assistant chiefs shall see to the carrying out of the orders of the chief in their own
company and in the absence of the chief act in his place and stead.
(c) Secretary-treasurer. The secretary-treasurer shall keep proper minutes of the meetings of the
department; receive, receipt for, safely keep and properly disburse all funds coming into his hands under the
by-laws of the organization. The treasurer shall give a bond in the sum of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00), the premium of which may be paid for out of the treasury of the fire department. The treasurer shall
file an annual report with the city council, showing his receipts and disbursements.
(d) The city council may in its discretion appoint the fire chief as the city fire marshal, who shall hold his office
at the will of the city council.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 5, Section 9-73)
Sec. 5.104 Membership; Discipline; Dues and Fees
(a) The Fire Department Committee shall determine who are to become members of the fire department as it
is first organized, controlled by the constitution and by-laws of the fire department and by the vote of its
members as it may provide, subject to revision at any time by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/221
(b) Any member violating any orders of the chief or acting chief shall be subject to summary suspension by
the chief or acting chief, subject to continued suspension or expulsion from the fire department according to the
by-laws and constitution of the fire department. It shall be the duty of every officer and member to aid in the
most efficient manner in fighting fires and the protection of property, and any member guilty of appropriating
property not his own to his own use or in any manner destroying or concealing the same shall forfeit his right to
further membership in the fire department.
(c) Membership dues and fees shall be such as are provided by the constitution and by-laws of the fire
department and all of the fees, if any, and all donations made to the fire department as such shall be safely kept
and expended only for strictly fire department activities and said sums shall not be distributed among the
members of the fire department.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 5, Section 9-74)
Sec. 5.105 Temporary Firemen Authorized
When a member of the Seymour volunteer fire department is called into the armed forces of the U.S. or is
engaged in defense work which requires that he be absent from regular attendance of fire alarms during the
present emergency, the members of the fire department by vote shall elect a temporary fireman to take the
place of said absent member. If said absent member does not return to discharged from the armed forces of the
U.S. or from a national defense project, he will be automatically dropped from the roll and forfeit all rights and
privileges that he may have had as a member of the Seymour volunteer fire department, and the temporary
member who has filled his place during his absence will automatically become a member of the fire department,
his date of membership being the date on which he was voted a temporary member. (Seymour Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 1, Article 7, Section 1-54)
Sec. 5.106 Fire Stations and Property
The city-owned and controlled fire stations shall be used for the housing and keeping of the fire fighting
apparatus, meetings of the fire companies, and such continuous occupation by the designated members of the
fire department for the safekeeping and protection of same as provided by the by-laws of the fire department,
and at all times subject to the approval and supervision of the Fire Department Committee under the consent of
the city council. It shall be the duty of all officers and members of the fire department to use the highest degree
of care for the preservation and protection of the city property that shall come into their possession or
supervision. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 5, Section 9-75)
Sec. 5.107 Penalties Applied to Members for Disobedience
Any person or persons who shall disobey any order of the fire chief or acting chief while going to or while
fighting a fire or other duties connected therewith shall be subject to immediate arrest by said fire chief and may
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 9, Article 5, Section 9-76)
Sec. 5.108 Compensation
The compensation for fire chief, officers and members of the fire department shall be fixed from time to time by
the city council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 5, Section 9-77)
ARTICLE 5.200 ARSON REWARD
The City of Seymour hereby offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to anyone who furnishes
information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of arson committed within
the corporate limits of the City of Seymour, Texas. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the
general fund of the City of Seymour, Texas. (Ordinance 90-1 adopted 2/8/90)
ARTICLE 5.300 FALSE ALARMS UNLAWFUL
Any person who shall willfully and knowingly give a false fire alarm, or who shall willfully and knowingly give
notice or cause notice to be given to the fire department of the city in any manner, of the existence of fire in the
city when no fire in fact exists, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9,
Article 1, Section 9-2)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/221
ARTICLE 5.400 UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH FIRE
STATION AND EQUIPMENT
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, except the city Firemen and city officials to go into the city
fire station, whether the same be open or closed, and remain there for a period of over one minute, unless on
official business with some officer of the fire department.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to mount upon the fire engine, or touch or handle any of the hose or
tools belonging to the same, except the firemen, city officials, or persons employed to look after, repair or
inspect the fire engine and equipment.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to park an automobile on the street in front of the fire station
or to park a vehicle or car within a distance of five feet on either side of the front of the station.
(d) Any person or persons violating any part of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 1, Section 9-3)
ARTICLE 5.500 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 5.501 Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Standard Fire Prevention
Code, being particularly the 1985 edition with 1986 revisions thereof and the whole thereof, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. Not less than three (3) copies of said code have
been and are now filed in the office of the city secretary as a public record and duly authenticated by the city
secretary and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the
date on which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 2, Section 9-11)
Sec. 5.502 Enforcement
The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 9, Article 2, Section 9-12)
Sec. 5.503 Definition
(a) Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the code hereby adopted, it shall be held to mean the City of
Seymour, Texas. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 2, Section 9-13)
Sec. 5.504 Limits for Storage of Flammable Liquids
(a) Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks,
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases and storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be restricted.
(b) The limits referred to in section 73 of the code hereby adopted in which storage of flammable liquids in
outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, the limits referred to in section 103 of the code hereby adopted, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits referred to in section 53b of the code
hereby adopted, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as
follows: Beginning at the intersection of Reiman and Oak Streets; thence east on Reiman Street to the center of
the alley in Block 9 of the Original Townsite; thence south to Miller Street; thence east on Miller Street to
Washington Street; thence north on Washington Street to the center of the alley in Block 2 of the Original
Townsite; thence east to East Street; thence north on East Street to the center of the alley in Block 5 of the
Original Townsite; thence west to the center of Block 5 of the Original Townsite; thence north to Nevada Street;
thence west to Oak Street; thence south to the point of beginning. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article
2, Section 9-14)
Sec. 5.505 Modifications
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/221
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted
upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when
granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the
records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 9, Article 2, Section 9-15)
Sec. 5.506 Appeals
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for,
or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the
fire department within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision being appealed. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 9, Article 2, Section 9-16)
Sec. 5.507 Penalties
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith,
or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the fire inspector or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein,
shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine as provided in Section 1.106 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10)
days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 2, Section 9-17)
ARTICLE 5.600 FIRE LIMITS*
Sec. 5.601 Fire Limits
The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits: Beginning at the intersections of Reiman
and Oak Streets; thence east on Reiman Street to the center of the alley in Block 9 of the Original Townsite;
thence south to Miller Street; thence east on Miller Street to Washington Street; thence north on Washington
Street to the center of the alley in Block 2 of the Original Townsite; thence east to East Street; thence north on
East Street to the center of the alley in Block 5 of the Original Townsite; thence west to the center of Block 5 of
the Original Townsite; thence north to Nevada Street; thence west to Oak Street; thence south to the point of
beginning. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-31)
Sec. 5.602 Permits and Inspections
(a) No wall, structure, building or part thereof, shall hereafter be built, enlarged, or altered, until a plan of the
proposed work, together with a statement of materials to be used, shall have been submitted to the city
secretary, who shall, if in accordance with the provisions herein contained, issue a written permit in triplicate for
the proposed work. Permits are to be kept on file with the city secretary.
(b) Structures hereafter erected without a permit, or not in conformity with this article, shall be removed.
(c) No building shall be moved from without to within the fire limits, nor from one location to another within the
fire limits until a permit shall have been issued therefore. No permit shall be issued unless such construction is
in accordance with this article.
(d) The designated building inspector shall inspect construction in progress as often as practical to see that
all provisions of this article are being complied with.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/221
(e) All plans and specifications submitted to the city secretary shall comply with all city ordinances and with
article 3271A of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-32)
Sec. 5.603 Construction Required Within the Fire Limits
(a) No building or structure of wooden, ironclad (whether on wood or metal supports), stucco, or veneer type
construction, or any building whose walls contain wood supports, shall be permitted except as indicated in
Section 5.604. No building shall hereafter be built, enlarged or altered, except in accordance with this article.
(b) The thickness of walls shall be not less than as given below:
(c) Brick walls shall be not less than twelve (12) inches thick, except that small one-story buildings with floor
areas of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or less may have walls eight (8) inches thick.
(d) Reinforced concrete walls may be three-fourths (3/4) of the thickness of brick walls, but in no case less
than eight (8) inches.
(e) Hollow building tile may be used as filler walls provided such walls be supported on reinforced concrete
beams and footings, and by adequate reinforced concrete or brick pillars or columns spaced not more than
sixteen (16) feet apart; walls to be not less than twelve (12) inches thick. Small one-story buildings of less than
five thousand (5,000) square feet floor area may have walls of eight (8) inch hollow building tile.
(f) Solid stone walls shall be four (4) inches thinner than brick walls for like construction.
(g) All exterior walls, party walls and division fire walls shall have parapets extending at least eighteen (18)
inches above the roof, and said parapets shall be at least twelve (12) inches thick, except where eight (8) inch
walls are permitted as above, in which case parapets may be eight (8) inches thick.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-33)
Sec. 5.604 Frame Building in Fire Limits
The following frame structures are permissible in the fire limits:
(1) Temporary one-story frame buildings for the use of builders.
(2) Wooden fences not over eight (8) feet high without roof or cover.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-34)
Sec. 5.605 Roofs
(a) All buildings or structures hereafter constructed in the fire limits shall have incombustible roof coverings.
(b) No roofing on an existing roof shall be renewed or repaired to a greater extent than ten percent (10%) of
the roof surface, except in conformity with this article, and in no instance shall more than one permit be issued
for each existing building in any one year.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-35)
Sec. 5.606 Repairs and Additions
(a) Any existing building within the fire limits which may hereafter be damaged by fire, decay or otherwise, to
an amount greater than fifty percent (500) of its present value, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be repaired
or rebuilt but shall be removed.
(b) Extensions, remodeling, or additions to existing buildings shall not be considered as repairs, and shall not
be permitted except when conforming with Section 5.603 of this article.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-36)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/221
Sec. 5.607 Arbitration
Whenever an application for permit to repair any existing building already located within the fire limits is made
by any person or firm, and the city council and the applicant disagree on the extent of repairs to be made, and a
permit is denied by the designated building inspector, then the city council shall appoint a competent and
disinterested person, and the applicant shall appoint a competent and disinterested person, which two persons
so appointed shall select a third member, and these said three persons shall appraise the building, examine the
plan of the proposed work, and the statement of materials and labor to be used in the repairing of said building,
and make a signed written report of their findings to the city council. If such report reflects clearly that the
rebuilding or repairing would be a violation of this article, then such application for permit shall be denied by the
city council; and if such report reflects that the person seeking said permit has complied with this article, and
the requested rebuilding or repairing is not in violation of this article, then the city council shall issue a permit for
the proposed building or repairing. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-37)
Sec. 5.608 Fees
There shall be charged and collected a fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this
code for issuance of permits under this article. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-38)
ARTICLE 5.700 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.701 Office Created; Appointment; Removal
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, with the
fire marshal reporting directly to the mayor and city council. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the
mayor by and with the consent of the city council. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of
the office, and shall be removed only for cause. He shall receive a salary to be set by the city council. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-51)
Sec. 5.702 Responsibility to Investigate Fires, Keep Records
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigations as to whether such
fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours,
not including Sundays, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss
which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9,
Article 4, Section 9-52)
Sec. 5.703 Testimony; Evidence of Arson to Prosecuting Attorney
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be
of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt
to commit the crime of arson, defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, the fire marshal shall
cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to
the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-53)
Sec. 5.704 Production of Evidence
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The said fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered
to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-54)
Sec. 5.705 Unlawful to Obstruct Investigations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/221
Any witness who refuses to be sworn or who refuses to appear or testify or who disobeys any lawful order of
said fire marshal or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of said investigations or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor
shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code; providing,
however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9,
Article 4, Section 9-55)
Sec. 5.706 Investigation May be in Private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is
held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with
each other until they have been examined. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-56)
Sec. 5.707 Access to Premises Required
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-
57)
Sec. 5.708 Authority to Discover, Abate Fire Hazards; Appeals
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty quarterly or more often, to enter
upon and make, or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile,
manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any
building or other structure which, for want or repair or by reason of age or dilapidated conditions, or for any
other cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so
occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or
dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever,
including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of
lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline,
kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible or inflammable materials, refuse or
with any other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create
conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and
such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises. Provided,
however, that if the said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5)
days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by his authority the
order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-58)
Sec. 5.709 Unlawful to Maintain Dilapidated Property Fire Hazards
Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when
for want of repairs or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause it is especially liable to fire and
which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so
occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-59)
Sec. 5.710 Dangerous Appurtenances Unlawful
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatsoever,
including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the
matter of fire or health or safety of persons or property of others, or who shall keep or maintain any building,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/221
other structures or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of
explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable
materials, refuse, or with any other conditions which shall be dangerous in character to the person, health or
property of others, or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires, or
which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such buildings, structure or premises other
than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found
in Section 1.106 of this code. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-60)
Sec. 5.711 Due Notice Required
No prosecution shall be brought under Sections 5.709 and 5.710 of this article until the order provided for in
Section 5.708 be given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 9, Article 4, Section 9-61)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH & SANITATION*
ARTICLE 6.100 REGULATION OF PUBLIC HEALTH*
Sec. 6.101 Health Committee Created; Term
There is hereby created a health committee, which shall consist of five (5) members. The term of each member
shall be a period of one (1) year. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 1, Section 13-1)
Sec. 6.102 Officers; Rules
The committee shall meet and select a chairman and a secretary. The chairman shall preside and the secretary
shall keep a record of all proceedings of the committee. The committee is hereby authorized to adopt such
rules as it may deem advisable to govern the conduct of its meetings. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13,
Article 1, Section 13-2)
Sec. 6.103 Duties
It shall be the duty of the committee to enforce all statutes of the State of Texas relating to the protection of
public health. It shall be the further duty of the committee to enforce the provisions of this article and all other
ordinances of the city relating to the protection of public health and sanitation, and to the prevention of the
spread of contagious and infectious diseases. It shall be the further duty of the health committee to promulgate
rules and regulations necessary for the preservation of the health and sanitation and to cause said rules and
regulations to be published as provided herein. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 1, Section 13-3)
Sec. 6.104 State Health and Sanitation Rules Adopted
All of the laws of the State of Texas relating to public health and sanitation and to the prevention of the spread
of contagious and infectious diseases, now in force or as the same may be hereinafter amended or
supplemented, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this article in the same manner and with
the same force and effect as if each and every provision of such statutes were herein fully set forth. Any person
violating any of the provisions of such laws within the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this article. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 1, Section 13-4)
Sec. 6.105 Complaints Procedure
Any person, firm or corporation may obtain the issuance of a complaint for the violation of any of the health
rules and regulations or upon any matter which constitutes an offense to the public health of the city. After the
execution of said complaint by the complainant the matter of investigation thereof shall be referred to the health
committee for their investigation and recommendations; within ten (10) days from and after the execution of
said complaint, it shall be incumbent upon the health committee to submit to the city administrator their findings
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/221
and recommendations, which shall be forwarded to the person, firm or corporation involved. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 13, Article 1, Section 13-5)
Sec. 6.106 Unlawful to Sell Meat from Wagons
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, individual or corporation to peddle fresh meats and sell the same to the
inhabitants from the meat wagon or wagons within the city limits. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article
1, Section 13-6)
Sec. 6.107 Certain Business Unhealthy*
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, build, own or operate any cotton gin,
elevator, textile mill or slaughter house hereafter constructed within the corporate limits of the city from the
following bounds: Beginning at the south end of Cedar Street where the same intersects within the corporate
limits of the city; thence north to the intersection of Lincoln and Cedar streets; thence east with Lincoln to where
it intersects Main Street; thence north with Main Street to Reiman Street; thence east with Reiman Street to the
intersection of East and Reiman Streets; thence north with East Street to the intersection with Morris Street;
thence east with Morris Street to the intersection with Bantau Street; thence north with Bantau Street to the
intersection with Custer Street; thence west to the west line of the corporate limits; thence following the
corporate limits to the place of beginning. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 1, Section 13-7)
CHAPTER 7
OFFENSES & NUISANCES
ARTICLE 7.100 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS*
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave any electric refrigerator,
commercial refrigerator, cooling box, or icebox unattended in any abandoned house, building, barn or structure
of any kind or upon any vacant lot or any other premises in the city, where the same may be available to or
accessible to children, without first removing the door from such refrigerator or icebox before leaving the same
unattended. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 2, Section 13-11)
(b) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 13, Article 2, Section 13-12)
ARTICLE 7.200 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 7.201 Particular Lots Declared a Nuisance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation who shall own or occupy any lot or lots in the city
to permit, cause, or allow a public nuisance under this section on any premises.
(b) Includes the following definitions:
Premises. All privately owned property, including vacant land or a building designed or used for residential,
commercial, business, industrial, or religious purposes, and includes a yard, ground, walk, driveway, fence,
porch, steps, or other structure appurtenant to the property.
Public Nuisance.
(1) Keeping, storing, or accumulating refuse on premises unless the refuse is entirely contained in
a closed receptacle;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/221
(2) Keeping, storing, or accumulating rubbish, including newspapers, abandoned vehicles,
refrigerators, stoves, furniture, tires, and cans, on premises for 10 days or more, unless the rubbish
or object is completely enclosed in a building or it not visible from a public street;
(3) Maintaining premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or
harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or disease-carrying pests;
(4) Maintaining a building in a manner that is structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety,
health, or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance, unsanitary conditions, dilapidation,
obsolescence, disaster, damage, or abandonment or because it constitutes a fire hazard;
(5) Construction materials, including all waste, debris, concrete, lumber, rock/brick, metal, or other
materials resulting from construction or demolition;
(6) Earth materials, including substances such as dirt, sand, gravel, mud, clay, wood chips, limbs
or brush capable of blowing or spilling thereby creating unsightliness and/or creating a hazard for the
general public;
(7) Junk, including worn out, used and/or discarded material or items, including, but not limited to,
odds and ends, lawn maintenance equipment, dilapidated or junked trailers, travel trailers or boats,
automotive parts or other machinery parts, furniture, iron or other scrap metal, tires, and glass;
(8) Fences in deteriorated condition or subject to falling down due to lack of maintenance or
damage, or that have been repaired with materials that are not comparable to the original fence
construction;
(9) Appliances intended for indoor use, working or nonworking, used, stored, abandoned or
located anywhere in the public view.
Refuse. Garbage, rubbish, paper, and other decayable and nondecayable waste, including vegetable matter
and animal and fish carcasses.
Weeds. All rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter that:
(1) Has grown to more than 8–12 inches in height; or
(2) May create an unsanitary condition or become a harborage for rodents, vermin, or other
disease-carrying pests regardless of the heights of the weeds.
(c) There is a criminal penalty for any violation of [Texas Administrative Code,] section 343.011 which
remains unabated after the 30th day after the date on which a person receives notice from a county official,
agent, or employee to abate the nuisance. An unabated offense is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of not less than $50.00 or more than $200.00. A fine of up to $500.00 may be assessed for subsequent
convictions in the same year under this section. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. The city may
assess the costs of abating the nuisance against the violator, and may place a lien on the property to secure
the assessment.
(d) Such condition is hereby declared a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which shall be a public
necessity.
Sec. 7.202 Notice to Property Owners by the City
(a) Whenever such public nuisance exists within the corporate limits of the city in violation of this article the
property owner or owners shall be notified of such violation utilizing any of the following methods:
(1) In person;
(2) By United States mail;
(3) By publication at least twice within ten consecutive days;
(4) By posting notice on or near a building near the property to which the violation relates;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/221
(5) By posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to
which the violation relates; if the property contains no buildings.
(b) Such notice shall include a copy of this article, shall specify the violation, its location, and the corrective
measures to abate such public nuisance. The owner of said property may protest that such lot is not a public
nuisance by filing a written notice with the city administrator within ten (10) days from the date notice is given by
the city. If protest is not filled by the property owner with in ten (10) days, the property owner's rights of protest
are forfeited.
Sec. 7.203 Procedure in Event of No Protest
If the owner of said lot fails, neglects, or refuses to either file notice of protest or comply with terms of the
notice to abate such public nuisance within ten (10) days, a code enforcement officer shall file a complaint in
municipal court.
Sec. 7.204 Procedure in the Event of Protest
Should a property owner file protest in accordance with the provisions hereof, the city secretary shall place such
protest on the agenda of the city council, give notice to the property owner of the time and place of such
meeting, and state in such notice that the city council will make determination as to whether the condition of the
lot constitutes a nuisance under the terms of this article. The property owner may appear in person or by attorney
to present the reasons for his protest. If, after hearing the evidence and making such investigation as the city
council shall deem necessary, the city council determines that such lot constitutes a nuisance, the city council
may order the nuisance abated and, in such event, shall specify a period of time to abate the nuisance and, if the
owner thereafter fails to take actions necessary to comply with the order of the city council, the city
administrator shall file a complaint in the municipal court.
Sec. 7.205 City May Abate Nuisance
Should any property owner fail to abate a public nuisance after notice to do so, as hereinabove provided, the city,
may take such action as it deems necessary to enter in and onto such property and abate such nuisance and may
pay the cost of such abatement and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done
to the owner of such lot.
Sec. 7.206 City to Have Privileged Lien for Abatement of Nuisance
Should the city incur expenses in abating a nuisance, as hereinabove provided, the city administrator shall file a
statement of such expenses incurred, giving the amount of such expenses, the date on which said work was done,
and the legal description of the property with the county clerk, and the city shall have a privileged lien upon said
lot or lots in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code, including all of the rights
granted the governing body of a municipality under such act, which said lien shall be second only to tax liens
and liens for street improvements, and said amount shall bear interest of the rate of 10% per annum from the
date said statement is filed. It is further provided that for any such expenditures and interest, suit may be
instituted and recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of said
expense so made, or certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or
improvements.
Sec. 7.207 Penalty for Violation
(a) Any firm, person, or individual who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found
in section 1.106 of this code.
(b) In the event that the property owner or owners have been notified of such violation, and either have not
contested within the then (10) days or has contested and been found guilty of the violation, now has thirty (30)
days to come into compliance. After thirty (30) days, the city shall make a determination of whether or not
compliance has begun or has been completed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/221
(1) Remediation Citation One. In the event that compliance has not begun within thirty (30) days
of the original citation, the owner will receive a second notification of compliance with a request to
either come into compliance or submit a remediation plan to city administration within ten (10) days.
If compliance or remediation plan is not submitted in ten (10) days, the city will issue another
citation, fine for citation will increase.
(2) Remediation Citation Two. In the event that compliance has not begun within thirty (30) days
of the original citation, and the owner received a second notification of compliance with a request to
either come into compliance or submit a remediation plan to city administration within ten (10) days,
a second notification of noncompliance with a final request for compliance or remediation plan to be
submitted within ten (10) days to the city administrator, the city will issue final citation, fine for citation
will increase, not to exceed $500.00.
Sec. 7.208 Choice of Remedies Not Required
The city shall not be required to choose between the filing of criminal charges against the owner of any lot in
violation of this article and the cleaning or having said lot cleaned to abate the nuisance, but may pursue both
remedies either simultaneously or separately.
(Ordinance 2018-10 adopted 11/15/18)
Secs. 7.209–7.225 Reserved
Division 2. Dangerous Weeds
Sec. 7.226 Immediate Abatement of Dangerous Weeds
The city may immediately abate the nuisance of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which are
an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person or persons. (Ordinance 2005-06 adopted
2/24/05)
ARTICLE 7.300 DUMPING, PILING OF COTTON HULLS OR BURRS
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or the employees, agents or servants of any person, or
anyone whomsoever to dump or pile cotton hulls, burrs, or gin trash at any location within the corporate limits of
the city, with the intent to leave said cotton hulls, burrs, or gin trash at such place where dumped; and any
person who violates any provision of this article upon conviction shall be found guilty and fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(b) The city council herein further states and declares that any such cotton hulls, burrs, or gin trash that are
dumped or piled inside the corporate limits of the city is declared to be a nuisance and such nuisance shall be
abated as provided by law in such cases.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 3, Section 13-27)
ARTICLE 7.400 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 7.401 Definitions
As used herein the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
(1) Junked vehicle. Any vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both a valid Texas
license plate or plates and a valid Texas Department of Public Safety motor vehicle inspection
certificate, and the condition of which is one or more of the following: wrecked, partially or wholly
dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
(2) Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of
any kind.
(3) City. As used herein shall mean the City of Seymour.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/221
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 4, Section 13-41)
Sec. 7.402 Junked Vehicles Declared Public Nuisance; Exceptions
The location or presence of any junked vehicle or junked vehicles on any lot, tract, or parcel of land or any
portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city shall be deemed a public
nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain such a public nuisance or to permit or allow the
same to exist on his property or on the property of another; provided that this section shall not apply to a junked
vehicle or junked vehicles in an enclosed building; a junked vehicle or junked vehicles on the premises of a
business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise; a junked vehicle or junked vehicles in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the city; or to vehicles in operable condition specially adapted or constructed for
racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article
4, Section 13-42)
Sec. 7.403 Notice to Abate
Whenever any such public nuisance exists in the city in violation of this article, notice of such violation shall be
given, as applicable, to the owner of such vehicle, or the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such
vehicle is situated, or to all such persons, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall be in writing, shall specify
the violation and its location, shall specify the corrective measures required, shall provide that any owner of
such vehicle, or owner or occupant of such premises, may protest the determination that such vehicle is a
nuisance by filing written notice thereof with the city administrator within ten (10) days, and failure to file such
protest within ten (10) days shall constitute consent to the removal and impoundment of such vehicle. A copy of
the notice shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises and/or the owner of the vehicle, either
by personal service; by mailing a copy, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of
such person; or by attaching such copy to the vehicle in question. Any notice attached to any vehicle need not
name the owner thereof, or the owner or occupant of the premises where it is situated, and any such notice
attached to a vehicle shall constitute notice to the owner of the vehicle and to the owner and occupant of the
premises where such vehicle is located. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 4, Section 13-43)
Sec. 7.404 Abatement of Nuisance by City; Lien
If the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such vehicle, fails, neglects or refuses to either file
notice of protest or to comply with the terms of any notice issued under the provisions of the preceding section,
within ten (10) days after service of such notice by personal service, mailing, or attachment to such vehicle,
appropriate city officials shall abate such public nuisance by removing the junked vehicle from its location and
impounding the same. All expenses incurred in the abatement of such nuisance, and costs of preserving such
vehicle prior to final disposition, shall be charged against the owner or owners of the junked vehicle, payable in
Seymour, Baylor County, Texas, and the city shall have a privileged lien on such junked vehicle, together with
ten percent (10%) interest on the delinquent amount from the date of impounding such vehicle. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 13, Article 4, Section 13-44)
Sec. 7.405 Procedure in Event of Protest
Should any person file a protest, in accordance with Section 7.403 hereof, of the determination that any vehicle
constitutes a nuisance under the terms of this article, the city administrator shall set a time and place for the
protestant to appear in person or by an attorney and present the reasons for his protest. If, after hearing the
evidence and making such investigation as the city administrator deems necessary, the city administrator may
determine that the vehicle in question constitutes a nuisance, the city administrator may order the same
removed from the premises, or he may recommend prosecution in corporation court in accordance with the
penal provisions hereof. (Ordinance 2004-01 adopted 2/19/04)
Sec. 7.406 Owner May Acquire Possession
The bona fide owner of any such junked vehicle or junked vehicles which have been impounded in accordance
with the provisions of this article may acquire possession of such junked vehicle or vehicles by paying the costs
of abatement as shall have been computed in accordance with Section 7.404 and by paying a reasonable
storage charge, based upon the period of time such junked vehicle or vehicles have been impounded. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 4, Section 13-46)
Sec. 7.407 Abandonment and Sale
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/221
In the event that possession by the bona fide owner thereof of any junked vehicle or junked vehicles impounded
in accordance with the provisions hereof is not acquired within ninety (90) days from the date of such
impoundment, such junked vehicle or vehicles shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be sold by
the city. Proceeds from any such sale shall first be applied to reduce or satisfy the storage charges computed in
accordance with the above section, and any amount of such proceeds then remaining shall be applied to
reduce or satisfy the lien perfected. Such lien shall remain in full force and effect with respect to any portion of
the costs of abatement remaining unsatisfied. Said vehicle may be sold only for scrap or salvage. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 4, Section 13-47)
Sec. 7.408 Notice to Texas Highway Department
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of any vehicle constituting a public nuisance, the city shall notify
the Texas Highway Department of such removal, identifying the vehicle or part thereof. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 13, Article 4, Section 13-48)
Sec. 7.409 Administration
The administration and enforcement of this article shall be carried out by the city, except that the actual removal
of any vehicle may be by any person duly authorized by the city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article
4, Section 13-49)
Sec. 7.410 Penalty
The violation of any provision of this article relating to the maintaining of a public nuisance as described herein
or in permitting or allowing such public nuisance to exist shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 13, Article 4,
Section 1350)
ARTICLE 7.500 ADOPTION OF STATE OF TEXAS PENAL CODE
The Penal Code, as amended by the State Legislature of the State of Texas, is hereby adopted and shall be
applicable within the city limits of the City of Seymour. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 14, Section 14-1)
ARTICLE 7.600 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 7.601 Casting, Throwing, Firing Fireworks Unlawful
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall cast, throw or fire any rocket, firecracker, or other
combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 14, Section 14-2)
Sec. 7.602 Possession, Exhibition of Fireworks Unlawful
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall exhibit or have in his possession with intent to give
away or sell or offer for sale within the city, any rocket, firecracker or other combustible fireworks of any kind.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 14, Section 14-3)
ARTICLE 7.700 CURFEW FOR MINORS†
Sec. 7.701 Definitions
In this section:
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the city or a designated representative.
Curfew Hours.
(1) 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day beginning with the first day of school of the Seymour Independent School District and
ending on the next to the last day of school of the Seymour Independent School District; and
(2) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day beginning with the last day of school of the Seymour Independent School District and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/221
ending on the day before school commences in the Seymour Independent School District; and
(3) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday (Friday night) or Sunday (Saturday night).
Direct Route. The shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or
stop along the way.
Emergency. Is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including, but, not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Holding Location. A place designated by the chief of police to whom a minor taken into custody for a violation of
this section will be delivered to await pickup by a parent or juvenile authorities.
Minor. Any person less than 17 years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural or adoptive parent of another person;
(2) A court-appointed guardian or another person; or
(3) At least 21 years of age and authorized by a parent or court-appointed guardian to have the
care and custody of another person.
Public Place. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, playground, park, plaza, building, or other places used by or
open to the public.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay unnecessarily; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of the premises.
Sec. 7.702 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 7.703 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 7.702 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent and was using a direct route;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate or intrastate travel;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/221
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, including, but, not limited to newspaper delivery, and was
using a direct route;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police officer about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school or religious activity or returning home by a direct route from an
official school or religious activity;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the
free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 7.702(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 7.704 Enforcement
(a) A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 7.702(a), may either/or:
(1) Ascertain the name and address of the minor, issue to the minor a written citation that the
minor is in violation of section 7.702(a).
(2) May take the minor to a holding location.
(b) When a minor is taken into custody under this subsection, the police department shall immediately notify
a parent to pick up the minor at the holding location. After a parent arrives at a holding location and provides
the information required by the chief of police to file an incident report, the minor shall be released into the
custody of the parent. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor, the minor shall be
released to the juvenile authorities.
(c) If a minor is not taken into custody for a violation of section 7.702(a), the police department shall by
certified mail, return receipt requested, notify a parent of the minor that the minor has violated section 7.702(a)
and include a warning that any subsequent violation may result in prosecution of the minor and the parent
under this section. If the minor was found in violation of section 7.702(a) at an establishment, the police
department shall by certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner, operator, or employee of the
establishment of the violation and include a warning that any subsequent violation may result in prosecution of
the owner, operator, and employee under this section.
(d) A police officer shall, within 24 hours after finding a minor in violation of section 7.702(a), file a written
report on the incident or assist to the extent possible in the preparation and filing of the report by a supervisor.
Sec. 7.705 Penalties
(a) A parent of a minor who violates section 7.702(b) in this section is, upon conviction, punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.00.
(b) The owner, operator, or employee of an establishment who violates section 7.702(c) of this section is,
upon conviction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(c) A minor may be prosecuted in municipal court for a violation of section 7.702(a) by a fine not to exceed
$500.00.
(Ordinance 2016-10 adopted 9/15/16)
ARTICLE 7.800 LOUDSPEAKER NOISE REGULATED*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/221
(a) It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a loudspeaker or amplifier attached to a coin-operated music
device or jukebox within the corporate limits.
(b) It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a coin-operated music device or jukebox within the corporate
limits in such a manner as to disturb the inhabitants of the area.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 14, Section 14-5)
ARTICLE 7.900 POSSESSION AND DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS†
(a) It shall be a violation of the law for any person to have in his possession a firearm as that term is herein
defined and to be carrying or transporting the same for the purpose of shooting said firearm inside the city
limits, and anyone found with a firearm in his possession inside the city limits shall be presumed to have
possession of the same for the purpose of firing the same within the city limits.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or fire any kind of firearm inside the city limits.
(c) It is hereby declared to be a violation of the law for any person to shoot at public or private property with
firearms and also it is unlawful for any person to in any manner damage public or private property by the
shooting of firearms as herein defined.
(d) Firearms are defined to include air rifles, pellet guns, or pistols or any other kind of weapon or device
which shoots pellets or missiles by any means whatsoever, whether mechanical or otherwise.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 14, Section 14-6)
ARTICLE 7.1000 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Sec. 7.1001 Unlawful to Ride Bicycles, Skateboards, Roller Blades (In-Line Skates) or Roller Skates
on Sidewalks in Central Business District
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates along or upon
any sidewalk within the central business district of the city. For purposes of this article, the central business
district includes the business district within the following boundary streets: Oak Street at California Street going
southerly until it intersects with Miller Street, Miller Street eastwardly until it intersects with Main Street (State
Hwy 183/277), Main Street northerly until reaching the intersection of Main Street and California Street (State
Hwy 82), then westerly to Oak Street, at the point of the beginning. (Ordinance 2005-09 adopted 5/19/05)
Sec. 7.1002 Unlawful to Spit on Sidewalks
Spitting on any of the sidewalks of the city or on the floor of any building in the city is prohibited. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 14, Section 14-8)
Sec. 7.1003 Playing Ball in Streets Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, bat or knock or play ball, or play catch with a ball upon
and in the streets within the city; and any person or persons who shall engage in a ball game, or shall throw a
ball, or shall bat or knock a ball, or engage in playing catch with a ball upon and on or across any street within
the city limits shall be deemed guilty of unlawfully obstructing the street. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 14,
Section 14-9)
ARTICLE 7.1100 SCAVENGING
No person or persons, other than the current resident of the property on which garbage or refuse, recyclable or
reusable materials are placed for collection or an authorized carrier shall remove, pick up or transfer garbage or
refuse, or recyclable or reusable materials left for collection in any residential subdivision or at any single-family
residence. All materials left for collection in either specifically marked recovery containers or any other type of
container are to be picked up by a designated carrier for the purpose of removal of garbage or refuse, or
recyclable or reusable materials. Each unauthorized removal of any item or items from a residential subdivision
location or a single-family residence location shall constitute a separate violation of this article. For purposes of
this article, recyclable or reusable material shall mean any material which is included in any public or private
recycling or reuse program. (Ordinance 2005-04 adopted 2/24/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/221
ARTICLE 7.1200 SEX OFFENDERS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 7.1201–7.1230 Reserved
Division 2. Residency
Sec. 7.1231 Application; Violation; Penalty
(a) This section applies only to a person who is:
(1) Required to register as a sex offender under Chapter 62, Code of Criminal Procedure,
because of a reportable conviction or adjudication involving a victim younger than 17 years of age;
or
(2) Civilly committed as a sexually violent predator under Chapter 841, Health and Safety Code,
and subject to outpatient treatment and supervision under that chapter.
(b) A person to whom this section applies may not reside within 1,000 feet of a school, childcare facility,
public or private youth center, or park containing playground equipment, as measured in a straight line from the
nearest property line of the residence to the nearest property line of the school, childcare facility, youth center,
or park.
(c) A person residing within 1,000 feet of a school, childcare facility; youth center, or park, does not commit a
violation of this section if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the residence prior to September 2006;
(2) The person is under the age of 18 years;
(3) The person is residing at the residence at the time the school, childcare facility, youth center,
or park is established or extended to within 1,000 feet of the residence.
(d) A person to whom this section applies commits a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000.00, if a person violates this section. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 7.1232 Definitions
In this division,
Childcare Facility. A facility which is required to register as a childcare facility with the state department of
family and protective services (or its successor agency) and includes, without limitation, a licensed childcare
center, a licensed childcare home, a registered childcare home, and a listed family home.
Park Containing Playground Equipment. Any outdoor facility located on public property that is intended for
recreation, is open to the public, and contains apparatus intended for the recreation of children, such as slides
or swing sets.
Public or Private Youth Center. Any recreational facility or gymnasium that:
(1) Is intended primarily for use by persons who are 17 years of age or younger; and
(2) Regularly provides athletic, civic, or cultural activities.
Reside. To live, dwell, abide, stay, or lodge for a period of more than one day.
School. A private, public, or charter elementary or secondary school.
Sec. 7.1233 List of Parks and Public or Private Youth Centers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/221
(a) The city administrator shall compile and maintain a list of parks containing playground equipment and
public or private youth centers. The location of these facilities, as well as schools and childcare facilities, may
be displayed on a map showing the perimeters of the safety zone established by this division.
(b) If any person (1) believes that a park which is not on the list described above meets the criteria
established by this division; or (2) operates a public or private youth center which is not on the list described
above which the person believes meets the criteria of this division, then, in either case, such person may
petition the city administrator to have such park or public or private youth center included on the list referred to
above. In the event the city administrator denies such petition, such person may appeal said ruling to the city
council. The action of the city council on such matter shall be final.
(Ordinance 2006-06 adopted 9/21/06)
ARTICLE 7.1300 NOISE*
Sec. 7.1301 Purpose
This article is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the
citizens of the city through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and raucous noise, or any noise which
unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable
persons of ordinary sensitivity.
Sec. 7.1302 Findings
(a) Loud and raucous noise degrades the environment of the city to a degree that:
(1) Is harmful to the health, welfare, and safety of its habitants and visitors;
(2) Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property;
(3) Interferes with the well-being, tranquility, and privacy of the home; and
(4) Both causes and aggravates health problems.
(b) Both the effective control and the elimination of loud and raucous noise are essential to the health and
welfare of the city's inhabitants and visitors, and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, including
recreation, work, and communication.
(c) The use of sound amplification equipment creates loud and raucous noise that may, in a particular
manner and at a particular time and place, substantially and unreasonably invade the privacy, peace, and
freedom of inhabitants of, and visitors to, the city.
(d) Certain short term easing of noise restrictions is essential to allow the construction and maintenance of
structures, infrastructure, and other elements necessary for the physical and commercial vitality of the city.
Sec. 7.1303 Definitions
City Administrator. The city administrator of the City of Seymour or the city administrator's designee.
Emergency. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property
damage demanding immediate attention.
Emergency Work. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property
damage, whether actually caused or threatened by an emergency, or work by private or public utilities when
restoring utility service.
Noise Sensitive Area. Includes, but is not limited to, a posted area where a school, hospital, nursing home,
church, court, public library, or similar institution is located.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, or corporation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/221
Public Right-of-Way. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place normally
accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a government entity.
Public Space. Any real property or structures on real property, owned by a government entity and normally
accessible to the public, including, but not limited to, parks and other recreational areas.
Residential Area. Any real property which contains a structure or building in which one or more persons reside,
provided that the structure or building is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for residential use in
accordance with the terms and maps of the city's zoning ordinance.
Sec. 7.1304 General Prohibition
(a) No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued:
(1) Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise.
(2) Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the
city.
(3) Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion
unreasonable discomfort to any persons within the neighborhood from which said noises emanate,
or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators
or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or
places of business.
(b) Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and raucous include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(1) The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial;
(2) The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area
where it is received or perceived;
(3) The time of day or night the sound occurs;
(4) The duration of the sound; and
(5) Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
Sec. 7.1305 Noises Prohibited
The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this article. This enumeration does not constitute an
exclusive list:
(1) Unreasonable Noises. The unreasonable making of, or knowingly and unreasonably permitting
to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or
vibration in any boarding facility, dwelling, place of business or other structure, or upon any public
street, park, or other place or building. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion, or
vibration incidental to the operation of these places when conducted in accordance with the usual
standards of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of
adjacent residences, or which will not detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of
business, are exempted from this provision.
(2) Vehicle Horns, Signaling Devices, and Similar Devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling
device, or other similar device, on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any right-of-way
or in any public space of the city for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds. The sounding of any
horn, signaling device, or other similar device, as a danger warning is exempt from this prohibition.
(3) Nonemergency Signaling Devices. Sounding or permitting sounding any amplified signal from
any bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes,
from any place for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds in any hourly period. The reasonable
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/221
sounding of such devices by houses of religious worship or by the city for traffic-control purposes are
exempt from the operation of this provision.
(4) Emergency Signaling Devices. The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of
any emergency signaling device, including fire, burglar, civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar
emergency signaling device, except in an emergency or except as provided in subsections (A) and
(B) below.
(A) Testing of an emergency signaling device shall occur between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed
five (5) minutes. Testing of the emergency signaling system shall not occur more than once in
each calendar month.
(B) Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor
vehicle burglar alarm, shall terminate within fifteen (15) minutes of activation unless an
emergency exists. If a false or accidental activation of an alarm occurs more than twice in a
calendar month, the owner or person responsible for the alarm shall be in violation of this
article.
(5) Radios, Televisions, Boomboxes, Phonographs, Stereos, Musical Instruments, and Similar
Devices. The use or operation of a radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, or similar
device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other
than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound,
and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors and passersby, or is
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from any person in a commercial, industrial area, or public
space. The use or operation of a radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, or similar
device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other
than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound,
and unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in residential or noise
sensitive areas, including multifamily or single-family dwellings.
(6) Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems, and Similar Devices. The unreasonably
loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or other
device for producing or reproducing sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays in the following areas:
(A) Within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas;
(B) Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the real property line of the
public space from which the sound emanates, and is unreasonably loud and raucous;
(C) This shall not apply to any public performance, gathering, or parade for which a permit
has been obtained from the city.
(7) Yelling, Shouting, and Similar Activities. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing in
residential or noise sensitive areas or in public places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of
reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities.
(8) Construction or Repair of Buildings, Excavation of Streets and Highways. The construction,
demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays. In cases of emergency, construction or repair noises are
exempt from this provision. In nonemergency situations, the building inspector or city administrator
may issue a permit, upon application, if the building inspector or city administrator determines that
the public health and safety, as affected by loud and raucous noise caused by construction or repair
of buildings or excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. will
not be impaired, and if the building inspector or city administrator further determines that loss or
inconvenience would result to a party in interest. The permit shall grant permission in nonemergency
cases for a period of not more than three (3) days. The permit may be renewed once for a period of
three (3) days or less.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/221
(9) Noise Sensitive Areas; Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals, and Similar Institutions. The
creation of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise adjacent to any noise sensitive area while it is
in use, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institution or which disturbs the
persons in these institutions.
(10) Blowers and Similar Devices. In residential or noise sensitive areas, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan, or any internal
combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or
fluids, provided that the noise is unreasonably loud and raucous and can be heard across the
property line of the property from which it emanates.
(11) Commercial Establishments Adjacent to Residential Property. Unreasonably loud and
raucous noise from the premises of any commercial establishment, including any outdoor area
which is part of or under the control of the establishment, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., which is plainly audible at a distance of five (5) feet from any residential property.
Sec. 7.1306 Exemptions
Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions set out in Section 7.1305 and are in addition
to the exemptions specifically set forth in Section 7.1305.
(1) Motor vehicles on trafficways of the city, provided that the prohibition of Section 7.1305(2)
continues to apply.
(2) Repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or
significant loss of property.
(3) Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or other alarm systems used in
case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity, or imminent danger, provided that the prohibition
contained in Section 7.1305(4) continues to apply.
(4) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or
the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
(5) Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city, the state, or
the federal government, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when public welfare and
convenience renders it impractical to perform the work between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(6) Outdoor School and Playground Activities. Reasonable activities conducted on public
playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the
manner in which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school athletic and
school entertainment events.
(7) Other Outdoor Events. Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting events, and
other similar outdoor events, provided that a permit has been obtained from the appropriate
permitting authority.
Sec. 7.1307 Enforcement
(a) The following individuals shall enforce this article: the city police department and its officers will have
primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained herein. Nothing in this article shall
prevent the city's police department and its officers from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning,
notice, or education.
(b) If a person's conduct would otherwise violate this article and consists of speech or communication; of a
gathering with others to hear or observe speech or communication; or of a gathering with others to picket or
otherwise express, in a nonviolent manner, a position on social, economic, political, or religious questions; the
person must be ordered to, and have the opportunity to, move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation prior
to arrest or a citation being issued.
Sec. 7.1308 Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/221
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine
not less than $100.00 and not to exceed $500.00.
(b) Each occurrence of a violation, or, in the case of continuous violations, each day a violation occurs or
continues, constitutes a separate offense and may be punished separately.
(Ordinance 2008-06 adopted 7/17/08)
CHAPTER 8
PERSONNEL & ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 8.100 CITY ADMINISTRATOR*
Sec. 8.101 Position Created
The office of city administrator, who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, is hereby created.
Sec. 8.102 Appointment and Removal
The city administrator shall be employed by a majority vote of the City Council of the City of Seymour and
likewise may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council of the City of Seymour at its pleasure.
Sec. 8.103 Guidance of Mayor and Council
All duties and work performed by the city administrator shall be under the administrative policies and guidance
of the mayor and city council.
Sec. 8.104 Duties
The city administrator's duties shall include:
(1) Directly supervise all department heads of the City of Seymour and supervise and coordinate
all activities of all city departments.
(2) Attend all meetings of the city council.
(3) Prepare the annual budget of the city, subject to approval of the city council.
(4) Make and execute short and long range plans of the City of Seymour.
(5) Act as personnel officer for the city.
(6) Monitor all fund transactions and sign all checks in behalf of the city.
(7) Execute official documents as authorized by the mayor and city council.
(8) Represent the city at various meetings when required or advantageous.
(9) Attend all staff meetings.
(10) Represent the city with outside organizations, agencies, businesses and the general public.
(11) Administer and monitor the city budget.
(12) Identify potential problems and make recommendations to the city council on issues requiring
council direction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/221
(13) Select and dismiss, when necessary, all department heads and other personnel.
(14) Approve the purchase of all major items within the limitations of statutes and budget
constraints.
(15) In coordination with the mayor, prepare and maintain agendas and other materials for all
meetings of the city council, boards and committees.
(16) Issue administrative directives.
(17) Execute official documents as directed by the city council.
(18) Act as the city's investment officer.
(Ordinance 99-07 adopted 5/20/99)
ARTICLE 8.200 TREASURER*
Sec. 8.201 Treasurer's Office Created
The office of city treasurer is hereby established and the said city treasurer shall immediately begin the
discharge of his duties as herein set forth. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 3, Section 1.13)
Sec. 8.202 Duty to Disburse, Receive, Deposit Funds
It shall be the duty of said city treasurer to receive and disburse all funds belonging to the city; and all funds
and/or receipts coming into the hands of the city treasurer shall be deposited by the city treasurer with the city
depository daily, indicating to the city depository the proper fund to which said deposit shall be credited. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 3, Section 1-14)
Sec. 8.203 Duty to Keep Accurate Accounts
The city treasurer shall keep accurate accounts of all such receipts and funds received and shall keep said
accounts with each special fund with the city depository so that at any and all times it may be easy to determine
the exact status and condition of each fund. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 3, Section 1-15)
Sec. 8.204 Duty to Disburse with Authorization
The city treasurer is hereby authorized to disburse funds belonging to the city upon written order of the mayor
or mayor pro tem and duly attested by the city secretary under the order of the city. Provided however, no order
shall be paid unless such order shall show upon its face that the city council has directed its issuance and for
what purpose and said order properly indicates upon which said fund it sis drawn and out of which the same is
to be paid. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 3, Section 1-16)
Sec. 8.205 Duty to Render Monthly Reports
The city treasurer shall render a full and correct statement of his receipts and payments to the city council at
their regular monthly meetings and whensoever at any other time he may be required so to do, and said reports
shall show a statement of the receipts and disbursements and from what sources the receipts were received
and to what funds the same were recorded and showing the condition of each fund and the balance on hand in
each of said funds. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 3, Section 1-17)
Sec. 8.206 Duty to Issue Warrants; Limits
The city treasurer is hereby instructed and it is hereby made a part of his duty to keep correctly accurate
accounts of all of the receipts received by the city and to show correctly the daily deposits with the city
depository and the fund or account to which the same belongs, and he shall keep a correct disbursement
record showing by whose order and for what purpose each warrant was issued and to which fund the same is
properly chargeable. The city treasurer shall not issue any warrant for any purpose except upon accounts duly
allowed and passed upon by the city council and all such accounts shall be correctly kept by the city treasurer.
Provided however, that the city treasurer may issue warrants for the salaries of the officers and employees of
the city where their employment has been authorized by appointment; and except where the city manager may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/221
be required to employ extra labor to meet any emergency or to carry out some important order or undertaking
by the city council; or where it is necessary to pay freight bills for supplies shipped to the city over some
transportation facility, in which case the city treasurer will issue warrants upon the written request of the city
manager. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 3, Section 1-18)
Sec. 8.207 Bond
It is further provided that before entering upon the performance of his duties as city treasurer, the said city
treasurer shall execute bond in favor of the City of Seymour in the amount of two thousand-five hundred dollars
($2,500) conditioned that such city treasurer shall well and faithfully perform and discharge all of the duties of
his office as required by law and the ordinances of the City of Seymour. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1,
Article 3, Section 1-19)
Sec. 8.208 Powers and Duties Conferred upon City Secretary
The powers and duties of the city treasurer as above set forth are hereby vested in and conferred upon the city
secretary of the City of Seymour, so that the city secretary in addition to his duties and functions as city
secretary shall also perform all of the duties and functions required of the city treasurer for the City of Seymour;
and the said city secretary shall before entering upon the performance of his duties as city treasurer, execute
the bond for faithful performance of such duties as above set forth and shall then enter upon the performance of
his duties as city treasurer likewise as above set forth. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 3, Section
1-20)
ARTICLE 8.300 SEYMOUR HOSPITAL AUTHORITY*
Sec. 8.301 Hospital Authority Created
It is to the best interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority to be comprised of the
territory included within the boundaries of the city, and said hospital authority is hereby created and the same
shall be a body politic and corporate under the name of Seymour Hospital Authority, which is hereby designated
as the name by which said authority shall be known. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 4, Section 1-
21)
Sec. 8.302 Board of Directors; Term; Oath
The Seymour Hospital Authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of seven (7) members and
each of said directors shall, unless other provision is made in the bond resolution or indenture in connection
with the issuance of bonds as provided in Article 4437e, V.A.T.S., serve for a term of two (2) years from the date
hereof and until their successors have been appointed by the governing body of the city, and have been duly
qualified. Each of the directors herein appointed shall qualify by executing oath of office required of appointed
officials of the state. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 4, Section 1-22)
ARTICLE 8.400 TAX ASSESSOR†
The position of tax assessor is created in place of tax assessor/collector. The assessor shall be appointed by
the city council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 5, Section 1-31)
ARTICLE 8.500 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 8.501 Police Force Created
There is hereby created and established a police force of the city which shall consist of a chief of police and as
many additional policemen as the city council shall decide to appoint from time to time. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 1, Article 8, Section 1-71)
Sec. 8.502 Officers' Terms of Employment
The terms of office of each of the said policemen shall be from month to month at the will and pleasure of the
city council; said officers shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the city council and shall hold office
until such time as the city council may for any reason deemed sufficient to it discontinue the employment; the
policemen shall perform duties such as daytime or nighttime services and additional services as the city council
may designate at the time of employment and the compensation of each officer shall be such as agreed to by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/221
and between the officers and the city council, to be paid monthly. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article
8, Section 1-72)
Sec. 8.503 Powers and Duties of Officers
The powers and duties of the said policemen shall be such as is designated by the Revised Civil Statutes and
the Code of Criminal Procedure of Texas for Peace Officers. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 8,
Section 1-73)
Sec. 8.504 Bond
Before entering upon his employment as chief of police or policeman, such officer shall take the oath required
of peace officers as provided by the statutes of Texas, and shall enter into a good and sufficient bond in the
sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000), payable to the mayor of the city, and his successors in office, conditioned
on the faithful performance of his duties and that he will faithfully pay over any and all sums of money that may
come into his hands as such officer to the city (or other person to whom it may be lawfully due) and conditioned
that any person or persons aggrieved by the unauthorized acts of any peace officer may bring suit against such
bond; and that such bond shall be in force and a valid obligation as long as the said peace officer shall hold the
said office. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 8, Section 1-74)
ARTICLE 8.600 SOCIAL SECURITY
Sec. 8.601 Provisions of State, Federal Statutes Adopted
The city council, acting for and on behalf of the City of Seymour, shall enter into all necessary agreements with
the State Department of Human Resources for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of House Bill 603,
Acts 52nd Leg., R.S. 1951, and Public Law 734, 81st Congress, ch. 809, 2d, H.R. 6000. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 1, Article 9, Section 1-81)
Sec. 8.602 Mayor Designated Agent
(a) The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary
agreements and instruments for and on behalf of said city council and city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter
1, Article 9, Section 1-82)
(b) The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections,
payments and reports, as required by the State. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 9, Section 1-83)
Sec. 8.603 City Social Security Fund Established
A sufficient sum of money is to be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of the above-mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city
“Social Security Fund” which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 9, Section 1-84)
Sec. 8.604 Part-Time Employees Included
The mayor is authorized to act as the agent of the city council to execute any and all necessary contracts,
agreements and instruments of every kind and character to bring about the desired result of including
employees of the city performing services in part-time positions. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 9,
Section 1-85)
ARTICLE 8.700 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 8.701 City Elects to Join TMRS
The city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all
departments now existing or hereafter established participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as
provided in Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature, as amended, (Article 6243h of Vernon's Civil Statutes of
Texas); and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-86)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/221
Sec. 8.702 Notification of Acceptance
The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the
city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above departments participate in said system.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-87)
Sec. 8.703 Membership by Employees Required
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of
participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a
condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to
such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article
10, Section 1-88)
Sec. 8.704 Deposit Rate
In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the TMRS on account of current
service of the employees of the participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of six percent (6%) of the
earnings of each employee of said departments, and in determining the deposits to be made on account of
such service the maximum earnings of the employee is full salary. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article
10, Section 1-89; Ordinance 94-12 adopted 11/17/94)
Sec. 8.705 Remittance of City's Contributions
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the TMRS at its office in Austin, Texas,
the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or
payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th
Legislature of the State of Texas, as amended, and the said city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to
ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the
employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and
to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be
required of the City of Seymour under the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts Regular Session, 50th Legislature, as
amended, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the TMRS. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-90)
Sec. 8.706 Supplemental Benefits Adopted
The City of Seymour, by its city council hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of
said city (as above defined) participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Chapter 312, Acts Regular Session, 56th Legislature; and all the
benefits and obligations; of participation in said fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-91)
Sec. 8.707 Notification of Participation
The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the TMRS that the city has elected to
participate and have the employees of the above mentioned departments participate in the Supplemental
Benefits Fund of said system. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-92)
Sec. 8.708 Employees' Membership Required
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of
participation of such department in said fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the
Supplemental Benefits Fund of the system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new
employees to said fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-93)
Sec. 8.709 Remitting City's Contribution; Limitation
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the TMRS at its office in Austin,
Texas, as the city's contributions to the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System,
such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/221
TMRS, provided that the rate of contribution to said fund shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of
the earnings of the employees who are covered under said fund; and such official shall make for the city such
reports as the board of trustees of the TMRS may prescribe. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10,
Section 1-94)
Sec. 8.710 Supplemental Death Benefits
The city hereby elects to participate in the Supplemental Death Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits for each of the city's employees who
are members of said System, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for annuitants
whose last covered employment was as an employee of the city, in the amounts and on the terms provided for
in Sections 62.004, 64.601 through 64.605, 65.314, 65.409, and 65.502 of Title 1108, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas, 1925, as amended. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-97)
Sec. 8.711 Additional Rights, Credits, Benefits
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 62.105, 64.202, 64.204, 64.405, 64.406, and 64.410 of Subtitle G
of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended by the 70th Legislature of the State of Texas,
Regular Session, which Subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the City of Seymour, Texas,
adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the “System”):
(1) An employee of the city who is a member of the System may terminate employment and
remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity at any time after that member
attains an applicable age and service requirement, if that member has at least ten (10) years of
credited service performed for one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under
Section 64.202(c) of the Act or are subject to Section 64.102(e) of the Act.
(2) An employee of the city who is a member of the System may retire and receive a service
retirement annuity if that member is at least sixty (60) years old and has at least ten (10) years of
creditable service performed for one or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility
under this subsection or are subject to Section 64.201(e) of this subtitle.
(3) Any employee of this city who is a member of the System is eligible to retire and receive a
service retirement annuity, if the member has at least 25 years of credited service in that System
performed For one or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or
have adopted a like provision under Section 64.202(f) of the TMRS Act.
(4) If a “vested member,” as that term is defined in Section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die
before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the
member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated
contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written
notice filed with the System elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the System
subject to the terms and conditions of said Section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not
been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service
retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity
payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have
been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity
(Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of
the surviving spouse.
(5) At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to
whom subsection (d) applies may, upon written application filed with the System, receive payment of
the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits
otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment
of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions
credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse.
(6) Any employee of this city who is a member of the System and who performed service for this
city prior to September 1, 1987, (for which service that employee did not receive credit with the
System because the employee was not at that time a member of the System due to his or her age at
the date of his or her employment) is hereby granted service credit with the System for all of such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/221
service (performed after the date of his or her latest employment by the city) that is prior to
September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with the System,
pursuant to Section 62.105 of the Act.
(7) The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan
provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of ordinance 87-13 pursuant to the
TMRS Act.
(8) Any employee of this city who is a member of the System is eligible to retire and receive a
“standard occupational disability annuity” under Section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an “optional
occupational disability retirement annuity” under Section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making
application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Board of
Trustees of the System, provided that the System's medical board has certified to said Board of
Trustees: (A) that the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties
of the member's employment; (B) that the disability is likely to be permanent; and (C) that the
member should be retired. Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 64.409 of the TMRS Act.
(9) The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (8)
above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under Sections 64.301 to 64.308 of
the TMRS Act.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-98)
(b) Prior Military Service.
(1) Pursuant to Section 63.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 63, Title 110B, Revised Civil Statues of
Texas, as amended, the City of Seymour hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment
to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as
a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the
armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees
meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 63.502(b) and 63.503 of said Subchapter F, and the
amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in Section 63.505.
(2) In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the
Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the Employees Saving
Fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00.
The City of Seymour agrees that its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund is to be charged
at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the
member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at
the date the member applies for such military service credit.
(Ordinance 89-9 adopted 9/12/89)
(c) Probationary Employees.
(1) Any employee of this city who is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System and
who performed service as a probationary employee for this city prior to September 1, 1989, for
which the employee did not receive credited service in the System because the person, as a
probationary employee was not enrolled as a member of the system during the period of
probationary employment, is hereby allowed to obtain prior service credit for the period of such
probationary service (not in excess of six months), pursuant to the provisions of Section 63.303 of
Subtitle G, Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes, as enacted by House Bill 1885, Acts of the Regular
Session of the 71st Legislature.
(2) To obtain prior service credit allowable under subsection (1) of this article any employee
entitled thereto shall file a detailed written statement of the service claimed with the city (clerk)
(secretary) within one year from the effective date of this section.
(3) As soon as practicable after the employee has filed a claim the prior service credit under
Section 63.303, Subtitle G of the Government Code, the city (clerk) (personnel officer) shall, if said
officer determines that such service was performed as claimed, verify the prior service allowable (not
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/221
exceeding six months) and the average monthly compensation paid the member during the period of
probationary employment, and shall certify to the Board of Trustees of the system the creditable
prior service approved, and the average monthly compensation paid to the person by the city during
the period of probationary employment.
(Ordinance 89-10 adopted 9/12/89)
(d) Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as
amended, which Subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the City of Seymour, Texas, adopts the
following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein
referred to as the “system”):
(1) Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a
service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system
performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section
854.202(g) of the TMRS Act.
(2) Prior to adopting this article, the governing body of the city has: (A) prepared an actuarial
analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and (B) held a public hearing
pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government
Code.
(3) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore
adopted and in force at the effective date of this article pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance 98-5 adopted 10/15/98)
Sec. 8.712 Authorization of Updated Service Credits–1988
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised Civil
Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has
current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1986,
by reason of service in the employment of the City of Seymour, and on such date has at least 36 months of
credited service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is 100% of the “base Updated
Service Credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 63.402 of said title). The
Updated Service Credit hereby allowed shall replace any Updated Service Credit, prior service credit, special
prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits required to
be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-95)
(c) This shall become effective on the first day of January 1, 1988, provided that it has previously been
determined by the Actuary for the system that all obligations of the city to the municipality accumulation fund,
including obligations hereby undertaken, can be funded by the city within its maximum contribution rate and
within its amortization period. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-99)
Sec. 8.713 Increase in Retirement Annuities–1988
(a) On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as
amended, the City of Seymour hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated
in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to
beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities
arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this Section replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current
service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the Urban Consumers, from
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/221
December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that
is 13 months before the effective date of Ordinance 87-12.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereby.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this Section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-96)
(f) This shall become effective on the first day of January 1, 1988, provided that it has previously been
determined by the Actuary for the system that all obligations of the city to the municipality accumulation fund,
including obligations hereby undertaken, can be funded by the city within its maximum contribution rate and
within its amortization period.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 10, Section 1-99)
Sec. 8.714 Authorization of Updated Service Credits–1989
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised Civil
Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has
current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1988,
by reason of service in the employment of the City of Seymour, and on such date has at least 36 months of
credited service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is 100% of the “base Updated
Service Credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 63.402 of said title). The
Updated Service Credit hereby allowed shall replace any Updated Service Credit, prior service credit, special
prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits required to
be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(Ordinance 88-17 adopted 10/13/88, Section 1)
(c) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service
credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1989. (Ordinance 88-17 adopted 10/13/88, Section 3)
Sec. 8.715 Increase in Retirement Annuities–1989
(a) On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 192S, as
amended, the City of Seymour hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated
in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to
beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities
arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current
service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based,
multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December
of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13
months before the effective date of this section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/221
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereby.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System.
(Ordinance 88-17 adopted 10/13/88, Section 2)
(f) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service
credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1989. (Ordinance 88-17 adopted 10/13/88, Section 3)
Sec. 8.716 Authorization of Updated Service Credits–1990
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised Civil
Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has
current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1989,
by reason of service in the employment of the City of Seymour, and on such date has at least 36 months of
credited service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is 100% of the “base Updated
Service Credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 63.402 of said title). The
Updated Service Credit hereby allowed shall replace any Updated Service Credit, prior service credit, special
prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 63.401 of said title, the deposits required to
be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on
account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(Ordinance 89-11 adopted 9/12/89, Section 1)
(c) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service
credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1990. (Ordinance 89-11 adopted 9/12/89, Section 3)
Sec. 8.717 Increase in Retirement Annuities-1990
(a) On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as
amended, the City of Seymour hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated
in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to
beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities
arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current
service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based,
multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December
of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13
months before the effective date of this section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereby.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System.
(Ordinance 89-11 adopted 9/12/89, Section 2)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/221
(f) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service
credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1990. (Ordinance 89-11 adopted 9/12/89, Section 3)
Sec. 8.718 Authorization of Updated Service Credits–1991
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.403 of Subtitle of Title 8, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current
service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the 1st day of January, 1990, by
reason of service in the employment of the City of Seymour and on such date has at least 36 months of
credited service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection td) of Section 853.402 of said title) in an amount that is 100% of the “base Updated
Service Credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of said title). The
Updated Service Credit hereby allowed shall replace any Updated Service Credit, prior service credit, special
prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of said title, the deposits required
to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments
on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such
person's earnings as an employee of the city.
(Ordinance 90-17 adopted 11/8/90, Section 1)
(c) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service
credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1991. (Ordinance 90-17 adopted 11/8/90, Section 3)
Sec. 8.719 Increase in Retirement Annuities–1991
(a) On terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as
amended, the City of Seymour hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated
in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to
beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities
arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current
service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based,
multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December
of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13
months before the effective date of this section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereby.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System.
(Ordinance 90-17 adopted 11/8/90, Section 2)
(f) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service
credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1991. (Ordinance 90-17 adopted 11/8/90, Section 3)
Sec. 8.720 Authorization of Updated Service Credits–1992
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS ACT”), each member of the Texas
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/221
Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service credit or prior
service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such
allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the City of Seymour (hereinafter called the “city”), and on
such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated
Service Credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(b) The Updated Service Credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base Updated Service
Credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). If the city
has previously adopted, or if it hereafter adopts an ordinance authorizing Updated Service Credit for unforfeited
credit for prior service or current service with any other participating municipality, the calculations and
adjustments set forth in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act shall apply to any such transferred service.
(c) Each Updated Service Credit allowed hereunder shall replace any Updated Service Credit, prior service
credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same
service.
(d) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits
required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current
service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's
compensation as an employee of the city.
(Ordinance 91-6 adopted 9/19/91, Section 1)
(e) The initial allowance of Updated Service Credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1992, subject
to approval by the Board of Trustees of the system. An allowance of Updated Service Credits and an increase
in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases
to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent
year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of
the TMRS Act.
(f) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on
the 1st day of January 1992.
(Ordinance 91-6 adopted 9/19/91, Section 3)
Sec. 8.721 Increase in Retirement Annuities–1992
(a) On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and
to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired
employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior
service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section
replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are
based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from
December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that
is 13 months before the effective date of this Section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this Section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(Ordinance 91-6 adopted 9/19/91, Section 2)
(f) The initial allowance of increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1992,
subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the system. An allowance of Updated Service Credits and an
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/221
increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this
section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to
such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of
Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(g) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on
the 1st day of January 1992.
(Ordinance 91-6 adopted 9/19/91, Section 3)
Sec. 8.722 Authorization of Updated Service Credits - 1994
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8,
Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS ACT”), each member of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “System”) who has current service credit or prior
service Credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such
allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of
credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service Credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who
is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior
service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous
service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such
allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with and subject
to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants
under this article.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base Updated Service
Credit” of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service
credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same
service.
(e) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits
required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current
service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this article on the full amount of such person's
compensation as an employee of the city.
(Ordinance 94-12, adopted 11/17/94, Section 1)
(f) The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be
effective on January 1, 1995, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the system. An allowance of
updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each
subsequent year until this article ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS
Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth
in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. (Ordinance 94-12, adopted 11/17/94, Section 3)
Sec. 8.723 Increase in Retirement Annuities - 1994
(a) On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and
to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired
employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior
service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section
replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are
based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from
December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that
is 13 months before the effective date of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/221
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereunder.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(Ordinance 94-12, adopted 11/17/94, Section 2)
Sec. 8.724 Authorization of Restricted Prior Service Credit-1998
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code,
as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city
shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the
entities described in Section 853.305 provided that (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in
the system for that service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305.
(b) The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for
retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and
may not be used in other computations, including computation of Updated Service Credits.
(c) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this article must take the action
required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city.
(Ordinance 98-1 adopted 3/19/98)
Sec. 8.725 Health Benefits Coverage
(a) The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to retirees through Texas Municipal League
Group Benefits Risk Pool under the Pool's Interlocal Agreement.
(b) The city hereby adopts the following definition of “retiree” for purposes of this article:
(1) age 60 with ten years of service
(c) The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the Texas
Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool:
(1) The same medical plan(s) offered to active employees and dependents
(2) Dental plan same as offered to active employees, and dependents
(3) Retiree Optional Life
(4) Medicare Supplemental Coverage plan when Medicare eligible age is reached.
(d) The Interlocal Agreement is in effect between the City of Seymour, Texas and the Texas Municipal
League Group Benefits Risk Pool provides that the board of trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The
rules and regulations of the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool allow the participating member
entity to provide retiree medical coverage at the same contribution as charged to active employees or to select
a contribution level which is 150% of the active employee contribution.
(e) The City of Seymour elects to have the retiree medical contribution be the same rate as active employees
for as long as the TML-GBRP offers this rate structure for retiree medical coverage. Other coverage's will be as
established annually by the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool Board of Trustees.
(f) This article will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date of to employees which retired under
a previous ordinance. For individuals retiring after the effective date of this article to qualify they must enroll for
this coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/221
(g) This article may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring
while it is in effect.
(Ordinance 98-6 adopted 11/19/98)
ARTICLE 8.800 AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 8.801 Airport Advisory Board Created; Membership; Term
(a) There is hereby created the Airport Advisory Board of the City of Seymour, to be composed of five (5)
members. All members shall be residents of Baylor County, Texas, and except for the first members of such
advisory board, shall be appointed for two-year terms, and shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Members of the airport advisory board shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent
of the city council. Appointments to the advisory board shall be made at the first regular meeting after the
annual election, or as soon thereafter as possible.
(b) The terms of two (2) members shall expire in the even-numbered years and the terms of the other three
(3) members shall expire in the odd-numbered years.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 2-1)
Sec. 8.802 Selection of Officers; Rules and Regulations
The airport advisory board shall select from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, and it shall
adopt, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations as shall not be inconsistent with
city ordinances. The advisory board shall appoint a secretary, who may but need not be, a member of the
board. The secretary shall keep a record of all transactions of the board. The manager of the airport shall
provide the advisory board with all information necessary for the performance of its duties. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 2-2)
Sec. 8.803 Duties
The airport advisory board shall from time to time make such general studies of airport construction and
operation as may be useful in keeping the municipal airport efficient and adequate to the needs of the city and
of the air transportation industry; it shall make recommendations to the city council in respect to construction,
expansions, improvements, maintenance and operation of the airport. It shall call the manager's attention to any
failure by personnel of the airport to carry out any orders or policies adopted by the city council; and it shall,
acting in an advisory capacity, work toward the general improvement of the airport and the advancement of the
city as an air transportation center. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 2-3)
Sec. 8.804 Disqualifications
No person having any financial interest in any commercial carrier by air, or in any concession, right or privilege
to conduct any business or render any service for compensation upon the premises of the municipal airport
shall be eligible for membership on the airport advisory board. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 1,
Section 2-4)
Sec. 8.805 Board Serves Without Compensation
All members of the airport advisory board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all
expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of such board, when
authorized by the city council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 2-5)
CHAPTER 9
SUBDIVISIONS*
ARTICLE 9.100 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/221
Sec. 9.101 Developer's Responsibilities in Subdividing
Any person desiring to subdivide or re-subdivide a tract of land within the city limits shall be required to provide
at his sole expense all necessary street grading, pavement, curbs, gutters and storm sewer drains, water and
sewer mains required to service such tract as subdivided or resubdivided, or such portion thereof as may be
developed by the erection of permanent buildings thereon. Prior to the final acceptance by the city council of
any such subdivision or re-subdivision, the owner or owners or the agents thereof shall be required to give good
and sufficient bond or deposit with the city clerk a sum in the total of the estimated cost of such improvements
within the tract of land subdivided or re-subdivided, which shall be for the performance of the mentioned
improvements. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 16, Article 1, Section 16-1)
Sec. 9.102 Submission of Plat
Every owner or developer of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits shall submit to the city
secretary a map or plat which shall accurately describe all of said subdivision or addition, and locate the same
with respect to an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part, giving the dimensions of all streets,
alleys, and squares, which map shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk of Baylor County, only after
the approval of the city council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 16, Article 1, Section 16-2)
Sec. 9.103 Plat Approval; Minimum Requirements for Subdivisions
The city council shall not approve any such map or plat until the same has been in the hands of the city
secretary for inspection for a minimum of ten (10) days, so it may be determined that the streets and alleys
therein are so arranged as to reasonably correspond with existing streets and alleys to which they will connect,
and that the plan of said subdivision, and that the said subdivision, meets the following minimum requirements:
(1) No residential lot created within shall consist of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet,
exclusive of alleys, nor be less than fifty (50) feet in width.
(2) Each block in said subdivision has alleys of a minimum of twenty (20) feet with a fifteen (15)
foot cut-off at all acute corners running through such blocks therein as are necessary for the
extension to the subdivision of the sanitary sewer lines, garbage collection, electric lines, gas lines,
and the necessary utility lines.
(3) Streets dedicated therein shall be a minimum width of fifty (50) feet.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 16, Article 1, Section 16-3)
Sec. 9.104 Paving Standards
(a) The city shall recognize as meeting minimum city standards for permanent-type paving the following:
(1) Concrete pavement of six (6) inch uniform thickness with curb and gutter, or
(2) Six (6) inch flexible base with one and one-half (1-1/2) inch asphalt surface course, including
prime coat, wyeing and rolling together with concrete curb and gutter.
(3) In lieu of the paving requirement of the subdivision prior to development, streets and alleys
may be opened, graded and graveled by City crews, as needed, at the sole expense of the
developer who will be billed by the City of Seymour for cost of labor, equipment and materials.
(b) This subsection in no way waives the minimum standards for permanent-type paving as set out in
subsection (1) and (2).
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 16, Article 1, Section 16-4)
Sec. 9.105 Utility Requirements
All such owners or developers shall install at their own expense all necessary water mains, including valves,
fittings and fire hydrants, and sanitary sewer mains, including manholes, wyes and cleanouts, for any distance
in excess of one hundred (100) feet from existing water and sewer mains to each individual lot, provided that
such improvements shall conform in all details to the city's standards as design, grade, location, size and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/221
quality of materials and construction. Upon completion of utility plans and specifications, two copies of said
plans shall be submitted to the city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 16, Article 1, Section 16-5)
Sec. 9.106 Extension of Water and Sewer Mains
(a) In the event such persons shall request the city to extend such water and sewer mains for them,
satisfactory assurance of payment in full may be required of such persons by the city. The city shall not be
required to make any such extensions with its own materials and workmen unless it so elects.
(b) In the event the City of Seymour installs water mains, including valves, fittings and fire hydrants, and
sanitary sewer mains for the developer, the developer will be billed for such costs, on a pro-rata basis, for each
lot as developed.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 16, Article 1, Section 16-6)
ARTICLE 9.200 ECONOMICALLY DISTRESSED AREAS PROGRAM
Sec. 9.201 Definitions
Drinking Water. All water distributed by any agency or individual, public or private, for the purpose of human
consumption, or which may be used in the preparation of foods or beverages or for the cleaning of any utensil
or article used in the course of preparation of food or beverages, for human bathing, or clothes washing.
Economically Distressed Area. An area in which the water supply or sewer services are inadequate to meet
minimal needs of residential users as defined by the Texas Water Development Board (board) rules; financial
resources are inadequate to provide water supply or sewer services that will satisfy those needs; and an
established residential subdivision was located on June 1, 1989, as determined by the board.
Nonpublic Water System. Any water system supplying water for domestic purposes which is not a public water
system.
TAC. Texas Administrative Code, as compiled by the Texas Secretary of State.
TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Water Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that will reduce the consumption of water,
reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water, or increase the recycling and reuse
of water so that a water supply is made available for future or alternative uses.
Sec. 9.202 Scope and Purpose
(a) Scope. This article contains model rules which the Texas Water Development Board (board) is required to
adopt in accordance with Texas Water Code Section 16.343. Before an application for financial assistance from
the economically distressed areas program as specified in Chapter 355, Subchapter B of the Texas Water Code
or Chapter 363, Subchapter E of the same title may be considered by the board, the applicant shall provide
documentation satisfactory in form and in substance that the municipality (ETJ) and county in which the
applicant is located has adopted the necessary orders, ordinances, or other rules that meet the requirements of
the Model Subdivision Rules contained in Chapter 16, Subchapter B, of the Texas Water Code.
(b) Purpose. The model rules provide the criteria for assuring that an adequate supply of safe drinking water
and adequate safe sewer facilities are available to residential areas in accordance with state standards
established by the department of state health services and the TNRCC. The model rules prohibit the
establishment of residential developments with lots of five acres or less without adequate water supply and
sewer services, prohibit more than one single-family detached dwelling to be located on each subdivision lot,
and establish minimum setbacks to ensure proper operation of water supply and sewer services and to reduce
the risk of fire hazards.
Sec. 9.203 Plats, Tracts and Subdivided Land
(a) The owner of a tract of land that divides the tract in any manner that creates two or more lots of five acres
or less intended for residential purposes must have a plat of the subdivision prepared. Lots of five acres or less
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/221
are presumed to be for residential purposes unless the land is restricted to nonresidential uses on the final plat
and duly noted in all deeds and contract for deeds.
(b) A division of a tract is defined as including a metes and bounds description, or any description of less
than a whole parcel, in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, using a contract of sale or other
executory contract, lease/purchase agreement, or using any other method to convey property.
(c) Every plat creating two or more lots of five acres or less for residential purposes, located within the ETJ of
the city shall comply with the standards of Section 9.204.
(d) The final plat shall be accompanied by an engineering report, consistent with Section 364.52 of the Texas
Water Code, bearing the signed and dated seal of a professional engineer registered in the state. The
engineering report shall discuss the availability and methodology of providing water facilities and wastewater
treatment to individual lots within the subdivision. A detailed cost estimate per lot acceptable to the planning
and zoning commission shall be provided for those unconstructed water supply and distribution facilities and
wastewater collection and treatment facilities which are necessary to serve each lot of the subdivision. The plan
shall include a construction schedule for each significant element needed to provide adequate water or
wastewater facilities.
(e) No subdivided land shall be sold or conveyed until the subdivider has received final approval by the
planning and zoning commission of the tract and has filed and recorded, with the county clerk of Baylor County,
a legally approved plat.
Sec. 9.204 Facility Standards
The establishment of a residential development with two or more lots of five acres or less where the water
supply and sewer services do not meet the minimum standards of this section is prohibited.
(1) Public Water Systems.
(A) Where drinking water is to be supplied to a subdivision by the city, the water quality and
system design, construction and operation, shall meet the minimum criteria set forth in 25 TAC
337.201–337.212, “Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems,” and 25 TAC 337.1–
337.18, “Drinking Water Standards Governing Drinking Water Quality and Reporting
Requirements for Public Water Supply Systems.”
(B) Subdividers shall supply drinking water by connecting to the city system. The written
service agreement permitting the connection to the city system shall calculate service charges
based on the ultimate development and occupancy of the proposed subdivision for a minimum
of thirty (30) years. The agreement must reflect that the subdivider has paid the cost of water
meters and other necessary connection equipment, membership fees, water rights acquisition
costs, or other fees associated with connection to the city system so that service is available to
each lot upon completion of construction of the water facilities described on the final plat.
(2) Nonpublic Water Systems.
(A) Where individual wells or other nonpublic water systems are proposed for the supply of
drinking water to residential establishments, a test well or wells located so as to be
representative of the quantity and quality of water generally available from the supplying
aquifer shall be drilled by the subdivider and the produced water sample will be submitted to a
private laboratory for a complete chemical and bacteriological analysis of the parameters on
which there are drinking water standards. The subdivider shall have prepared and provided a
copy of a groundwater availability study which shall include analysis of the long-term (30 years)
quantity of the available groundwater supplies relative to the ultimate needs of the subdivision.
The water quality of the water produced from the test well must meet the standards of water
quality required for community water systems as set forth in 30 TAC, Section 290.103,
290.105, 290.106, and 290.110, either:
(i) Without any treatment to the water; or
(ii) With treatment by an identified and commercially available water treatment system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/221
(B) Individual water wells or nonpublic water systems that do not meet the water quality
standards developed by the TNRCC and set out in 30 TAC Sections 290.103, 290.105,
290.106, and 290.110 shall be prohibited.
(3) Transportation of Potable Water. The conveyance of potable water by transport truck or other
mobile device to supply the domestic needs of the subdivision is not an acceptable method, except
on an emergency basis. Absence of a water system meeting the standards of this article due to
negligence of the subdivider does not constitute an emergency.
(4) Wastewater Systems.
(A) Organized Sewerage Facilities.
(i) Subdividers who propose the development of an organized wastewater collection
and treatment system other than the city municipal system, shall obtain a permit to
dispose of wastes from the TNRCC in accordance with 30 TAC Chapter 305,
“Consolidated Permits,” and obtain approval of engineering planning materials for such
systems under 30 TAC Chapter 317, “Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems,” from the
TNRCC.
(ii) Subdividers who propose to dispose of wastewater by connecting to an existing
permitted facility must provide a written agreement with the city. The agreement must
accommodate the total flow anticipated from the ultimate development and occupancy of
the proposed subdivision for a minimum of thirty (30) years. This agreement must reflect
that the subdivider has paid the cost of all fees associated with connection to the
wastewater collection and treatment system so that service is available to each lot upon
completion of construction of the wastewater facilities described on the final plat.
Engineering plans for the proposed wastewater collection lines must comply with 30 TAC,
Chapter 317 and 31 TAC, Section 364.33(a)(12).
(B) On-Site Sewerage Facilities.
(i) No on-site wastewater disposal or septic system shall be permitted on any lot or
tract which is less than one acre in size or within 200 feet of a public wastewater
collection system. No on-site wastewater disposal system shall be permitted on any tract,
regardless of size, where soil conditions, flood zones, topography, or other conditions do
not permit both an undisturbed septic drain field and sufficient fallow, undisturbed land for
a replacement drain field.
(ii) No on-site wastewater disposal or septic system shall be permitted within any 100-
year flood zone identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on the flood
insurance rating maps (FIRM).
(iii) On-site facilities which serve residential dwellings with anticipated wastewater
generation of no greater than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day must comply with 30
TAC, Chapter 285, and be designed by a registered professional engineer or registered
professional sanitarian.
(iv) Proposals for on-site sewerage facilities for the on-site disposal of sewage in the
amount of five thousand (5,000) gallons per day or greater must comply with 30 TAC,
Chapter 317, and be presented to the TNRCC for determination of the necessity for a
wastewater permit from that agency. Each such disposal facility must be designed by a
registered professional engineer.
(v) On-site sewerage facilities not required to obtain a wastewater permit from the
TNRCC must apply for and receive a permit from the city, or its authorized agent as
required by the procedures established in 25 TAC 301.101 through 301.109.
(vi) On-site sewage facilities proposed near lakes or water storage reservoirs shall be
licensed and installed in strict accordance with requirements established by the TNRCC
in their rules 31 TAC, Chapter 285.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/221
(vii) On-site sewerage facilities proposed within aquifer recharge zones must be
licensed and installed in strict accordance with requirements established by the Texas
Water Commission in 31 TAC, Chapter 313, and applicable department of state health
services regulations.
(viii) The TCEQ, the city health department, or their authorized agents shall review
proposals for on-site sewage disposal systems and make inspections of such systems as
necessary to assure that the system is in compliance with Chapter 366 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code and rules in 30 TAC, Chapter 285, and in particular Sections
285.4, 285.5, 285.30 through 285.39. In addition to the unsatisfactory on-site disposal
systems listed in 30 TAC, Section 385.3(b), pit privies and portable toilets are prohibited.
(5) Graywater Systems for Reuse of Treated Wastewater.
(A) Organized Sewerage Facilities. Any proposal for sewage collection, treatment, and
disposal systems which include graywater reuse shall meet minimum criteria of 30 TAC,
Chapter 210, promulgated and administered by the TNRCC.
(B) On-Site Sewerage Facilities. Any proposal for on-site sewage disposal which includes
provisions for graywater use shall meet the minimum criteria of 30 TAC, Chapter 285.
(6) Sludge Disposal. The disposal of sludge from water treatment and wastewater treatment
facilities shall meet the criteria of 30 TAC, Chapter 312 and Chapter 317.
(7) Setbacks. In areas outside the corporate city limits which lack water lines sized for fire
protection, setbacks from private access easements, public or private roads and rights-of-way shall
be a minimum of forty-five (45) feet from the centerline of such road, street, or easement. Setbacks
from adjacent property lines shall be a minimum of five (5) feet for site-built housing and seven (7)
feet for any manufactured housing unit, and shall not conflict with separation or setback distances
required by rules governing public utilities, on-site sewerage facilities, or drinking water supplies.
(8) Number of Dwellings Per Lot. No more than one single-family detached dwelling shall be
located on an individual lot or tract. A notation of this restriction shall be placed on the face of the
approved final plat, in all deeds, and in all contracts for deed for real estate sold within the
subdivision. Notice of this restriction must be given by the seller in writing to any purchaser prior to
execution of any binding agreement for sale or conveyance of any real estate. Proposals which
include multifamily residential shall include adequate, detailed planning materials as required for the
determination of proper water and wastewater utility type and design.
(9) Connection to Public Wastewater Collection System. As soon as a public wastewater system
is available within 200 feet of the lot or tract, the lot or tract must be connected to the public
wastewater collection system. Failure to properly connect to the public system within 30 days of
written notice by the city shall void any water service agreement, and water service shall be
suspended until proper connection to the wastewater collection system is in place.
Sec. 9.205 Enforcement and Penalties
(a) If it appears that a violation or threat of a violation of Chapter 212, Subchapter B of the Texas Local
Government Code or a plan, rule, or ordinance adopted under Chapter 212, Subchapter B, or consistent with
Subchapter B exists, the city is entitled to appropriate injunctive relief against the person who committed, is
committing, or is threatening to commit the violation.
(b) A suit for injunctive relief may be brought in the county in which the defendant resides, the county in
which the violation or threat of violation occurs, or any county in which the city is wholly or partially located.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person violates Chapter 212, Subchapter B, or a plan, rule, or
ordinance adopted under Chapter 212, Subchapter B, or consistent with Subchapter B within the limits of the
city. An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues constitutes a
separate offense.
(d) Civil Penalty. A person who violates any rule adopted under this section pursuant to Section 16.343 of the
Texas Water Code is subject to a civil penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/221
violation and for each day of a continuing violation.
(e) Damages. The city may recover damages in an amount adequate for the city to undertake any
construction or other activity to bring about compliance with a requirement established under this section.
(f) Equitable Remedies. In addition to other remedies, the subdivider may be enjoined for the violation or
threatened violation of any requirement of this section by suit for injunction and/or application for temporary
injunction, and/or temporary restraining order duly filed by the city attorney. In addition to enforcement by a
political subdivision, the state attorney general may bring suit to enforce a rule adopted under Section 16.350 of
the water code, to recover the penalty provided by Section 16.352 of the water code, to obtain injunctive relief
to prevent the violation or continued violation of a political subdivision's rules, or to enforce the rules, recover
the criminal penalty, and obtain injunctive relief.
Sec. 9.206 Conflict of Interest
(a) Any member of the commission who has a substantial interest in a subdivided tract shall file, before a
vote or decision regarding the approval of a plat for the tract, an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the
interest and shall abstain from further participation in the matter. The affidavit must be filed with the city
secretary.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a person with substantial interest is one who:
(1) Has an equitable or legal ownership interest in the tract with a fair market value of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more;
(2) Acts as a developer of the tract;
(3) Owns ten percent (10%) or more of the voting stock or shares of, or owns either ten percent
(10%) or more, or $5,000.00 or more, of the fair market value of a business entity that:
(A) Has an equitable or legal ownership interest in the tract with a fair market value of
$2,500.00 or more;
(B) Acts as a developer of the tract; or
(C) Receives in a calendar year funds from a business entity described by subsection (c)
that exceeds ten percent (10%) of the person's gross income for the previous year.
(c) A person is also considered to have a substantial interest if he or she is related within the first degree by
consanguinity or affinity to another person who, under subsection (b)(3), has a substantial interest in the tract.
(d) For the purposes of this section, a tract includes the subdivided tract as a whole, not an individual lot.
(e) The finding by a court of a violation of this section of this article does not render voidable an action of the
commission unless the measure would not have passed the commission without the vote of the member who
violated this section.
(f) A violation under this section is a class A misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 2009-03 adopted 10/22/09)
CHAPTER 10
TRAFFIC CONTROL*
ARTICLE 10.100 TRAFFIC ENGINEER*
Sec. 10.101 Position Created
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/221
The position of city traffic engineer is hereby authorized. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 1, Article 6,
Section 1-36)
Sec. 10.102 Authority to Erect Traffic Control Devices, Impose Weight Limits†
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to erect
and maintain official traffic control devices on any streets or parts of streets to impose gross weight limits. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-1)
Sec. 10.103 Authority to Designate Loading Zones
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading
zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this article are applicable. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-2)
Sec. 10.104 Authority to Impose Size Restrictions
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to erect
and maintain official traffic control devices on any streets or parts of streets to impose vehicle size restrictions.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-3)
Sec. 10.105 Authority to Exclude Specified Traffic
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to
determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited any class or kind of
traffic which is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic and shall erect
appropriate official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1,
Section 19-4)
Sec. 10.106 Authority to Impose Truck Restrictions
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to erect
and maintain official traffic control devices on any streets or parts of streets to prohibit the operation of trucks
exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross weight; provided that such devices shall not prohibit necessary
local operation on such streets for the purpose of making a pickup or delivery. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-5)
Sec. 10.107 Authority to Assign One-Way Streets and Alleys
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall
place and maintain official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective
unless such devices are in place. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-6)
Sec. 10.108 Authority for Stop Signs and Yield Signs
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs, or other official traffic
control devices, to designate through streets or to designate intersections or other roadway junctions at which
vehicular traffic on one or more of the roadways should yield or stop and yield before entering the intersection
or junction. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-7)
Sec. 10.109 Placement of Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking
The city traffic engineer shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or
sign such streets but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within this
city unless the state highway commission or state highway engineer has determined that the roadway is of
sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-8)
Sec. 10.110 Prohibiting Turns at Intersections
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall
not make a right, left or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/221
may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-11)
Sec. 10.111 Authority to Restrict Direction of Movement During Certain Periods
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific
lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite
direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or
other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to
be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-12)
Sec. 10.112 Powers of and Appointment of Traffic Engineer
The city secretary shall have all powers and duties of the traffic engineer until such time as the council shall hire
a traffic engineer. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-13)
Sec. 10.113 No U-Turn Signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a u-turn between the north end of 300 Block of Washington Street
and shall extend to the south end of the 100 Block of Washington Street.
(1) Performing a 180-degree rotation to reverse the direction of travel.
(2) Turning across a lane of travel marked or unmarked for the purpose of parking.
(3) Exception. Vehicle needing to operate in a manner to make immediate delivery to place of
business in zoned area.
(Ordinance 2012-04 adopted 3/22/12)
ARTICLE 10.200 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sec. 10.201 State Speed Laws Applicable
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city except
where the city traffic engineer, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, determines that other
speed limits shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so determined when signs are in place giving
notice thereof. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-14)
Sec. 10.202 Duty of Officers to Enforce Traffic Laws
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the police to
enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-15)
Sec. 10.203 Authority of Police Officers to Direct Traffic
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, providing that in the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct
traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-16)
Sec. 10.204 Emergency and Experimental Regulations
The chief of police may authorize the temporary placing of official traffic control devices when required by an
emergency. The chief of police shall notify the city traffic engineer of his action as soon thereafter as is
practicable. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-17)
Sec. 10.205 Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/221
(a) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal,
markings, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes
with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(b) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any sign or
signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. No person shall place or maintain a sign across or above a
street unless permission is granted by the city traffic engineer.
(c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to a highway of
signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(d) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared a public nuisance and the authority
having jurisdiction of the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without
notice.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-18)
Sec. 10.206 Interfering with Devices, Signs or Signals
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-19)
State law reference–Destruction of traffic–control devices, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat., art. 6701d, section 37.
Sec. 10.207 Use of Streets to Sell Vehicles Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any portion of any public street, alley, avenue or
highway in the city as a stand for the sale or offering for sale or trade of any automobile, automobile truck,
motorcycle or other vehicle of any description, motor or otherwise, or to use any portion of any public street,
alley, avenue or highway for the purpose of sale or offering for sale or trade of any automobile, automobile
truck, motorcycle or other vehicle, motor or otherwise, by parking said vehicle or running same upon the streets
of the city with a “For Sale” or other sign upon them, indicating that such vehicles are for sale. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-20)
Sec. 10.208 Full Stop Required at Stop Signs
Any motor driven or other vehicle operation upon a public street, alley or other public way, shall come to a full
stop where such stop signs are installed and maintained by the city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19,
Article 2, Section 19-21)
Sec. 10.209 Vehicle Operators, Pedestrians to Obey Traffic Signals
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or attempt to operate any vehicle, or for any
pedestrian to walk, or attempt to walk, into or across the intersection of Washington and McLain Streets in the
city, when the red or amber lights are displayed facing or opposing the direction of said vehicle or pedestrian;
and it shall be the duty of every person operating a vehicle, upon approaching such street intersection, or when
such vehicle is standing at or near such intersection, to promptly proceed in the same direction across the
intersection, and pedestrians may proceed in the same direction across such intersection, upon the appearance
of the green light facing and opposing the direction of such vehicle or pedestrian; provided, that any vehicle
may turn from its original course to the left into the intersecting street, only upon the display of the green light
facing or opposing the original course of such vehicle. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section
19-22)
Sec. 10.210 Pedestrians to Have Right-of-Way; Conditions
Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way when proceeding across any such intersection upon the display of the
green light facing and opposing the direction of such pedestrians, over all vehicles which may turn to the right
after entering such intersections for the purpose of proceeding along the intersecting street, and over all
vehicles no matter in what direction such vehicles may be proceeding. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19,
Article 2, Section 19-23)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/221
Sec. 10.211 Intersection Defined
The term “intersection” as used in this article shall, when applied to the operation of vehicles, mean that area at
the crossing of such street that is embraced within lines projected at right angles to and across said streets
from property line to property line, and when applied to the movement of pedestrians, same shall mean all of
said area except the sidewalks therein. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-24)
Sec. 10.212 Vehicle Defined
The term “vehicle” as used in this article, shall mean all motor driven vehicles, horse-drawn vehicles, bicycles,
and all other means of travel other than by foot. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 2, Section 19-
25)
Sec. 10.213 Neighborhood Electric Vehicles, Motorized Neighborhood Vehicles or Motor-Assisted
Scooters
(a) In the interest of public safety, the use of neighborhood electric vehicles, neighborhood motorized
vehicles or motor-assisted scooters, is prohibited on the streets, highways, alleys and public paths in the city.
(b) The Code of Ordinances of the city, shall prohibit the operation of the use of neighborhood electric
vehicles, neighborhood motorized vehicles or motor-assisted scooters, in the city, and the Code of Ordinances
of the city, shall include the following section to read verbatim as follows:
(1) For purposes of this section the terms “neighborhood electric vehicles” and “motor-assisted
scooter” shall have the same meaning assigned by Transportation Code, section 551.301, as
amended. A “motorized neighborhood vehicle” is defined as the same as a “neighborhood electric
vehicle” but utilizing a gas or other fossil fuel powered motor.
(2) A person may not operate a neighborhood electric vehicle or motorized neighborhood vehicle
or motor-assisted scooter, which travels at speeds of 2 miles per hour or greater, with the exception
of scooters for the disabled, electric wheelchairs designed to assist physically disabled persons and
properly licensed and insured motorized vehicles, on any alley, street or highway within the city.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or park any neighborhood electric vehicle,
neighborhood motorized vehicle or motor-assisted scooter, over or across any public park, curb,
sidewalk, grass, lawn, hiking or jogging trail, path or park land within the city. This section is not
applicable to municipal vehicles.
(Ordinance 2005-10 adopted 5/19/05)
Sec. 10.214 Engine Retarding Devices
(a) No person shall operate an engine of any motor vehicle so as to “brake” or slow the same through the
use of gears (commonly known as “jake braking”) or by any other method which produces any noise in addition
to the normal operating engine noise, within the city limits.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and
every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2004-05 adopted 7/15/04)
Sec. 10.215 Golf Carts and Utility Vehicles
(a) Golf carts shall be defined (per Texas Transportation Code section 502.401 item 18) as vehicles designed
to operate at a maximum speed of 25 miles per hour or less and excludes all-terrain vehicles and design
altered golf carts, and slow moving vehicles.
(b) The following regulations and requirements shall apply to all golf carts and other slow moving vehicles on
public streets in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/221
(1) Each operator of a golf cart shall maintain financial responsibility (insurance) as required of
other passenger vehicles in the Texas Transportation Code section 601.051.
(2) Golf can operators must have a valid driver's license as required of other passenger vehicles
in the Texas Transportation Code title 7, subchapter B, section 521.021.
(3) Golf carts will be operated during daylight hours only.
(4) Golf carts will only be operated on roadways where posted speed limits do not exceed 35
miles per hour.
(5) Golf carts shall display a “slow-moving vehicle” emblem that has a reflective surface designed
to be clearly visible in daylight and shall be maintained in a clean, reflective condition.
(6) Golf carts shall be equipped with front and rear lamps, an exterior mirror mounted on the
driver's side of the vehicle and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger side of the
vehicle or an interior mirror, a parking brake, reflex reflectors (1 red on each side as far to the rear as
practicable and 1 red on the rear).
(7) Operators of golf carts shall not allow anyone to sit in the lap of the operator or passengers of
the vehicle, nor allow anyone to stand up in the vehicle during the operation of the vehicle.
Passengers shall be limited to seating capacity as designed by the manufacturer.
(8) Golf carts shall not be operated on city sidewalks or pathways.
(9) Golf carts shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles when traveling.
(10) All-terrain vehicles are prohibited from operating on all public streets.
(11) Design altered golf carts that have been altered to allow them to travel at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour are prohibited from operating on all public streets.
(12) Golf carts are prohibited from pulling trailers, boats, jet skis, etc.
(c) Any person, firm, corporation or other entity that violates the terms of the above referenced regulations
and requirements, or other terms of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.00.
(Ordinance 2016-05 adopted 5/26/16)
ARTICLE 10.300 PARKING*
Sec. 10.301 Parallel Parking Zone Designated
North Main Street, being all of Main Street north of Ingram Street, is hereby designated a street for parallel
parking of motor vehicles only so that any person parking a motor vehicle of any description, or any other type
of conveyance or self-propelled vehicle or machine, on North Main Street aforesaid, shall park said vehicle
inside the parallel parking area marked off on the street so that the vehicle when parked shall be near to and
parallel to the curb and inside the parking area designated, so that said motor vehicle shall not be parked
across any parking lines either to the side, front or back of the vehicle. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19,
Article 3, Section 19-31)
Sec. 10.302 Ten Minute Zone Designated
There is hereby created a ten (10) minute parking limit on the east street vehicle parking right-of-way of North
Washington Street abutting Lots 1-9, Block 19, Original Town Addition. The aforementioned parking limit shall
be construed to mean that any vehicle, either engine-powered or self-propelled, shall not park in the
aforementioned parking right-of-way for a period exceeding ten (10) minutes at one interval. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-45)
Sec. 10.303 Overnight “No Parking” Zones Designated; Exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/221
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on any street, road or parking area surrounding
the stadium, tennis courts, lake, and all of such parking area being located within the boundaries of the City
Park Area and being owned by the city, during the hours from 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; provided however, it shall
not be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in the above described area during such periods of time as the public
generally is gathering to attend some program or event which has been duly scheduled in advance to convene
or meet at some specified time and date in such park areas and by authorized and lawful sponsors.
(b) It shall be prohibited to park any type of vehicle, except as noted below, on the north ten (10) Feet of Lot
11 and all of Lots 12 through 15, Block 41 of the Original Addition from the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.,
Monday through Sunday. The only exceptions noted shall be emergency vehicles and Seymour municipal
vehicles.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-46)
Sec. 10.304 Parking During Day Limited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct any portion of any public street, alley, avenue
or highway in the city by placing, parking or leaving thereon any type of vehicle, tractor, trailer, motorcycle,
farming equipment or any other type of self-propelled device, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., unless
the same is actually in daily use. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-47)
Sec. 10.305 School No Parking Zones Designated; School Areas
(a) There is hereby created a “No Parking” zone on the north street parking right-of-way of East California
Street, abutting the south side of Block 6, McLain Addition. The aforementioned “No Parking” zone shall be
construed to mean that any vehicle shall not park in the aforementioned right-of-way between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days during which the elementary school is in operation.
(b) There is hereby created a “No Parking” zone on the east street parking right-of-way of North East Street
abutting the west side of Block 11, McLain Addition. The aforementioned “No Parking” zone shall be construed
to mean that any vehicle shall not park in the aforementioned parking right-of-way at any time during school
days and hours of operation, except those vehicles bearing Texas exempt license tags.
(c) There is hereby created a “No Parking” zone on the east street parking right-of-way of North East Street
abutting the west side of Block 11, McLain Addition. The aforementioned “No Parking” zone shall be construed
to mean that any vehicle shall not park in the aforementioned parking right-of-way at any time during school
days and hours of operation, except those vehicles authorized in conjunction with operations of the Seymour
Independent School District.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-51)
Sec. 10.306 Additional “No Parking” Zones Established
A “no parking” zone shall be established on the hereinafter described highways:
(1) On either side of U.S. 183, U.S. 277, and U.S. 283 from the south side of Clay Street to the
east side of Cedar Street.
(2) On the south street parking right-of-way of East Morris Street abutting the east eighty (80) feet
of the north side of Lot 1, Block 5, Original Town Addition. The aforementioned zone shall be
construed to mean that any vehicle shall not park in the aforementioned parking right-of-way, at any
time, except those vehicles authorized in conjunction with the storage facilities located on Lot 1,
Block 5, Original Town Addition.
(3) On West California Street extending from North Main Street west to the city limits line.
(4) On Ingram Street from South Main Street extending east to the city limits line.
(5) Beginning at the intersection of North Main and Nevada Streets, extending east on Nevada
Street to its east end, and continuing on east on Ellis Street to its intersection with Stadium Drive,
and continuing on Stadium Drive (formerly Kerr Street) to its intersection with the corporate city limits
line.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/221
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-61)
Sec. 10.307 Parking Within Fire Zone Limited
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct any portion of any public street,
alley, avenue or highway in the city by placing, parking or leaving any type of vehicle or trailer thereon, which is
within the boundaries of the city fire zone, continuously for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-62)
Sec. 10.308 Double Parking Unlawful
Double parking is absolutely prohibited, except that parties in an automobile may stop behind cars for the
purpose of getting service from stores and shops, provided someone capable of operating such vehicle is left at
the wheel. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-63)
Sec. 10.309 Unlawful to Park Near Fireplug
It shall be unlawful to park a car within fifteen (15) feet of any fireplug within the city. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-64)
Sec. 10.310 Thirty Minute Zone Designated
(a) There is hereby created a thirty (30) minute parking limit on the west street vehicle parking right-of-way of
South Washington Street abutting lots 17-21, Block 8, Original Town Addition of the City of Seymour. The
aforementioned parking limit shall be construed to mean that any vehicle, either engine-powered or selfpropelled,
shall not park in the aforementioned parking tight-of-way, for a period exceeding thirty (30) minutes at
one interval.
(b) There is hereby created a thirty (30) minute parking limit at the aforementioned location for three (3)
parking spaces, only. Thirty (30) minute parking signs shall be erected at the aforementioned location.
(c) Any vehicle, either engine powered or self-propelled, found parking in the aforementioned parking area an
interval longer than thirty (30) minutes, as mentioned in subsection (a), shall be issued a citation by a law
enforcement official of the City of Seymour.
(Ordinance 92-4 adopted 6/11/92)
ARTICLE 10.400 LOADING ZONES
Sec. 10.401 Permits for Loading or Unloading at Angle to Curb
The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to authorize the backing of a vehicle to the curb
for the purpose of loading or unloading property subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such
permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property alongside the curb or to the owner of the
vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and herein authorized. (1988 Seymour
City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-9)
Sec. 10.402 Standing in Loading Zones
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of property in any place marked as a loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading
and unloading of property exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(b) The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is
waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load or unload property.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 1, Section 19-10)
ARTICLE 10.500 TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 10.501 Routes Designated
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/221
No truck with a payload rating of more than 5,000 pounds may drive upon any public street within the corporate
city limits with the following exceptions:
(1) Said trucks may use U.S. and state designated thoroughfares including State Farm Roads 422
and 1919.
(2) Said trucks may use Oregon Street, Nevada Street, and Idaho Street between Cedar and
Main Street (U.S. 283-182-277).
(3) Said trucks may use Cedar Street and Oak Street between California Street (U.S. 82) and
Oregon Street.
(4) Said trucks may use any other road, street or thoroughfare located within the corporate limits
of the city when traveling directly to or from the drivers residence providing said truck and/or trailer
will be parked on an all-weather surface, when in route to deliver or to pick up cargo, but only when
the destination for delivery or pickup cannot be accessed by utilizing any of the above named roads,
streets or thoroughfares. In such instances said trucks may use only the most direct route in going to
or coming from the location at which it is to deliver or pick up cargo. Said trucks are also allowed to
pick up fuel at the location of their choice providing they take the most direct route to or from any of
the above named roads, streets or thoroughfares.
(5) Emergency vehicles, city vehicles, commercial trash haulers, school buses and commercial
harvesters traveling to the city for the sole purpose of performing seasonal work are exempted from
this section.
Sec. 10.502 Leaving Truck Unattended
It shall be unlawful to leave either an unattended truck, truck tractor, or a tractor trailer parked on any of the city
streets, thoroughfares or alleyways within the corporate limits of the city, at any time. Any of such vehicles
remaining parked unattended upon the streets, thoroughfares or alleyways of this city for more than three (3)
hours shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
Sec. 10.503 Penalty for Violations
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each day* or portion of a day* during which any violation hereof shall be committed and conviction
of any such violation shall be held punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five ($165.00) [sic] nor more
than two hundred dollars ($500.00).
* (Day begins at 12:01 a.m. and ends at 12:00 p.m. midnight.)
(Ordinance 2018-09 adopted 11/15/18)
ARTICLE 10.600 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
(a) There is hereby designated a one-way vehicular traffic direction, with the direction of traffic flow to be from
north to south on the ten (10) foot north-south alley located in Block 7 of the Original Town Addition, more
specifically being located from the south right-of-way line of West Morris Street to the north right-of-way line of
West McLain Street.
(b) From South to North on North East Street from the North right-of-way line of East Idaho Street to the
South right-of-way line of East California Street.
(c) From East to West on East Idaho Street from the West right-of-way line of North Stratton to the East rightof-
way line of North East Street.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 6, Section 19-72)
(d) From East to West on the 50' North-East street as hereinafter described:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/221
50' West East Street (East California) located between Block 5 & 6 and 11 & 12 of the McLain
Addition of the City of Seymour, Texas, more specifically being located from the West Right-of-Way
Line of North East Street to the East Right-of-Way Line of North East Street to the East Right-of-Way
Line of North Stratton Street.
(Ordinance 93-9 adopted 9/9/93)
ARTICLE 10.700 SPEED ZONES*
(a) The legal speed limits for all motor vehicles or any other vehicles being driven or operated in said
designated zones on said highways and streets shall be and is as follows:
(1) The speed limit zones for SOUTHBOUND traffic on U.S. Highway No. 277 are as follows:
45 mph from North City Limit to F.W.D. Railroad Main Track (0.13 miles)
40 mph from F.W.D. Railroad Main Track to Davis Street (0.22 miles)
35 mph from Davis Street to California Street (0.26 miles)
30 mph from California Street to Belknap Street (0.79 miles)
35 mph from Belknap Street to 0.30 miles south of Wichita Valley Railroad
(0.21 miles)
40 mph from 0.30 miles south of Wichita Valley Railroad to South City Limit
(0.20 miles)
(2) The speed limit zones for NORTHBOUND traffic on U.S. Highway No. 277 are as follows:
35 mph from South City Limit to Belknap Street (0.41 miles)
30 mph from Belknap Street to California Street (0.79 miles)
40 mph from California Street to Davis Street (0.26 miles)
50 mph from Davis Street to the North City Limit (0.35 miles)
(3) The speed limit zones for EASTBOUND traffic on State Highway No. 114 are as follows:
30 mph from Main Street to Selmas Street (0.22 miles)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/221
40 mph from Selmas Street to Norman Street (0.27 miles)
50 mph from Norman Street to 0.10 miles west of East City Limit (0.25 miles)
55 mph from 0.10 miles west of East City Limit to East City Limit (0.10
miles)
(4) The speed limit zones for WESTBOUND traffic on State Highway No. 114 are as follows:
50 mph from East City Limit to Norman Street (0.35 miles)
45 mph from Norman Street to Selmas Street (0.27 miles)
30 mph from Selmas Street to Main Street (0.22 miles)
(5) The speed limit zones for traffic on FM 422 are as follows:
EASTBOUND:
* 30 mph - from U.S. 277 (MP 0.000) to Browning Street (MP 0.290)
(0.290 miles)
40 mph - from Browning Street (MP 0.290) to East City Limits (MP
1.120) (0.830 miles)
50 mph - From 576' west of Custer St. (MP 11.350) to 750' west of West
St. (MP 11.658) 0.308 miles
45 mph - From 750' west of West St. (MP 11.658) to 523' west of River
St. (MP 11.990) 0.332 miles
35 mph - From 523' west of River St. (MP 11.990) to 158' east of Cedar
St. (MP 12.370) 0.380 miles
30 mph - From 158' east of Cedar St. (MP 12.370) to US 277 (MP
12.579) 0.209 miles
WESTBOUND:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/221
30 mph - From US 277 (MP 12.579) to 158 feet east of Cedar St. (MP
12.370) 0.209 miles
35 mph - From 158' east of Cedar St. (MP 12.370) to 523' West of River
St. (MP 11.990) 0.380 miles
45 mph - From 523' west of River St. (MP 11.990) to 750' west of West
St. (MP 11.658) 0.332 miles
50 mph - From 750' west of West St. (MP 11.658) to 576' west of Custer
St. (MP 11.350) 0.308 miles
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 7, Section 19-81)
MISCELLANEOUS:
From US 82/BU 183/283 at MP 0.000 to MP 0.307 for 0.307 miles at 30
mph
From MP 0.307 to MP 1.100 for 0.793 miles at 35 mph
(Ordinance 2009-02 adopted 10/22/09)
* SCHOOL SPEED LIMIT 20 M.P.H. WHEN FLASHING:
WESTBOUND:
20 mph - From 375' east of Foley St. (MP 12.341) to 174' West of
Donald St. (MP 12.177) 0.164 miles
EASTBOUND:
20 mph - From 174' west of Donald St. (MP 12.177) to 375' east of
Foley St. (MP 12.341) 0.164 miles
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 7, Section 19-81)
MISCELLANEOUS:
From MP 0.082 to 0.212 for 0.130 miles will be a 20 mph school zone
From MP 0.620 to 0.853 for 0.233 miles will be a second 20 mph school
zone
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/221
(Ordinance 2009-02 adopted 10/22/09)
(6) The speed limit zones for traffic on US 183 are as follows:
SOUTHBOUND:
40 mph - From North City Limits (MP 1.607) to 1272' south of North City
Limits (MP 1.366) 0.241 miles
35 mph - From 1272' south of North City Limits (MP 1.366) to Custer
St. (MP 1.123) 0.243 miles
*30 mph - From Custer St. (MP 1.123) to Washington St. (MP 20.91)
1.024 miles
40 mph - From Washington St. (MP 20.91) to South City Limits (MP
21.200) 0.290 miles
NORTHBOUND:
40 mph - From South City Limits (MP 21.200) to Washington St. (MP
20.91) 0.290 miles
*30 mph - From Washington St. (MP 20.91) to Custer St. (MP 1.123)
1.024 miles
35 mph - From Custer St. (MP 1.123) to 1272' south of North City Limits
(MP 1.366) 0.243 miles
40 mph - From 1272' south of North City Limits (MP 1.366) to North
City Limits (MP 1.607) 0.241 miles
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 7, Section 19-81)
MISCELLANEOUS:
From US 82 at CSJ 156-06, mp 0.500, to SH 114 at CSJ 157-01, MP
20.660, for 0.651 miles at 30 mph
From SH 114 at CSJ 157-01, mp 20.660, to the west bound frontage road
of US 277 at CSJ 562-09, MP 0.139, for 0.279 miles at 40 mph
(Ordinance 2010-02 adopted 3/25/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/221
(b) The City Council has determined and now determines that the prima facie speeds of vehicles set forth in
Article 827a, Section 8, of the Penal Code of the State of Texas, are less than is reasonable and safe in a
school zone under conditions found to exist upon certain parts of Donald, Idaho, Cedar and Nevada Streets,
laying within the city limits of said City of Seymour, taking into consideration the extent and condition of the
pavement and other circumstances as well as the usual traffic thereon, and the City Council therefore
determines and declares the reasonable and safe prima facie speed limits upon such portions of said streets to
be as follows:
SCHOOL SPEED LIMIT 20 M.P.H. DURING SCHOOL HOURS:
500 Block of North Cedar Street between the intersections of West Idaho and
West Nevada Streets;
500 Block of North Donald Street between the intersections of West Idaho
and West Nevada Streets;
300 & 400 Blocks of West Nevada between the intersections of North Cedar
and North Donald Streets;
300 & 400 Blocks of West Idaho between the intersections of North Cedar
and North Donald Streets;
which shall be effective during school hours, except where otherwise provided herein, when appropriate signs
giving notice thereof are erected at such parts of said streets, provided, however, that nothing in this provision
shall be construed as attempting to modify or alter the basic rule set forth in subsection 1(a) of Section 8 of
Article 827a of the Penal Code of Texas nor to authorize for any class of vehicle in excess of the maximum
values set forth for said class of vehicle in subsection 1(b), Paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of Section 8 of Article
827a of the Penal Code of Texas, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the limits herein established shall
be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits hereinabove specified and established shall be prima facie
evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 7, Section 19-81)
(c) The city council of the City of Seymour has determined and now determines that the prima facie speeds
of vehicles set forth in Article 827a, Section 8, of the Penal Code of the State of Texas, are less than is
reasonable and safe in a residential neighborhood and the City Park under conditions found to exist upon
certain parts of Murrie, Clements, Morris and Pecan Streets, laying within the city limits of said City of Seymour,
taking into consideration the extent and condition of the pavement and other circumstances as well as the usual
traffic thereon, and the city council of the City of Seymour therefore determines and declares the reasonable
and safe prima facie speed limits upon such portions of said streets to be as follows:
SPEED LIMIT 20 M.P.H.:
200, 300 & 400 Blocks of North Murrie Street
200 Block of North Clement Street
700 & 800 Blocks of East Morris Street
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/221
700 & 800 Blocks of East Pecan Street
which shall be effective at all hours, when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such parts of
said streets, provided, however, that nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as attempting to modify or
alter the basic rule set forth in Subsection l(a) of Section 8 Article 827 a of the Penal Code of Texas nor to
authorize for any class of vehicle in excess of the maximum values set forth for said class of vehicles in
Subsection l(b), Paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of Section 8 Article 827a of the Penal Code of Texas. Where no
special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with said Subsection l(a) of Section 8 Article
827a of the Penal Code of Texas, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the limits herein established shall
be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits hereinabove specified and established shall be prima facie
evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(c) It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance, and any person who violates any such provision shall upon conviction receive the punishment
provided in the Penal laws of the State of Texas for any person who drives a vehicle upon a public street at an
unlawful speed.
(Ordinance 89-7 adopted 8/10/89)
ARTICLE 10.800 TRAFFIC HAZARDS ABATEMENT
Sec. 10.801 Abatement of Tree, Shrub, etc. Traffic Hazards Authorized
Whenever the city secretary or street superintendent of the city shall find a tree, hedge, scrub or other natural
growth of any kind or description, located and growing within the boundaries of any public street in the city,
which interferes with the vision of any motorist or driver while driving upon such streets, thereby constituting a
traffic hazard, the city secretary or street superintendent is therefore authorized and directed to abate the traffic
hazard by trimming or removing any such obstruction. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 8, Section
19-91)
Sec. 10.802 Notice to Owner
The city secretary is hereby instructed to give notice to the owner of any abutting property and afford such
owner the opportunity to do the work of removing said traffic hazard, but shall not be required to await the
owner's action in any case where he shall find that the public safety requires the immediate abatement of such
hazard. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 8, Section 19-92)
Sec. 10.803 Abatement by City
In all cases where immediate action is not required, a notice shall be sent to the owner of an abutting property
stating that the hazard needs to be removed in the interest of public safety. If the same has not been removed
within ten (10) days of the notice, the work will be done by the city and the expenses incurred shall be billed to
the owner. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 8, Section 19-93)
Sec. 10.804 Appeal
In the event that any interested person is dissatisfied with the action of the city secretary, he may, within the ten
(10) day period of notice hereinabove described, file and appeal the matter in the city council whose judgment
thereon shall be final. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 8, Section 19-94)
Sec. 10.805 Vision Requirements
On any corner lot or parkway adjacent thereto, a fence, wall, sign, hedge, tree or obstruction of any nature
erected, planted or maintained so as to interfere with sight lines at elevations between two (2) and eight (8) feet
above the top of the adjacent roadway curb, or if there is no curb, then from the average street grade, within a
triangular area formed by the intersection of the adjacent curb lines, or if none exists, the normal curb lines and
a point on each curb line forty-five (45) feet from the intersection, shall be prima facie evidence that such fence,
wall, sign, hedge, tree or obstruction of any nature constitutes an obstruction to vision as it regards public safety
on the streets. The triangular area of visibility as provided for herein is further described and depicted in the
drawing as maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. Any such fence, wall, sign, hedge, tree or
obstruction of any nature erected, planted or maintained in violation of this article shall be removed upon written
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/221
notice from the city secretary served upon the owner or occupant of the premises where such obstruction has
been erected, planted or maintained. In the event the obstruction is not removed within ten (10) days after
notice, it may be removed by the city at the expense of the property owner. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter
19, Article 8, Section 19-95)
ARTICLE 10.900 TRAIN SPEED AND OTHER REGULATIONS
(a) Train Speed Limit Set. It shall be unlawful for any engineer or other person in charge of any electric,
gasoline motor or steam locomotive or train to run the same within the corporate limits of the city at a greater
rate of speed than ten (10) miles per hour. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 9, Section 19-101)
(b) Flagman or Automatic Signals Required at Crossings. Each railroad company having a track or tracks
crossing the State Highway in the city at the following places: Oak Street where the same intersects California
Street; Washington Street where the same is crossed with the Railway Company, shall have and is hereby
required to keep a flagman at said crossings to give notice of the approach of trains, engines and cars upon
said tracks. It is to be construed that the flagman shall not remain on constant duty but shall be on duty only
when trains, engines or cars are actually approaching the crossing. In lieu of the flagman required, said railway
company may install automatic grade crossing gates or may provide other automatic signaling devices,
provided, however, that such automatic gates or other signaling devices shall be approved by the city council
before their installation. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 19, Article 9, Section 19-102)
CHAPTER 11
UTILITIES & SOLID WASTE*
ARTICLE 11.100 GARBAGE AND OTHER REFUSE
Sec. 11.101 City Service for Residences
The owner, occupant or lessee of every residence within the city shall be required to place all garbage and
trash in receptacles placed by the contractor in the alley or adjacent to the street. Said owner, occupant or
lessee shall be billed at the rates established in Section 11.106, as long as such residence is occupied or city
water and/or electrical service is intact.
Sec. 11.102 City Service for Commercial Establishments
The owner, occupant or lessee of every residence within the city shall be required to place all garbage and
trash in receptacles placed by the contractor in the alley or adjacent to the street. Said owner, occupant or
lessee shall be billed at the rates established in Section 11.106, as long as such residence is occupied or city
water and/or electrical service is intact.
Sec. 11.103 Residents Out of City Limits/County Residents
Residents living outside the city limits may:
(1) Transport their own refuse to the transfer station at rate listed in Section 11.106.
(2) Have their refuse collected at the outside city limit rate, if contractor deems the point of
collection is feasible.
Sec. 11.104 Commercial Out of City Limits/County Residents
Commercial customers within the extra territorial jurisdiction of ½ mile outside the city limits will be charged the
inside the city limit commercial rate. Commercial businesses outside this boundary will be charged as listed in
Section 11.106.
Sec. 11.105 Transfer Station
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/221
(a) In General.
(1) The transfer station will assess all subscribers and non-subscribers a fee for disposal of
garbage and brush at the rates established in Section 11.106 of this article. A subscriber is a
monthly fee payer whether residential or commercial inside or outside the city limits. A nonsubscriber
is anyone not currently paying monthly fees and will pay for services at the gate or at city
hall, at rates established in Section 11.106.
(2) According to state rules, all vehicles with open beds must be tarped or covered in some
manner to prevent refuse from blowing out. Trailers, pickup trucks and trucks must have side boards
and tailgates with no trash visible, otherwise the load must be tarped or secured with tie downs.
Loads not in compliance will be denied admittance to the facility.
(b) Refuse Prohibited at Transfer Station. The following waste materials will not be accepted at the solid
waste transfer station by residential customers, commercial establishments, contractors or haulers:
(1) Rock or large concrete debris.
(2) Tires.
Disposal of these materials will be the responsibility of said residential customer or commercial operator to
coordinate with the private waste collection contractor by using rentable containers/roll offs at construction work
site.
(Ordinance 2000-06 adopted 8/17/00)
(c) Hours of Operation for the Solid Waste Transfer Station. The hours of operation for the solid waste
transfer station are hereby established:
Summer (March–November) Winter (December–February)
Tuesday–Friday 2:00 p.m.–6:00 p.m. 1:00 p.m.–5:00 p.m.
Saturday 9:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m. 9:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.
Sunday Closed
Monday Closed
Holidays Closed
(Ordinance 2014-07 adopted 8/21/14)
Sec. 11.106 Rates
Garbage collection rates shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(Ordinance 2000-11 adopted 12/14/00)
Sec. 11.107 Burning of Garbage, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/221
(a) It is hereby prohibited for any person to burn garbage, trash, debris, structures, or other related articles
within the city limits, save and except the volunteer fire department of the city may, without violating this article,
burn structures solely for the purpose of training volunteer fire fighters. The volunteer fire department must
obtain authorization from TNRCC prior to conducting outdoor burning for training.
(b) Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 99-08 adopted 6/17/99)
Sec. 11.108 Sanitation Service Charges Payable; Discontinuance of Utility Service for Nonpayment
(a) There is hereby provided a penalty for those parties failing to pay their monthly utility bill when such bill is
due. It shall be the duty of the city utility billing department to notify each resident user and bill them for
sanitation service each month with their water bill and said bill shall be due on the first (1st) day of each month
and payable in the same manner as the water bills are paid.
(b) The City of Seymour, at its option, may suspend or terminate any or all utility services to include
electricity, water and sewer services of the owner, occupant or lessee of every residence within the City of
Seymour and of the owner, occupant or lessee of every commercial establishment within the City of Seymour
who shall fail to pay the prescribed charges assessed against them as herein provided for sanitation pickup.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 11, Article 1, Section 11-5; Ordinance 94-11 adopted 11/17/94)
Sec. 11.109 Collection Schedule
Garbage and refuse situated at residences shall be picked up twice per week. Services rendered to commercial
and industrial areas shall be as needed. Boardinghouses, even though operated in a private home, shall be
placed in the commercial category. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 11, Article 1, Section 11-7)
Sec. 11.110 City Not to Collect if Article is Violated
The city will not make collection of any garbage, trash or rubbish or tree limbs where same is not prepared for
collection and placed as designated by the terms of this article. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 11, Article
1, Section 11-8)
Sec. 11.111 Disposal of Rock, Waste, Building Debris and Other Trash
Rock, waste, building materials or other trash resulting from construction or remodeling or from a general cleanup
of vacant or improved property or from sizable amounts of trees, trash or debris cleaned from property will
not be removed by the city as a regular service but may be done for the owner for payment of an extra fee.
Exceptions to this section will be made during any clean-up campaign which is proclaimed and authorized by
the mayor or city council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 11, Article 1, Section 11-9)
Sec. 11.112 Disposal of Animal Waste
Manure from private stables, cow lots, poultry yards, pigeon lofts, or refuse from animals or night soil and dead
animals, and all waste not herein mentioned, must be kept in a separate suitable container and not dumped in
the alleys or retained on the premises to become a nuisance. It shall be disposed of by the occupant of the
premises at his own expense. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 11, Article 1, Section 11-10)
Sec. 11.113 Removal of Dead Animals
The owner or possessor of any animal which may die within the city limits shall within twenty-four (24) hours
after death of such animal, cause the carcass to be removed beyond the city limits at his own expense.
Exceptions to this section may be made in case of dogs and cats and other small house pets which may be
removed by the city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 11, Article 1, Section 11-11)
Sec. 11.114 Unlawful to Dump Heavy Animals on City Property; Penalty
Heavy dead animals shall include livestock such as cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, sheep, hogs and any
type of animal generally classified as a heavy animal. Henceforth, it shall be a violation of this article for anyone
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/221
to deliver or to cause to be delivered any such dead animal as herein defined onto the city dump grounds or
any city-owned property. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 11, Article 1, Section 11-12)
Sec. 11.115 Deposits on Streets or Alleys Prohibited
The placing of kitchen garbage, trash or rubbish or material in any street or alley within the city limits is
prohibited. Any owner, occupant or leasee found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 11, Article 1, Section 11-13)
Sec. 11.116 Fines
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 2000-06 adopted 8/17/00)
ARTICLE 11.200 LANDFILL REGULATIONS
Sec. 11.201 Approved Manner of Disposal
All garbage, rubbish, trash or other solid waste material must be disposed of in a manner approved by the City
of Seymour and its authorized representatives. (Ordinance 88-18 adopted 10/13/88)
Sec. 11.202 Permit Required
Effective as of the date of this article, no person except employees of the City of Seymour or duly authorized
agents, shall empty garbage or trash from any vehicle into the landfill unless such person has obtained a permit
or license, or is otherwise authorized by this article or has paid the specified charges for entry into the landfill. It
shall be unlawful for any attendant at the landfill or any person to dump trash or garbage in the landfill unless
said person has a permit or license to dump or has paid a specified charge for dumping. (Ordinance 88-18
adopted 10/13/88, Section 1)
Sec. 11.203 Rates
(a) There shall be charged and collected for the permission to use and the use of the City of Seymour
Landfill, the amounts as set forth below:
(b) Persons who pay regular monthly residential garbage rates to the city may receive a free landfill permit
sticker which shall be good for one (1) year. Permits will expire December 31 regardless of date of issuance.
When exhibited properly attached on the front of a pickup truck, car or car-pulled trailer, a current and valid
sticker will allow them to dump refuse hauled from their personal residence in accordance with charges set out
below. This sticker may not be used for vehicles larger than the aforementioned, regardless of (the operator's)
residency with the city.
(c) The permit must be obtained at the city hall or at the landfill prior to the vehicle entering the city landfill.
The city reserves the right to deny a permit to any person, when determined to be in the best interest of the city.
(d) All holders of landfill stickers or permits will furnish, upon request of the landfill attendant, the address
from which the refuse was removed. Persons who are found to be in violation of their landfill sticker or permit
will have their permit revoked and be barred from further entrance to the landfill and assessed a fine as
provided in Section 11.216, each violation will constitute a separate and punishable offense.
(e) No junk, wrecked, dismantled or abandoned vehicles will be allowed to be disposed of in the landfill.
(Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 2)
Sec. 11.204 Annual Permit Fee
The city shall furnish permit stickers for windshield display as provided for in the fee schedule found in the
appendix of this code. (Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 2)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/221
Sec. 11.205 Landfill Charges
Landfill charges shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance 92-
12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 2)
Sec. 11.206 Annual Permits/Licenses Not Transferable
Permit or License Holders may not allow other parties to use their Permits/Licenses, and Permits/Licenses are
not transferable. (Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 2.1)
Sec. 11.207 Dumping Procedures
It shall be unlawful for any attendant at a landfill or landfills owned or maintained by the city or any other
employee of the city to allow or permit any such person to dump garbage or trash in a city landfill from a vehicle
unless such vehicle is licenses hereunder or has valid Permit Sticker attached to windshield. After
determination of validity of License or Permit, the attendant at the landfill shall note thereto the city license
number, the current state registration number, and the make and model of the vehicle and licenses or permit
number. Upon receipt of cash for dumping, the attendant shall make out in triplicate a ticket noting thereon the
current registration number and the make and model of the vehicle, and shall give one copy to the person
desiring to dump said garbage or trash, one copy shall remain in the book, and one copy is to be transmitted to
the city office. At the close of each day, all cash collected shall be transmitted to the designated depository.
(Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 2.2)
Sec. 11.208 Procedures for Current Holders of Landfill Permits
Commercial Operators and Holders of current Landfill Permits may receive credit toward new annual permit for
unused portion of permit. Basis for credit will be prorated at the rate of 8% per month for each month remaining
on permit. (Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 2.3)
Sec. 11.209 Use of City Service Required
All residence and business in the city limits are required to be on city sanitation services and pay the
appropriate fee. city residents and businesses pay for sanitation services, including container pick-up by the
City Sanitation Department. It shall be unlawful for County residents and businesses to empty garbage and
trash in containers provided for those residents and businesses paying for sanitation pick-up service, and
violators will be subject to penalties set out in Section 11.216. (Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 3)
Sec. 11.210 Landfill Available to Persons Outside City Limits
The landfill is owned and operated entirely for the citizens of the City of Seymour and residents and businesses
operating outside the city limits of Seymour will be allowed to dump at the landfill site in accordance with
License/Permit fees set out in Section 11.204.
(Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 4)
Sec. 11.211 Disclaimer of City Liability
Any person entering the city operated disposal site for any reason shall be conclusively presumed to know the
hazards and the extent of the damage which accompanies the disposal of solid waste materials and the use of
trucks, vehicles and heavy machinery to move, remove, bury and dispose of same and by his or her actions in
entering upon such site and for and in consideration of the permission granted by the city to enter upon such
site, every person shall covenant and be deemed to have covenanted not to sue and to indemnify, save
harmless and defend the city, its agents, officers and employees from and against any and all claims of any
nature whatsoever for injury or damage to person or property, whether real or asserted, arising out of or
resulting from the entry by such person upon the city-operated disposal site. (Ordinance 88-18, adopted
10/13/88, Section 5)
Sec. 11.212 Disposal of Solid Waste Materials
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to take, remove, or carry away from the city operated disposal site any
garbage, rubbish, trash or other solid waste material, whether or not same has monetary value, without prior
written approval of the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/221
(b) The city secretary shall have the authority to curtail, temporarily suspend, or permanently halt any solid
waste disposal operation conducted by any private person, firm or corporation which does not conform to the
requirements of city, county or state regulations pertaining thereto or shall in any manner jeopardize the public
health, safety and welfare.
(Ordinance 88-18, adopted 10/13/88, Section 6)
Sec. 11.213 Reserved*
Sec. 11.214 Specifying Charges for Disposal of Solid Waste
Governmental agencies and schools hauling their own waste may, after obtaining annual commercial
license/permit, may be billed on a monthly basis for number and size of loads from the attendant's dumping
receipt book, payable on each agency's statements. (Ordinance 92-12, adopted 9/10/92, Section 8)
Sec. 11.215 Specifying Charges for Disposal of City Flat Bed Truck Loads
Flat bed trucks which the city parks for city residents in the evening or weekend will be as provided for in the
fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92, Section 9)
Sec. 11.216 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 93-13 adopted 12/9/93)
ARTICLE 11.300 PUBLIC UTILITIES†
Sec. 11.301 Definitions
(a) Corporation. When used in this article means a private corporation, an association, a joint stock company
or a business trust.
(b) Person. When used in this article means a natural person, a partnership or two or more persons having a
joint or common interest in a corporation as hereinbefore defined.
(c) Public utility or utility. When used in this article includes persons and corporations or their lessees,
trustees, receivers, their agents and servants, now or hereafter owning or operating in the city any wires, poles,
lines, conduit lines, pipes, pipe lines, plant, property or equipment, while using any of the streets or alleys within
the city, for the purpose of carrying on its business or the sale of its commodity or service to the citizens of
Seymour, in either one or more of the following lines:
(1) Producing, manufacturing or obtaining, conveying, distributing or delivering gas, and by “gas”
as used in this article is meant natural gas, artificial gas, mixed gas, either or all for public use, or
service for compensation.
(2) Owning, leasing or operating pipes, pipe lines or any part thereof, manholes or any and all
appliances of whatsoever character in, over or under any street or alley within the city in the
construction, maintaining, operating in the transportation or conveying of sewerage, or in the
operation of any sanitary sewerage disposal plant or any part thereof in the city under franchise or
contract with the city or any person or corporation in the city.
(3) Producing, generating, transmitting, conveying or delivering electricity for the production of
light, heat or power for public use or for the use of any person, firm or corporation within the city for
compensation.
(4) Conveying, carrying or transmitting messages, conversations or communications by telephone
where such service is offered to the public or persons or firms or corporations within the city for
compensation.
(d) The above definitions are cumulative only and not exclusive and any person, including the city, engaged
in any phase of the gas, electric power, electric light or telephone business or sanitary sewerage or any one or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/221
more of such businesses within the city in such manner as to be effected with a public interest, is declared to be
a public utility and subject to all the provisions of this article.
(e) Public utility. Shall, for rate making purposes only, include any person as hereinbefore defined including
the City of Seymour, producing, generating or furnishing any of the foregoing services to another person for
distribution to or for the public for compensation.
(f) Rate. When used in this article means and includes every compensation, charge, fare, toll, rental and
classification or any of them demanded, charged, observed or collected by any public utility for any service,
product or commodity offered by it to the public or to any person, firm or corporation within the city, and rules,
regulations, practices or contracts affecting any such compensation, charge, fee, toll, rental or classification.
Every rate made, demanded or received by any public utility within the city or by two or more public utilities
jointly shall be just and reasonable and every public utility shall furnish adequate, efficient and reasonable
service.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-1)
Sec. 11.302 Ability of Council to Gather Information
For the performance of the duties of the city council and the enforcement of this article relative to public utilities,
the council may appoint, employ, or remove such engineers, accountants, statisticians, assistants, inspectors,
clerks, examiners and such subordinates as may from time to time become reasonably necessary to gather
data and information as to the reasonableness of rates to be fixed, charged and collected by any public utility
within the city; and may appoint, on such terms as may be advisable, counsel and attorneys who are specially
skilled in rate matters, and such counsel and attorneys shall advise the council and represent it and the city in
conjunction with the city attorney in all litigation and court proceedings under the direction of the city council,
and the city council shall have the power and authority to have brought before it at any reasonable time any
officer, manager, agent or servant or employer of any public utility doing business in the city and compel them
to testify and give evidence, and submit evidence to the city council at any hearing or investigation before the
city council in any matters involving the fixing of rates or compensation to be charged and collected by such
public utility, and shall have the power and authority to compel any manager, agent or servant or employee of
any public utility to bring before the city council any records, books or accounts of any public utility and submit
the same to the city council for inspection and investigation at any hearing or investigation provided for under
this article, or which at any time may be held within the discretion of the city council. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-2)
Sec. 11.303 Majority of Council a Quorum
In all matters coming before the city council pertaining to public utilities, a majority of the city council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, for the performance of any duty or for the exercise of
any power of the city council. The act of a majority of the city council and all investigations and hearing or
inquiry shall be held by the city council and under its direction and authority. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter
17, Article 1, Section 17-3)
Sec. 11.304 Utilities to File Rate Schedules with City
Within ten (10) days after final passage of this chapter, every public utility within the city or every public utility
doing business in the city shall file with the city secretary schedules showing the rates of compensation being
charged to each of its customers in the city for service or sale of its commodity to each person, firm, partnership
or corporation, and thereafter under such rules and regulations as the city council may from time to time
prescribe, upon demand from the city council, every public utility as herein defined shall file with the city council,
within such time and in such form as the city council may designate, schedules showing the rates being
charged, demanded and collected by such utility for service or sale of its commodity to all persons, firms,
partnerships or corporations in the city. The utility shall keep copies of such schedules open for public
inspection under such rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-4)
Sec. 11.305 Utilities Not to Give Gifts; Equality of Rates
No public utility doing business within the corporate limits of the city shall directly or indirectly by any device
whatsoever or in any wise, manner or method make any gift or rebate of its service or commodity, nor charge,
demand, collect or receive from any person, firm, partnership or corporation a greater or less compensation for
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/221
any service rendered or to be rendered to any of its customers than that as prescribed or as may be prescribed
from time to time by the city council and schedules applicable thereto, nor shall any person receive or accept
any service or any of the utilities commodity the public utility has for sale, for a compensation greater or less
than that prescribed in such schedules or rates as may from time to time be established by the city council;
provided, however, that no public utility shall be prohibited from charging or collecting, whether directly or
indirectly, a greater compensation than that prescribed by ordinance where the city council elects to prescribe
merely minimum rates. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-5)
Sec. 11.306 Uniform Rates Required
No public utility shall, as to rate or services, make or grant any unreasonable preference or advantage to any
corporation or person, or subject any corporation or person to any prejudice or disadvantage. No public utility
nor the city council shall establish or maintain any unreasonable difference as to rates or as between classes of
service. The city council shall determine any question of fact arising under this section. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-6)
Sec. 11.307 Utilities Clothed with Public Interest
Every utility described in this article is hereby declared to be engaged in a business that is affected with a public
interest and is subject to the jurisdiction, control and regulation of the city council in accordance with the
provisions of this article and the laws of Texas. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-7)
Sec. 11.308 Public Hearing Authorized in Rate Determination
The city council for the purpose of determining, fixing and regulating the charges, fares, rates or compensation
and/or prescribing maximum and/or minimum rates of any public utility now enjoying or that may hereafter enjoy
any franchise granted by the city, or exercise any other public privilege in the city, or for the purpose of
prescribing the kind of service to be furnished by such utility and the manner in which it shall be rendered and
for the purpose of from time to time altering or changing such rules, regulations and compensation, shall at the
request of the public utility affected, or upon call of the chairman of the council or call of a majority of the
council, either at a regular meeting of the council or a special meeting called for that purpose, have a hearing
before the council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-8)
Sec. 11.309 Notice of Hearing Required
The city council shall cause at least ten (10) days prior notice, by registered mail, to be given to any public
utility, person, firm or corporation affected by such hearing. Such notice shall state the time and place of such
meeting the purpose thereof. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-9)
Sec. 11.310 Utilities' Records Available to City
In order to ascertain all the facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is or could be a reasonable rate
or compensation, the public utility shall on demand submit to the city council or any person designated by it for
inspection, its books, records and schedules of rates charged, as well as the rates proposed to be charged, and
the city council shall have full power to compel the attendance of witnesses for such purpose before any
hearing before the council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-10).
Sec. 11.311 Fair and Reasonable Rates to be Set by Ordinance
The city council after such hearing and notice shall by ordinance from time to time determine and fix such rates
and/or prescribe such maximum and/or minimum rates and enforce such schedules of rates to be charged and
collected by such public utility for its services or commodity furnished to its patrons or to any persons, firms,
partnerships or corporations in the city. Such rates so established or fixed shall be just, fair and reasonable
rates or charges for the services or commodities furnished by the public utility, and all regulations for
transmitting, carrying, conveying, producing, transporting, distributing, selling and delivering such commodities
within the city shall be fair and reasonable. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-11)
Sec. 11.312 City Council May Amend Rates
Any utility affected by a schedule of rates fixed by the city council or any regulations thereof, or any person, firm
or corporation thus affected, may by petition, or the city council on its own motion, after notice and hearing, may
change, alter or modify any existing rate or rates or regulations and amend or substitute an entirely new rate
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/221
structure and make such further schedule of rates and/or regulations by ordinance, resolution or orders as may
be consistent with fair and reasonable rates to be charged patrons of such public utility within the corporate
limits of the city for the commodity furnished or service rendered. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article
1, Section 17-12)
Sec. 11.313 Right of Appeal
The council assumes original regulatory jurisdiction in the regulations, compensations, fixing and regulating the
charges, fares or rates of any public utility, person, firm or corporation now enjoying, or that may hereafter
enjoy, the privilege of any franchise or exercising any other public privilege as hereinbefore set forth in this
article, and any public utility, person, firm or corporation who shall desire to contest any rate schedule or rates
or compensation or regulations as may from time to time be fixed by the city council, shall have the right to
appeal therefrom to any agency or court of competent jurisdiction. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17,
Article 1, Section 17-13)
Sec. 11.314 Discrimination by Utility Prohibited
No utility shall unreasonably discriminate in favor against any person, place or corporation either in apportioning
the supply of its commodities or its charges therefor. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section
17-14)
Sec. 11.315 City Council May Set Standards
The city council may, after hearing and notice, as hereinbefore provided for, upon its own motion or complaint,
ascertain and fix just and reasonable standards, classifications, regulations, practices or services to be
furnished, imposed, observed and followed by any utility; ascertain and fix adequate and reasonable standards
for the measurements of quantity, quality, pressure, initial voltage or other conditions pertaining to the supply of
the product, commodity or service furnished or rendered by any utility; prescribe reasonable regulations for the
examination and testing of such products, commodity or service and for the measurement thereof; establish
and approve reasonable rules, regulations, specifications and standards to secure the accuracy of all meters
and appliances for the measurement; and provide for the examination and testing of any and all appliances
used for the measurement of product, commodity or service of any utility. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter
17, Article 1, Section 17-15)
Sec. 11.316 City May Fix Value of Utility Property
The city council may, on hearing and notice, ascertain and fix the value of the whole or any part of the property
of any utility, insofar as the same us material to the exercise of the jurisdiction of the city council and may make
revaluation from time to time and ascertains the value of all new construction, extension and additions to the
property of every utility. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-16)
Sec. 11.317 Utility Accounting System
Each utility shall establish a system of accounts to be kept as may be ordered and directed by the city council
or establish a system of accounts for each class and the city council may prescribe the manner in which its boor
accounts in some particular form or manner, such practice may be continued and compliance with such
regulations be deemed compliance with the regulations of the city council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter
17, Article 1, Section 17-17)
Sec. 11.318 City Authorized to Examine, Test Utilities
Any utility shall permit the city council and officers and employees of the city during all reasonable hours to
enter upon any premises occupied by any utility for the purpose of making the examination and tests and
exercising any power provided for in this article, and shall permit the setting up and use on such premises of
any apparatus and appliance necessary therefor. Such utility shall have the right to be represented at the
making of such examination, test, and inspection. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-
18)
Sec. 11.319 Utility Reports to Council
Each utility shall file with the city council annual reports in such form and of such content as the city council may
require, and special reports concerning any matters about which the city council is authorized to inquire or keep
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/221
itself informed, and which it is required under this article to enforce. All reports shall be made under oath when
required by the city council. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-19)
Sec. 11.320 City May Investigate Utility Management
The city council may on its own motion and whenever it may deem necessary in the performance of its duties
investigate and examine the conditions and management of any utility. In conducting such investigation, the city
council may proceed, either with or without a hearing as it may deem best, but it shall make no order without
the parties thereto a hearing. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-20)
Sec. 11.321 Authority to Issue Subpoena
In all hearings before the city council or investigations by the city council it may issue subpoena duces tecum
and all necessary process in proceedings pending before it; which may be served by the city council or by any
person authorized to serve process of courts of record. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1,
Section 17-21)
Sec. 11.322 Depositions
The city council or any party to the proceedings may in any investigation or hearing before the city council
cause the depositions of witnesses to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for the taking of depositions in
civil cases. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-22)
Sec. 11.323 Adherence to Law Required
Any public utility coming under the provisions of this article, or any manager, agent or servant or employee of
any public utility failing or refusing to subject itself or himself to the jurisdiction of the city council as provided for
in this article and failing or refusing to obey any order or ordinance of the city council legally promulgated
hereunder, after reasonable notice and opportunity to do so, shall be liable to a penalty as hereinafter provided.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-23)
Sec. 11.324 Construing Penalty Provision
In construing and enforcing the provisions of this article relating to penalties, the act, omission or failure of any
official, agent or employee of any corporation or person acting within the scope of his official duties or
employment, shall in every case be deemed to be also the act, omission or failure of such corporation or
person. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-24)
Sec. 11.325 Penalties Cumulative
All penalties accruing under this article shall be cumulative and a suit may be brought by the city in any court
having jurisdiction thereof against any utility for the recovery of such penalties, and a suit for the recovery of
one penalty shall not be a bar to or affect the recovery of any penalty for forfeiture or be a bar to any criminal
prosecution against any public utility or any official, director, agent or employee thereof or any other corporation
or person. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-25)
Sec. 11.326 Actions to Recover Penalties
Actions to recover penalties under this article shall be brought in the name of the City of Seymour, and all
criminal prosecutions shall be brought in the name of the State of Texas. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter
17, Article 1, Section 17-26)
Sec. 11.327 City Not Exempt from Provisions
Nothing in this article shall in any manner be construed as exempting the city, which owns and operates a
public utility, from any of the provisions or operation of this or any other ordinance hereafter passed relative to
any of the subject matters contained in this article. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 17-
27)
ARTICLE 11.400 WATER, SEWER, AND ELECTRIC SYSTEMS*
Sec. 11.401 Certain Acts Unlawful
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/221
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do, commit, or assist in committing any of the following things
or acts in the city:
(1) To open or close any fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the waterworks system of the
city, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shut-offs thereof, without the permission of the
city waterworks representative, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the
fire department.
(2) To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure or wantonly force open any gate or door, or in
any way whatsoever destroy, injure or deface any part of any engine house, reservoir, stand pipe,
elevated tank, building or buildings, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs, or fixtures or property
appertaining to the waterworks system, wastewater treatment plant and sanitary sewer system.
(3) To place any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within
three (3) feet of any fire hydrant.
(4) To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps on any elevated water storage tank or stand pipe
of the waterworks system, except by permission of the waterworks representative.
(5) To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for
himself or others from private connections on premises contrary to city regulations or ordinances.
(6) To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipe, cock, valve, or other
apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system, or to turn on or off without authority the water in any
street hydrant or other water fixture, or to hitch or tie any animal thereto.
(7) To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the
waterworks system or to turn on or use the water of said system without first obtaining a permit
therefor.
(8) To cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box.
(9) To remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or in any manner change,
interfere with or tamper with any water meter; providing the provisions of this section shall not apply
to the employees of the city when acting in their official capacities.
(10) To turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been
turned off for the non-payment of the monthly water charge or for the violation of any rule or
ordinance governing the waterworks system.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-31)
Sec. 11.402 Relocation of Existing Water Meters, Waterlines, Etc.
In instances where existing water meters, waterlines and other related waterworks items are requested to be
relocated, by a person, firm, association or corporation, for the convenience of said person, firm, association or
corporation, the actual expenses for the relocation shall be borne solely by the person, firm, association or
corporation requesting the relocation. The actual work can be performed by city forces or by a contractor
selected by the city. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-32)
Sec. 11.403 Variance
In instances where the relocation of existing water meters, waterlines and other related waterworks are
requested by a person, firm, association or corporation as heretofore mentioned in Section 11.402, and in a
determination by the city administrator that said relocation shall benefit the city, the city administrator shall then
prorate the actual costs between the party requesting the relocation and the city. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-33)
Sec. 11.404 Electric Deposit
Persons, firms and corporations desiring electric service to be furnished by the city shall make deposits prior to
such connections being made, which deposits shall be made and paid to the city in amounts as provided for in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/221
the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance 95-5, adopted 11/17/95, Section 1)
Sec. 11.405 Water Deposit
Those desiring water service from the city shall deposit prior to receiving any such water service connection
and with the city in amounts as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance
95-5, adopted 11/16/95, Section 2)
Sec. 11.405.1 Garbage-Only Deposit
Person living outside the city limits, having no other utilities with the city but desiring to be served by the city's
solid waste collection contractor, shall deposit, prior to receiving a solid waste receptacle, a garbage-only
deposit with the utility billing department in the amount provided in Appendix A to this code.
Sec. 11.405.2 Refund of Garbage-Only Deposit
(a) The garbage-only deposit may be refunded in whole or in part if account holder presents to city hall or
otherwise provides signature and dated request in writing for termination of garbage-only service and the
removal of trash receptacle.
(b) When said account is paid in full and request for service terminated is received before the 6th of the
calendar month (or date when bills are printed for that month) customer may receive a full refund. Partial
refunds will be granted of deposit less the amount of final bill if termination request is received after monthly
bills are drafted. If trash receptacle is damaged or lost, the accountholder forfeits his/her refund. For special
circumstances refunds will be made at city administrator's or city secretary's discretion.
(Ordinance 2006-02 adopted 3/23/06)
Sec. 11.406 Additional Deposit, Unpaid Balances
If the city determines, by a search of the records of the city, that any customer applying for service has had
previous unpaid balances for city electric or water service, it may, at its discretion, cause said customer to make
an additional deposit to the city. (Ordinance 95-5, adopted 11/16/95, Section 3)
Sec. 11.407 Waiver of Deposit
If the customer applying for service can present to the city a valid letter of credit from one or more previous
electric and/or water suppliers for a period of not less than one year, the city can, at its discretion, waive all or
part of any required electric and/or water deposits prescribed in Sections 11.404, 11.405, and 11.406 above.
(Ordinance 95-5, adopted 11/16/95, Section 4)
Sec. 11.408 Identification Required
The city shall require, or cause to be required, positive and personal identification of any or all persons applying
for electric or water service from the city prior to any connection of said service. (Ordinance 95-5, adopted
11/16/95, Section 5)
Sec. 11.409 Disconnection for Default; Reconnection Charge*
In the event any consumer of electricity or water within the city, and using such city facilities does not pay the
matured rates and charges within fifteen (15) days from the day that same becomes due and payable, then the
city shall cause such electrical, or water service so in default to be disconnected. In the event of any such
disconnection for failure to pay accounts as stated, the customer shall pay to the city a reconnection charge,
before reconnection is made, in the amount as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this
code, plus the full account and charges that are unpaid at that time; and upon such payments being made,
such connection shall be reestablished. If it is determined that any disconnected water or electric meter has
been illegally turned on or tampered with in any manner by anyone other than a city employee, the meter will be
removed and reinstalled only upon payment of additional service charge as provided for in the fee schedule
found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance 95-5, adopted 11/16/95, Section 6)
Sec. 11.410 Reserved†
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/221
Sec. 11.411 No Free Service Allowed
No free service shall be allowed; and to the extent that the city or any of its agents or instrumentalities may
avail themselves of the services and facilities afforded by the system, they shall pay therefor the same rates
and charges herein prescribed. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-48)
Sec. 11.412 Refund of Deposits Under $1.01
Whenever the light or water deposit, after liquidation charges, is less than one dollar and one cent ($1.01) the
person involved shall pick that amount up at the utility office in person. If said amount is not picked up within
ninety (90) calendar days after notification, said amount shall revert to the utility company. (1988 Seymour City
Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-49)
Sec. 11.413 Water Rates; Service Fee; Capital Improvements
(a) The rates for water furnished by the city to residents inside the city limits shall be as provided for in the
fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(b) The minimum rates for water furnished by the city to customers outside the city limits shall be as provided
for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(c) A service fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code shall be assessed for
customer-requested connects and disconnects, other than those required to initiate or terminate service to a
location, during regular office hours Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and a service fee as
provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code for customer-requested connects and
disconnects, after office hours. Said fee to be charged for both disconnect/connect as a single service, to be
attached to and made part of the next regular billing.
(d) A Water Capital Improvements Fund is hereby established from a portion of the revenues created by this
section, to be funded as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. Said Capital
Improvement Fund to be separately maintained at the sole discretion of the city council for use in Water Capital
Improvements projects only.
(e) The city council expressly reserves the privilege of negotiating contracts for utility abatements for
commercial customers and entities who are by their nature, in the opinion of the council, necessities or
enhancements for this community. The council, therefore, reserves the right to waive or abate customary
charges for utilities as the council deem appropriate.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-50; Ordinance 96-12, adopted 11/21/96, Section 3)
Sec. 11.414 Water Supply to Airport; Charges
The City of Seymour shall install a two (2) inch water line adjacent to the lots leased to the lessees at the
Seymour Municipal Airport. Service lines, three-quarter (3/4) inch in diameter, will be provided to each lot or
hangar with an outlet. The cost of the water service line, water tap, and monthly service shall be as provided for
in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance 89-6 adopted 8/3/89)
Sec. 11.415 Discontinuance of Service; Unpaid Balance
In the event the monthly service charge is not paid, service will be discontinued and the unpaid balance will be
assessed against the lessee's annual lease agreements. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2,
Section 17-52)
Sec. 11.416 Private Water Line Restrictions
Lessees at the Seymour Municipal Airport desiring to install water lines not connecting to the city's main water
line shall require authorization from the city administrator. Any private water line installed shall be maintained by
the lessee utilizing said water line. Any liability incurred through the installation or use of said water line shall be
borne entirely be the lessee. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-53)
Sec. 11.417 Cost of Water Meters, Installation in Plainview Addition
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/221
There is hereby set an average current cost for water meters and water meter installation for existing water
meter taps in the Plainview Addition to the city. The average current cost of the water meter and water meter
installation materials shall be determined by the current cost of said materials at the time of installation. The
cost shall be payable in advance before a water meter is set. The cost shall apply only to new construction after
December 8, 1977. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-54)
Sec. 11.418 Reserved*
Sec. 11.419 Connection to Sewer System Required
Before any building permit is issued to any person or persons, firm or corporation, to erect a building, any public
house or residence within the corporate limits of the city, and within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the line of the
sewer system of the city, such person or persons, firm or corporation shall show to the building inspector that
the plans for such building and improvements provide for a proper connection with the sanitary sewer line.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-57)
Sec. 11. 420 Privies Prohibited
Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall improve any property within one hundred fifty (150) feet of
the sewer line, and include it in such improvements, and who shall erect or maintain any privy or dry closet,
permitting the same to be used, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and such act is hereby prohibited. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-58)
Sec. 11. 421 Miscellaneous Service Charges
(a) Temporary Service and/or Changing of Service Entrance. Temporary service is service through a “service
entrance” that is temporarily installed. This “temporary service” may be for a new residence while under
construction or it may be during repair of an old residence or for any other service of a temporary nature. This
would include changing a “house service” to a “meter pole service” or to change from a “meter pole” to the
“house”. This “temporary service” will also apply to non-residential service. The fee for this service shall be as
provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(b) Location Change Fee. If a customer moves from one location to another and the city disconnects and
reconnects his water and electric meters, the fee for this service will be as provided for in the fee schedule
found in the appendix of this code.
(c) Re-Read at Customer's Request. Meters will be re-read by customer request. There will be a fee as
provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, if the original reading was correct. There will
be no charge for an incorrect reading, and an adjustment of billing will be made to correct an error in reading.
(d) Connect Fee. A service charge for connecting utility service (turning utilities on and reading meters) shall
be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(e) Recourse for Non-Payment of Service Charges. Statements will be issued for the service charges herein
contained, to be mailed by the first of each month following service. Any service charges remaining unpaid
thirty days after billing date will be added to utility bills as “arrears”, and failure to pay total bill as stated on utility
statement will result in disconnection of utility services.
(Ordinance 95-5, adopted 11/16/95, Section 8)
Sec. 11.422 Electric Utility Rates
(a) Charges for customers purchasing electrical energy and obtaining electrical services from the city shall be
as prescribed from time to time by the city council.
(b) Referencing all rates, a Correction Factor to adjust prior months estimated KWH sales to actual and
reflect over and under recoveries of purchased power costs, is hereby added to the Power Cost Adjustment
Factor (PCAF) that is attached as Exhibit I.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 2, Section 17-60)
ARTICLE 11.500 NATURAL GAS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/221
Sec. 11.501 Standard Gas Code Adopted
The Standard Gas Code, 1985 edition with 1986 revisions, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully
copied herein. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 3, Section 17-71)
Sec. 11.502 Gas Rates
The maximum general service rate for sales of natural gas rendered to residential and commercial consumers
within the city limits of Seymour, Texas, by Lone Star Gas Company, a Division of ENSERCH CORPORATION,
a Texas Corporation, its successors and assigns, is hereby fixed and determined as set forth in Item A, in the
Attachment hereto which is incorporated herein. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 3, Section 17-
72)
Sec. 11.503 Adjustments
(a) The residential and commercial rates set forth above shall be adjusted upward or downward from a base
of ($4.3142) per Mcf by a Gas Cost Adjustment Factor expressed as an amount per thousand cubic feet (Mcf)
of natural gas for changes in the intracompany city gate rate charge as authorized by the Railroad Commission
of Texas or other regulatory body having jurisdiction for gas delivered to the Seymour distribution system,
according to Item B, in the Attachment hereto which is incorporated herein.
(b) Company shall also receive tax adjustments according to Item C, in the Attachment hereto which is
incorporated herein.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 3, Section 17-73)
Sec. 11.504 Service Charges
In addition to the aforesaid rates, Company shall have the right to collect such reasonable charges as are
necessary to conduct its business and to carry out its reasonable rules and regulations in effect. The service
charges set forth in Item D and E, in the Attachment hereto which is incorporated herein are approved. Services
for which no charge is set out may be performed and charged for by Company at a level established by the
normal forces of competition. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 3, Section 17-74)
Sec. 11.505 Rate Case Expenses
Rate case expense is not included in the calculation of proposed rates. If rate case expense is incurred in this
current case, it is the intention of Lone Star Gas Company to recover the current and any prior rate case
expense through a surcharge designed for a six-month nominal recovery period. The surcharge per Mcf would
be calculated by dividing the rate case expense to be recovered by one-half of the adjusted annual sales
volume to residential and commercial customers. When a surcharge is applicable, monthly status reports will be
provided to account for the collections. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 3, Section 17-75)
Sec. 11.506 Amendments, Changes to Rates
The rates set forth in this article may be changed and amended by either the city or Company in the manner
provided by law. Service hereunder is subject to the orders of regulatory bodies having jurisdiction, and to the
Company's Rules and Regulations currently on file in the Company's office. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter
17, Article 3, Section 17-76)
ARTICLE 11.600 CONNECTIONS, REPAIRS AND EXTENSIONS OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
Sec. 11.601 Connections, Repairs and Extensions of Water Service
(a) The city shall install and maintain all service connections and lines from water mains to the customer's
meter (limit 100') and it shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person to repair or renew a service line from
the main to the meter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person other than City Water Department personnel to tap
any water main, make connection with the water main or extend a service line from the main. Said work shall
be done exclusively by the City Water Department personnel and the customer shall pay the customary tapping
fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/221
(c) The city will extend new service lines one hundred (100) feet or to the nearest property line. New service
line extensions shall be done exclusively by the City Water Department personnel.
(d) Any extensions beyond one hundred (100) feet shall be installed by the city but paid for by the customer
and the city will then maintain the lines.
(Ordinance 93-2, adopted 2/18/93, Section 1)
Sec. 11.602 Connections, Repairs and Extensions of Sewer Service
(a) The City Sewer Department personnel shall make all taps to sewer mains and install risers to the correct
height required for the customer's service line and shall maintain the same. The customer will be required to
pay the customary tapping fee. It shall be the customer's responsibility to install, repair and maintain his sewer
line fro- the riser to his house or building.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person other than City Sewer Department personnel to tap
any sewer main or install risers.
(c) The city will extend new main lines one hundred (100) feet or to the nearest property line. New main line
extensions shall be done exclusively by the City Water Department personnel.
(d) Any extensions beyond one hundred (100) feet shall be installed by the city but paid for by the customer
and the city will then maintain the lines. These extensions shall be 6" or larger and the customer shall pay for a
4" line.
(e) In the event a lift station is required for a property owner to connect to city sewer service the property
owner will pay for the lift station and equipment and the city will assume maintenance of the station once it is
installed. The lift station must be built to city specifications and inspected by the city prior to the city accepting
maintenance responsibilities for the station. The customer will pay for electrical service to operate the lift
station.
(Ordinance 93-2, adopted 2/18/93, Section 2)
ARTICLE 11.700 ELECTRICAL UTILITIES BOARD
Sec. 11.701 Board Created; Composition; Organization; Qualifications
(a) There is hereby created an Electric Utilities Board.
(b) The city council will appoint three (3) members to the Electrical Utilities Board. The city administrator,
Electrical Superintendent, and Electrical Trainee shall be ex-officio members of the Board. They shall attend
meetings of the Board and shall have the right to discuss any matter that is under consideration by the board
but shall have no vote. They shall provide all information requested by the Board in a timely manner.
(c) At the first organizational meeting, the appointed members will draw for terms as follows: One (1) shall
draw a one-year term, and one (1) shall draw a two year term, and one (1) shall draw a three (3) year term. A
member successor shall be appointed for a three (3) year term. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term
in the same manner, as provided for regular appointments.
(d) Members of the Electrical Utilities Board shall have the same qualifications as are required for
membership on the city council.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 4, Section 5-101)
Sec. 11.702 Board's Duties
(a) The board shall serve the city council as a consulting and advisory body to study and recommend policies
relating to the operation and future planning of the electric department.
(b) The annual budget for the department shall be prepared by the electric superintendent and the city
administrator. The board shall review the budget and make such changes as they deem appropriate. The city
administrator shall then present it to the Council, with the general budget, for their review.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/221
(c) The board shall make all recommendations for capital improvements to the city council.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 4, Section 5-102)
ARTICLE 11.800 ELECTRICITY RULES, REGULATIONS AND RATES*
Sec. 11.801 Definitions
Company, Utility or Public Utility. All persons, firms, or corporations, private or municipal, now or hereafter
operating in the city, any generating plants and distribution systems, any wires, poles, or lines, property or
equipment, while using any of the streets or alleys within said city, for the purpose of carrying on its business or
generating, distributing, or selling electric power and current for any purpose.
Consumer or Customer. A person, firm or corporation using any electric power from any company, as herein
above defined.
Net Rate. The rate as set out in said schedules herein.
Sec. 11.802 Schedules
The schedules or rates as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code are hereby adopted
and fixed as the minimum rates which may and or shall be charged for electric service hereinafter furnished to
any consumer or customer, as above defined.
Sec. 11.803 Power Cost Adjustment Factor
The monthly charges for all rates shall be adjusted in accordance to the power cost adjustment factor (PCAF)
that is attached as exhibit A to Ordinance 2014-02.
Sec. 11.804 Policy Statement
Referencing fees, service, location or installation of facilities, rules and regulations, etc., that is hereby attached,
as exhibit B to Ordinance 2014-02, a policy statement.
Sec. 11.805 Rules and Regulations
(a) The utility will require reasonable security for the payment of its bills, and shall not furnish service to any
customer who is in default in payment of any indebtedness for electric current to the utility. The following
procedures are established to ensure the security of payment:
(1) Residential electric customers deposit will be as provided in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code, providing that customer does not owe a past due bill, otherwise, it will be at
the discretion of the city administrator or city secretary on how much the deposit will be.
(2) A valid current (within the previous 12 months) letter of credit from one or more previous
electric suppliers, of not less than one year, showing an excellent record of payment.
(3) Commercial electric customers deposit will equal to a two-month average bill. In the event of
new construction where no monthly average bill exists, the deposit will be computed from a previous
bill similar to location. The deposit will never be less than as provided in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code.
(4) A valid current (within the previous 12 months) letter of credit from one or more previous
electric suppliers, of not less than one year showing an excellent record of payment [sic].
(5) If the city determines, by a search of the records of the city, that any customer applying for
service has had previous unpaid balances for city utility service, said customer will be required to
pay unpaid balances in full, plus deposits before service can be established with the city. This
applies to both commercial and residential.
(6) The city shall require, or cause to be required, positive and personal identification of any or all
persons applying for electric service from the city, prior to any connection of said service.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/221
(7) In the event any consumer of electricity within the city, and using such city facilities does not
pay utility charges by the 18th or the first business day thereafter, then the city shall cause such
electrical services in default to be disconnected. In the event of any such disconnection for failure to
pay accounts as stated, the customer shall pay to the city, a reconnection fee charge, before the
reconnection is made, in the sum provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
Reconnection will be made, (if payment is received in the city office no later than 5:00 p.m.,
Monday–Friday, excluding holidays) and upon such payment being made, such connection shall be
reestablished. If it is determined that any disconnected electric meter has been illegally turned on or
tampered with in any manner by anyone other than a city employee, the meter will be removed and
reinstalled, only upon payment of an additional service charge as provided in the fee schedule found
in appendix A of this code. A fine of up to $500.00 will be imposed and charges will also be filed in
municipal court, under theft of service charge. If court payment is not received as court ordered,
electric service will be subject to disconnection until payment of utility service and court cost is
received in full.
(Ordinance 2014-02 adopted 3/20/14)
(8) Refund (applying to both residential and commercial accounts) of utility deposits, will be
applied to the customers utility bill, if in the previous 18 months from the date deposits were paid, all
payments have been promptly paid (no exceptions). (Ordinance 2018-12 adopted 11/15/18)
(9) The charge for return checks or drafts will be provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A
of this code. After 3 occurrences, you will no longer be able to pay by check or draft, for a period of
one year.
(b) Bills will be rendered by the utility office on the 7th day of each month, and shall be paid by the consumer
to the city the 18th day of each month, and shall become due and payable on this date. Any customer paying
after the 18th day of the month, will be charged a 10% penalty on their remaining balance.
(c) Late notices will be sent out on the 19th of the month, with payment due in full by the 25th. If payment is
not received by the 26th at 10:00 a.m., services will be disconnected without further notice.
(d) Electric service will not be turned off for failure of payment on Fridays or any day prior to holidays. Also,
on days of extreme conditions, those conditions being temperature forecasting above 100 degrees (F) for 3 or
more days and temperature forecasted below 32 degrees (F) for a 24-hour period.
(e) Average monthly billing for residential customers by executing an average monthly payment (AMP)
agreement.
(f) Wiring, apparatus, machinery or appliances of the consumer will be required to be installed and
maintained in accordance with good electric practices, all governmental regulations and wiring permit is
required.
(g) The ordinary method of connection between the utility's distributing system and the consumer's service
wires will be by overhead wires. If the consumer shall desire to have connection made in any way, special
arrangements will be made between the consumer and the utility by which the connection will be made and
maintained at the consumer's cost.
(h) The utility will, without rental or other charge, furnish a meter for the registration of electric current. The
city has the right to inspect such meter at any time and to pass such regulations as to testing it as may be
necessary to ascertain and ensure its accuracy and efficiency.
(i) The consumer shall provide and at all times maintain, free of expense to the utility, and at a suitable and
easily accessible location within the premises to be supplied with electric current, sufficient and proper space
for the installation of meters or other similar devices of the utility, and shall also provide the necessary meter
board, wiring, and meter loops.
(j) The utility will supply electric current only through meters or other measuring devices furnished and owned
by it. The utility office must be notified when the consumer desires to have such meter or other measuring
device installed, relocated, changed or removed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/221
(k) The duly authorized agents of the utility shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the
consumer for the purpose of inspecting wiring and apparatus, removing the utility's property, reading meters
and other purposes incident to the carrying out of the contract. The utility, however, does not assume the duty
of inspecting the consumer's wiring, machinery or apparatus, and will not be responsible therefor.
(l) The consumer shall properly protect the utility's property on the consumer's premises, and shall permit no
one but the utility's agents, and persons authorized by law, to inspect or tamper with the utility's wiring and
apparatus.
(m) The consumer assumes all responsibility for the electric current upon the consumer's premises, and at
and from the point of delivery thereof, and for the wires, apparatus and appurtenances used in connection
therewith.
Sec. 11.806 Miscellaneous Service Charges
(a) Temporary Service and/or Changing of Service Entrance. Temporary service is service through a “service
entrance” that is temporarily installed. This “temporary service” may be during repair of an old residence or for
any other service of a temporary nature. This would include changing a “house service” to a “meter pole
service” or to change from a “meter pole” to the “house.” This “temporary service” will also apply to
nonresidential service. The fee for this service shall be provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code.
(b) Location Change Fee. If a customer moves from one location to another and the city disconnects and
reconnects the electric meter, the fee for this service will be provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of
this code.
(c) Reread at Customer's Request. Meters will be reread by customer request. There will be a fee charged
provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code, if the original reading was correct. There will be
no charge for an incorrect reading, and an adjustment of billing will be made to correct an error in reading.
(d) Connect Fee (Establishing Services). A service charge for connecting utility service (turning utilities on
and reading meters) shall be a charge provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code during
regular office hours.
(e) Recourse for Nonpayment of Service Charges. Statements will be issued for the service charges herein
contained, to be mailed by the 7th of each month following service. Any service charges remaining unpaid thirty
days after billing date will be added to utility bills as “arrears,” and failure to pay total bill as stated on utility
statement will result in disconnection of utility services.
Sec. 11.807 Penalties
(a) Any person, firm or corporation as defined herein in section 11.801 above who violates any provision of
this article or who fails, omits, or neglects to obey or comply with any lawful order or ordinance or any part of
this provision thereof, legally promulgated by the city council, involving any of the matters herein contained
upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be fined any sum of money not to exceed $500.00 for
each offense; and each day of such violation, omission or neglect to obey or comply with such order or
ordinances promulgated hereunder shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) In construing and enforcing the provisions of this article relating to penalties, the act, omission or failure of
any official, agent, servant or employee of any corporation or person acting within the scope of his official duties
or employment shall in every case be deemed to be also the act, omission or failure of such corporation or
person as herein defined.
Sec. 11.808 Free Service
No free service shall be allowed; and to the extent that the city or any of its agencies or instrumentalities may
avail themselves of the services and facilities afforded by the system, they shall pay therefor, the same rates
and charges herein prescribed.
Sec. 11.809 Negotiated Contracts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/221
The city council expressly reserves the right to negotiate contracts for utility abatements, unless contraindicated
by bond ordinance, with commercial customers and entities that are by their nature, in the opinion of the
council, necessities or enhancements for community development. The council, therefore, reserves the right to
waive, abate, or reduce customary charges for utilities as the council deems appropriate.
(Ordinance 2014-02 adopted 3/20/14)
ARTICLE 11.900 GREASE/GRIT TRAPS
Sec. 11.901 Grease/Grit Trap Maintenance
The owner or lessee of every commercial establishment within the city that generates grease or grit trap wastes
shall install and maintain grease/grit traps or control grease/grit wastes in such a manner as will negate the
possibility of flow of said wastes into the city collection system. The grease grit traps shall be cleaned frequently
no less than every six (6) months. Records will be kept by the proprietors of the commercial establishment and
will be made available for inspection by city personnel during normal business hours. New commercial
establishments that generate grease or grit shall install grease/grit traps before opening for business.
Sec. 11.902 Grease/Grit Trap Inspection
All grease/grit traps will be inspected periodically by city personnel. The city shall inspect the facilities of any
user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with.
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city, or the
designated representatives of the city, ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of their duties.
(Ordinance 2003-11 adopted 6/19/03)
Sec. 11.903 Disposal
The city will temporarily provide a place for permitted haulers to dispose of grease/grit trap wastes at a rate
charged to the hauler established in section 11.912. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 3)
Sec. 11.904 Discontinuing Grease/Grit Trap Disposal Service
The city reserves the right to reject any hauled waste consisting of grease/grit trap waste at the city wastewater
facility when such discharges may compromise the effectiveness of the wastewater treatment plant process.
(Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 4)
Sec. 11.905 Permitting of Haulers
Grease/grit trap waste haulers disposing of waste at the Seymour Wastewater Treatment Plant will be permitted
by the city to haul said waste. A fee will be charged for this permit at a rate established in Section 11.912. All
haulers will also be required to obtain a permit to haul said wastes from the State and comply with all applicable
State requirements. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 5)
Sec. 11.906 Accepting Wastes from Outside the City Limits
Grease or grit trap wastes derived from outside of the city limits will not be accepted. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted
3/10/94, Section 6)
Sec. 11.907 Trip Tickets
All hauled waste loads being discharged at the City of Seymour Wastewater Treatment Plant will be
documented on trip tickets that will be supplied by the city at a rate established in Section 11.912. (Ordinance
94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 7)
Sec. 11.908 Operation Hours
Wastes can be discharged when allowed at the Wastewater Treatment Plant, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. -
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, the plant will be closed on Saturday, Sunday and Holidays. Prior notice of
discharge must be given to the Wastewater Treatment Plant operator on duty. Special requests by haulers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/221
wanting to discharge during non-operating hours, if allowed, will be charged for any overtime incurred by the
operator on duty. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 8)
Sec. 11.909 Testing of Wastes
All grit traps will be tested by city personnel prior to being loaded by the waste hauler. Notice should be given to
the Wastewater Treatment operator twenty-four (24) hours in advance. Any waste trucks carrying hauled
wastes are subject to testing at any time at the haulers expense and shall be done at the discretion of city
personnel. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 9)
Sec. 11.910 Rejection of Loads
Any waste deemed to be unacceptable by city personnel will not be allowed to be discharges into the
wastewater treatment facility. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 10)
Sec. 11.911 Civil Penalties
Any user or hauler who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed
to comply with any provision of this Ordinance, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. In addition
to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees and other expenses of
litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this Ordinance or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder. Additional recoveries and relief in law and/or equity under existing
Federal or State law are precluded by specific recoveries obtained by the city under this section of the article.
(Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 11)
Sec. 11.912 Fees
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal
system for the implementation of the program established herein. Fees shall be as provided for in the fee
schedule found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94, Section 12)
ARTICLE 11.1000 WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND TRANSPORTATION USER CHARGE SYSTEM*
Sec. 11.1001 Requirements
The City of Seymour, as a recipient of a federal grant for the replacement and expansion of the wastewater
treatment and transportation facility, is required to develop and enact a user charge system to fairly distribute
the annual operation, maintenance and replacement costs of these facilities among all users and/or user
classes. (Ordinance 90-11 adopted 9/17/90, Section 1)
Sec. 11.1002 Definitions
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million by
weight, or milligram per liter (mg/l).
Conventional Pollutant means those pollutants that are generally biodegradable and readily handled within
normal concentration ranges by conventional treatment processes. Conventional pollutants specifically include
biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, fecal coliform, pH, oil, and grease.
Domestic Wastewater means the liquid waste normally originating in quarters inhabited or frequented by human
beings and may include human excreta, bath water, kitchen wastes (with or without properly shredded
garbage), and laundry waste.
Industrial Users means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment work which
discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary wastes as defined in 40 CFR 35 of
Federal Rules and Regulations.
Non-conventional Pollutants means all other pollutants which are not specifically identified as either
conventional or toxic and includes such pollutants as chemical oxygen demand (COD), phosphorus, sulfates,
chlorides, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/221
Non-residential Customers means all other customers receiving wastewater service and includes, but is not
limited to, commercial establishments, churches, schools, nursing homes, and hospitals.
Normal Wastewater Concentrations means wastewater having characteristics generally associated with typical
domestic wastewater and shall have the following limits:
BOD, 5 days @ 20°C 300 mg/l (max.)
Chlorine Demand 15 Min. 68°F 25 mg/l (max.)
Suspended Solids 300 mg/l (max.)
Hydrogen ion Concentration (pH) 5.0 to 9.0
Free Oil and Grease 10 mg/l (max.)
Oil and Grease, Total 100 mg/l (max.)
Temperature 125°F (max.)
NH3-N 30 mg/l (max.)
Objectionable Pollutant means those toxic and non-conventional pollutant causing an increase in the cost of
managing the effluent or sludge of the treatment waste. Suggested maximum limits for some objectional
pollutants are defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance.
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Costs means those costs associated with the necessary operational
requirements of a wastewater treatment facility and collection system including replacement.
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution.
Prohibited Pollutants means any toxic or non-conventional pollutants that would cause problems in the
adequate treatment of the wastewater and would be required to be removed prior to any discharge into the
wastewater system.
Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which
are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the treatment works during its service life.
Residential Customers means those customers living in homes, apartments, town houses, and trailers.
Sewer Superintendent means the person duly designated by the governing authority to oversee and supervise
the activities incident to the operation and maintenance of the sewage works, or his authorized deputy, agency
or representative.
Suspended Solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or
other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/221
Toxic Pollutants means those pollutants which have been designated as toxic under Section 307 of the 1977
Clean Water Act, including all additions to the list.
User Charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share of the cost
of operation and maintenance of such works.
Other Terms. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Ordinance 90-11 adopted 9/17/90, Section 2)
Sec. 11.1003 User Charges
(a) Customers with Normal Wastewater Contributions. In cases where wastewater characteristics contributed
by users are below or near the normal wastewater concentrations and do not contain any objectionable
pollutants, the user's charges are to be based on their estimated volume contribution.
(b) User Charge Formula. The individual customer charges will be based on the following formula:
Cu = Cb + (Ct/Vt) Vu
Where:
Cu = A user's monthly charge for wastewater service.
Cb = A user's share of monthly costs not related to operation and maintenance of wastewater
collection and treatment system.
Ct = Total operation and maintenance of lift stations and wastewater treatment facilities.
Vt = Total annual volume contribution from all users. Vt is the total annual volume of wastewater
received by the treatment facility. For the first year of operation of the plant, 0.257 million gallons per
day flow will be used. At the end of the first year, the actual flow measured at the plant shall be used.
Vu = The average monthly quantity of wastewater discharged by the individual user during winter
months. Average winter month's wastewater contribution is the average of the water consumed as
reflected on the user's water meter for the months of January, February, and March.
(Ordinance 90-11 adopted 9/17/90, Section 3.1)
Sec. 11.1004 Surcharge for Excessive Pollutant Concentrations
(a) Determination of Excessive Pollutant Concentrations. The superintendent of sewers will be responsible
for determining which users have sewage with excessive pollutant concentrations. Users who have effluent that
exceeds normal loading are responsible for self monitoring. The superintendent will determine the users who
are liable for surcharges either by individual testing or by using industry standards. If a user disputes his
surcharge, the burden of proof will be upon the user to show that his effluent meets normal loading
characteristics.
(b) Conventional Pollutants. In the event that conventional pollutant concentrations from a user exceed the
normal range of strength of domestic wastewater, a surcharge shall be levied. The use of such a surcharge
would be necessary if a user discharging a wastewater has a higher range of strength, and is located within the
city, and desires to have wastewater treatment service. The surcharge would be levied by the following formula:
Cs = (Bc(b) + Sc(s)) x Vu
where Cs = Surcharge for sewage of excessive strength.
Bc = O&M cost for treatment of a unit of BOD.
b = Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level of 300 mg/l.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/221
Sc = O&M cost for treatment of a unit of suspended solids (SS).
s = Concentration of SS from a user above a base level of 300 mg/l.
Vu = Volume concentration from a user per unit of time.
(c) Non-Conventional Pollutants. In the event that objectional pollutants or other non-conventional pollutants
are discharged into the system and cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge of the
treatment works, the city shall take action to determine such cost and levee a surcharge to that user.
(Ordinance 90-11 adopted 9/17/90, Section 3.2)
Sec. 11.1005 User Charge Policy Requirements
(a) General Requirements. The user charge system shall be revised accordingly to accomplish the following:
(1) Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among the users
and user classes as required herein;
(2) Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance cost necessary for the
proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment and collection system
works; and
(3) Apply excess revenues collected from users or a class of users to the costs and operation and
maintenance fund, and adjust the rate accordingly in the following year.
(b) Review Period. It shall be the policy of the City of Seymour to review the User Charge System not less
than every year to insure that the general requirements of subsection (a) are met. It also shall be the policy of
the City of Seymour to review all user rate structures not less than every year to insure a fair distribution of
costs. After the first year of operation and enactment of this article, the City of Seymour shall review the User
Charge System annually and make the appropriate modifications.
(c) Notification. It shall be the policy of the City of Seymour that each user be notified at least annually in
conjunction with a regular bill of the sewer rate and that portion of the sewer bill which is attributable to the
Operation & Maintenance of the wastewater treatment and collection facilities.
(d) Complaints. It shall be the policy of the city to formally review complaints of sewer charges to a user at
any regularly scheduled city council meeting upon adequate notice.
(Ordinance 90-11 adopted 9/17/90, Section 4)
ARTICLE 11.1100 BULK WATER SALES
(a) The city shall, after the passage of this article, provide at least two racks to be used for the sale or
purchase of bulk water within the city.
(b) One of said racks shall be clearly designated in such a manner as to apprise the public that water sold
from said rack is to be used for human consumption; the second of said racks shall be clearly designated to
apprise the public that water sold from said rack shall not be used for human consumption.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or institution to purchase water from the rack
designated as being for human consumption for any purpose other than for human or household use, or to use
said rack to fill any unsanitary or dangerous container.
(d) Any person, firm, corporation or institution found to be in violation of the terms of this article may be fined
in the municipal court of the city in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this
code, and additionally may be ordered to make full and complete restitution to the city for any damage done to
the water rack of the city and all equipment appurtenant thereto. In such even, not only will the individual
involved be charged with said offense, but said individual's employer, as well.
(Ordinance 91-3 adopted 5/9/91)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/221
ARTICLE 11.1200 PROVISION OF UTILITIES TO NEW INDUSTRY
Sec. 11.1201 Service Free for Certain Periods
(a) Water, sewer and solid waste monthly services shall be provided free to new industry with five (5) to ten
(10) employees for a period of two (2) years.
(b) Water, sewer and solid waste monthly services shall be provided free to new industry with eleven (11) to
fifteen (15) employees for a period of three (3) years.
(c) Water, sewer and solid waste monthly services shall be provided free to new industry with fifteen (15) or
more employees for a period of five (5) years.
(Ordinance 92-7 adopted 8/13/92, Section 1)
Sec. 11.1202 Normal Usage Required
Section 11.1201 will apply only in cases of normal usage of water, sewer and solid waste services, as
determined by the city. (Ordinance 92-7 adopted 8/13/92, Section 2)
Sec. 11.1203 Determining Number of Employees
Employee numbers are determined by full time payroll employees on a yearly average number. (Ordinance 92-
7 adopted 8/13/92, Section 3)
Sec. 11.1204 Charges Resume upon Expiration of Period
After provisions of Section 11.1201 expires charges for water, sewer and solid waste services for present and
future industries located outside the city limits shall be the same as those located within the city limits.
(Ordinance 92-7 adopted 8/13/92, Section 4)
Sec. 11.1205 Industry Defined
Industry shall be defined as the manufacture of a product or service of a product that is destined for retail sale
in a large trade area. (Ordinance 92-7 adopted 8/13/92, Section 5)
ARTICLE 11.1300 INDUSTRIAL WASTE*
Sec. 11.1301 Definitions
Approving Authority means the city administrator or his duly authorized representative.
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature
of twenty (20) degrees centigrade.
Building Sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer on other place of disposal (also
called the house lateral and house connection).
City means the City of Seymour, County of Baylor, State of Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic
matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus
not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
Control Manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
Control Point means point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges
in the public sewer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/221
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food;
and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
Industrial Waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from
the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or
distinct from normal wastewater.
Industrial Waste Charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the
city's sewerage system.
Milligrams Per Liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligramper-
liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Natural Outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal Domestic Wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into
sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 300 mg/l
and BOD is not more than 300 mg/l.
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered
design capacity.
Person means any individual and includes any corporation, organization, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, or other legal entity.
pH means the logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Public Sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting
properties shall have the use, subject to control by the City of Seymour, Texas.
Sanitary Sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination
of both, and into which storm water, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not
intentionally passed.
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than
five (5) times the average twenty-four hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of
analysis, of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” as prepared, approved, and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Pollution Control Federation.
Storm Sewer means a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which
domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Storm Water means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
Superintendent means the Water and Wastewater Superintendent of the City of Seymour, Texas or his duly
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Suspended Solids (SS) means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension
in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely, removable by a laboratory filtration device.
To Discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or
dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or
other harmful substances.
Unpolluted Wastewater means water containing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/221
(1) no free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) no acids or alkalis;
(3) no phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water,
(4) no toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) no noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as
determined by the Texas Water Commission; and
(7) color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of
determination as specified in Standard Methods.
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from
domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities.
Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions,
and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
Wastewater Facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and
industrial wastes.
Wastewater Treatment Plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving,
processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
Wastewater Service Charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not
exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. and
Watercourse means a natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 1)
Sec. 11.1302 Prohibited Discharges
(a) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes
may
(1) injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities.
(2) constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(b) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 2)
Sec. 11.1303 Chemical Discharges
(a) No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l.
(2) fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply.
(3) chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l.
(4) gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/221
(5) substances causing an excessive Chemical Oxygen Demand (C.O.D.)
(b) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
(2) fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperature between thirty-two (32)
and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (0 to 65 degrees Centigrade).
(3) objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree
that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Approving Authority for such materials; or
(4) obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the
provisions of subsection (a).
(c) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower
than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities.
(d) All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor
producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the Approving Authority. After
treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by
state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 3)
Sec. 11.1304 Hazardous Metals and Toxic Materials
(a) No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in Section
11.402(b).
(b) The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to
inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with “Standard Methods” are:
HEAVY METAL LIMITS
NOT TO EXCEED
Daily Grab
Metal Average Composite Sample
Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3
Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0
Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/221
Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0
Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0
Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5
Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0
Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01
Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0
Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2
Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0
(Note: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority
of Texas Water Commission Rule 156.19).
(c) No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from
the Approving Authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable
provisions.
(d) Prohibited hazardous materials include but are not limited to:
Antimony Rhenium
Beryllium Strontium
Bismuth Tellurium
Cobalt Herbicides
Molybdenum Fungicides
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/221
Pesticides
Uranylion
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 4)
Sec. 11.1305 Particulate Size
(a) No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree
that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles
greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimensions are prohibited.
(b) The Approving Authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 5)
Sec. 11.1306 Storm Water and Other Unpolluted Drainage
(a) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
(1) unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage.
(2) unpolluted cooling water.
(3) unpolluted industrial process waters.
(4) other unpolluted drainage.
or make any connection from inflow sources.
(b) In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the Approving Authority may
designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of
this section may be discharged.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 6)
Sec. 11.1307 Temperature
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature to the total wastewater
treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined
total increase of plant influent to one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. (Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90,
Section 7)
Sec. 11.1308 Radioactive Wastes
(a) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the
Approving Authority.
(b) The Approving Authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations,
regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 8)
Sec. 11.1309 Impairment of Facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing
(1) obstruction to the flow in sewers.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/221
(2) interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or
(3) excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause
concentrations of
(1) inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including but not limited to:
(A) Fuller's earth
(B) lime slurries; and
(C) lime residues.
(2) dissolved solids greater than 250 mg/l including but not limited to
(A) sodium chloride; and
(B) sodium sulfate.
(3) excessive discoloration including but not limited to
(A) dye wastes; and
(B) vegetable tanning solutions; or
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(c) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may
(1) deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers.
(2) overload skimming and grease handling equipment.
(3) pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment
processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action: or
(4) deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(d) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which
(1) is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or
(2) is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet
the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(e) The Approving Authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) impair the treatment process;
(2) cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater, or
(4) render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(f) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a)
section if present in sufficient quantity or size including but not limited to:
(1) ashes;
(2) cinders;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/221
(3) sand;
(4) mud;
(5) straw;
(6) shavings;
(7) metal;
(8) glass;
(9) rags;
(10) feathers;
(11) tar;
(12) plastics;
(13) wood;
(14) underground garbage;
(15) whole blood;
(16) paunch manure;
(17) hair and fleshings;
(18) entrails;
(19) paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(20) slops;
(21) chemical residues;
(22) paint residues; or
(23) bulk solids.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 9)
Sec. 11.1310 Compliance with Existing Authority
(a) Unless exception is granted by the Approving Authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by
all persons discharging;
(1) wastewater;
(2) industrial waste;
(3) polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the Texas Water Commission, no person may deposit or discharge any waste
included in subsection (a) on public or private property or into or adjacent to any:
(1) natural outlet;
(2) watercourse;
(3) storm sewer;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/221
(4) other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The Approving Authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will
receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal,
state and local governments.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 10)
Sec. 11.1311 Approving Authority Requirements
(a) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may
(1) deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters;
(2) create a hazard to life or health; or
(3) create a public nuisance;
the Approving Authority shall require
(1) pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(2) control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(3) payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(b) The Approving Authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included
under subsection (a) of this section.
(c) The Approving Authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge
does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 11)
Sec. 11.1312 Approving Authority Review and Approval
(a) If pretreatment or control is required, the Approving Authority shall review and approve design and
installation of equipment and processes.
(b) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes,
ordinances and other laws.
(c) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall
provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 12)
Sec. 11.1313 Requirements for Traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include
(1) grease or waste containing grease in amounts that will impede or stop the flow in the public
sewers.
(2) oil;
(3) sand;
(4) flammable wastes; and
(5) other harmful ingredients.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/221
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the
Approving Authority
(1) provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the Approving Authority;
(2) locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and
inspection; and
(3) maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 13)
Sec. 11.1314 Requirements for Building Sewers
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own
expense and as required by the Approving Authority
(1) install an accessible control manhole;
(2) install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of
the waste; and
(3) install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps....) where needed.
(4) maintain the equipment and facilities.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 14)
Sec. 11.1315 Sampling and Testing
(a) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and
property.
NOTE: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite sample from
all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample of samples should be taken. Normally, but not
always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where
applicable, 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine
pH and oil and grease.
(b) Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by the ordinance shall be
(1) conducted in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods”; and
(2) determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point
authorized by the Approving Authority.
(c) BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized
discharges.
(d) The Approving Authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater
which is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall
be sampled for flow BOD, TSS and pH at least annually.
(e) City may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if
necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is
available and no other source of raw water is used.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 15)
Sec. 11.1316 User Charge System
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/221
(a) The city has promulgated a separate ordinance regulating the method to fairly distribute the operation and
maintenance cost among the users. The User Charge System ordinance will determine the rates to be paid by
the users with periodic adjustments.
(b) When discharges of any waste into the City of Seymour sewer system are approved by the Approving
Authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing
(1) terms of acceptance by the city;
(2) payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the User Charge System as
mentioned in Subpart 1 of this Section;
(3) sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the “Uniform
Plumbing Code” as promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials;
(4) a sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and
(5) construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use.
(c) Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular sewer bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to the
Operation and Maintenance of the wastewater treatment system.
(d) The city will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and
maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 16)
Sec. 11.1317 Savings Clause
A person discharging wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this article may continue without
penalty so long as he:
(1) does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge without permission of the
Approving Authority.
(2) has discharged the waste at least six months prior to the effective date of this article; and
(3) applies for and is granted a permit no later than 150 days after the effective date of this article.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 17)
Sec. 11.1318 Conditions or Permits
(a) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause
provided that the person
(1) submit an application within 120 days after the effective date of this article on forms supplied
by the Approving Authority.
(2) secure approval by the Approving Authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when
required; and
(3) has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including but not limited
to, provisions for
(1) payment of charges;
(2) installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities, if required, and
(3) sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the city; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/221
(4) provides a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to the provisions of this article
and approval of the Approving Authority.
(b) A person applying for a new discharge shall
(1) meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and
(2) secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 18)
Sec. 11.1319 Power to Enter Property
(a) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
enforcing this article.
(b) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning
safety, internal security, and fire protection.
(c) Except when caused by negligence or failure of person(s) to maintain safe conditions, the city shall
indemnify the person(s) against loss or damage to their property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage to their property by city employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person(s) and growing out of
the sampling operation.
(d) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for
the purposes of:
(1) inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
(2) maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and
(3) conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance
with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(e) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the public sewers.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 19)
Sec. 11.1320 Authority to Disconnect Service
(a) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the
system when
(1) acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to
the sewer potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper
conveyance and treatment of wastewater,
(2) a governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is
no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is
delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment
that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or
(3) the customer
(A) discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the Approving
Authority;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/221
(B) discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an
imbalance in the wastewater treatment system;
(C) fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or
(D) repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of Sections
11.1302 through 11.1309 as stated above.
(b) If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall
(1) disconnect the customer,
(2) supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all
pertinent information; and
(3) continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/additional
pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectional characteristics from his wastes.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 20)
Sec. 11.1321 Notice
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. (Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90,
Section 21)
Sec. 11.1322 Continuing Prohibited Discharges
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 22)
Sec. 11.1323 Penalty
(a) A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is
punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(b) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) section, the city is entitled to pursue all other
criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person
continuing prohibited discharges.
(Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 23)
Sec. 11.1324 Failure to Pay
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the
other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. (Ordinance
90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 24)
Sec. 11.1325 Penalty for Criminal Mischief
The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and
ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying
sewers or treatment facilities. (Ordinance 90-12 adopted 9/17/90, Section 25)
ARTICLE 11.1400 DELINQUENT UTILITY BILLS
Sec. 11.1401 Penalty
Bills will be rendered by the city on the 8th day of each month and are due and payable within ten (10) days
from the date thereof. Any bill not paid in accordance with this provision becomes delinquent and the amount of
this bill, less applicable sales tax, will be subject to a ten (10) percent late payment penalty. If a bill is not paid
by the 26th of the month, it is hereby ordained that the city will disconnect service; service to be resumed only
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/221
upon payment of all charges, fees and penalties. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 17, Article 4, Section 17-
81; Ordinance 2005-01 adopted 1/20/05)
Sec. 11.1402 Collection
(a) Policy. It is the policy of the city that all utility bills should be paid before the delinquency date.
(b) Cut-Off Notice to be Mailed for Nonpayment. At any time a utility customer has not paid a utility bill in full
prior to the 18th day of the month in which the utility bill was mailed, the customer shall be mailed a cut-off
notice providing that the customer's utilities will be disconnected on the 26th day of the month (unless this date
falls on a Friday, a weekend or a holiday, in such case the disconnection date falls to the next business date)
unless the entire utility bill is paid in full.
(c) Utility Service to be Disconnected for Nonpayment. If the customer has not paid his entire bill by the
disconnect date, all utility services to the customer will be terminated on the disconnect date and will not be
reconnected until such time as the customer has paid his entire utility bill then due, plus any applicable
disconnect fee, reconnect fee, and all other charges, fines and/or fees.
(d) Exceptions. In the event the city administrator feels that the implementation of this policy would be unduly
harsh for a particular customer because of unique circumstances, the city administrator, or his designee, may
delay implementation of this policy and enter into a payment plan with the customer upon such terms as are
suitable to the city administrator.
(e) Payment Plan. Any payment plan entered into by the city and a customer must be signed by the
customer. Unless specifically approved by the city administrator, no customer may enter into a payment plan
which extends beyond the end of the current month unless the customer pays, at that time, a minimum of onethird
(1/3) of his delinquent bill, plus a contract fee of $10.00. Unless specifically approved by the city
administrator, no payment plan may extend more than three (3) months and must provide for the payment of
future utility bills, plus one-third (1/3) of the arrearage remaining after the payment made by the customer at the
inception of the contract. If a customer fails to comply with the terms of the payment plan, the customer's
utilities will be disconnected with or without notice on the day after a customer's default. In such event, utility
service will not be reconnected until the customer has paid his entire utility bill, plus all other applicable
charges. No customer may enter into more than three payment plans in any calendar year and may not enter
into a payment plan if he has not fulfilled completely the provisions of any previous payment plan.
(f) Payment Contract Form. Attached to Ordinance 2005-05 and on file in the office of the city secretary is a
sample of the form to be utilized for any future payment plans entered into under the terms of this section, this
form may be modified at the city administrators discretion as warranted.
(Ordinance 2005-05 adopted 2/24/05)
ARTICLE 11.1500 MANDATORY USE OF WATER SYSTEM FACILITY
(a) The benefits of receiving grant funds in connection with the water treatment project will accrue to all
eligible water users.
(b) All residences, commercial businesses, bulk water users, and all other entities, present and future,
located within the city limits are required to use the Seymour Water System Facility.
(c) There shall be no free service or use of the facility permitted by anyone or any entity or business located
within the city limits.
(d) This article shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the law.
(Ordinance 97-2 adopted 4/15/97)
ARTICLE 11.1600 SEWER SERVICE AND RATES*
Sec. 11.1601 Schedules
The schedules or rates as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code are hereby
adopted and fixed as the minimum rates which may and/or shall be charged for sewer service hereinafter
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/221
furnished to any consumer or customer as above defined.
Sec. 11.1602 Policy Statements
(a) A sewer capital improvement fund has been established from a portion of the revenues created by this
and prior ordinances and funded on a monthly basis:
RESIDENTIAL/CHURCH/COMMERCIAL PER MONTH
Inside and outside city limits 6% sewer sales
Said sewer capital improvement fund to be separately maintained at the sole discretion of the city council and
designated for sewer capital improvement projects only.
(b) The city shall prohibit service to any structure constructed in a designated floodplain area after January
12, 1995, the date of public environmental notification in area news media. The city may provide service to any
structure existing in a designated floodplain area prior to January 12, 1995.
(c) Rules and regulations for sewer service, see exhibit A as maintained on file in the offices of the city.
Sec. 11.1603 Rules and Regulations
(a) The utility will require reasonable security for the payment of its bills, and shall not furnish service to any
customer who is in default in payment of any indebtedness for sewer usage to the utility. This applies to
customers who do not have city water. The following procedures are established to ensure the security of
payment:
(1) Residential sewer customers deposit will be $25.00, and commercial sewer customers will be
$30.00.
(2) A valid current (within the previous 18 months) letter of credit from one or more previous utility
suppliers, of not less than one year, showing an excellent record of payment.
(Ordinance 99-09 adopted 7/1/99)
(3) Subsection deleted in its entirety. (Ordinance 2001-14 adopted 6/21/01)
(4) If the city determines by a search of the records of the city, that any customer applying for
service has had previous unpaid balances for city utility service, the city may at its discretion cause
said customer to make additional deposit to the city; this applies to both commercial and residential.
(5) The city shall require or cause to be required, positive and personal identification of any or all
persons applying for sewer service from the City of Seymour, Texas prior to any connection of said
service.
(6) Refund (applying to both residential and commercial) of deposit for sewer service will be
applied to the customer's utility bill upon final disconnection.
(Ordinance 99-09 adopted 7/1/99)
(7) The charge for returned checks or drafts will be $25.00 for each occurrence. After three
occurrences a customer will no longer be able to pay by check or draft. (Ordinance 01-12 adopted
3/22/01)
(b) Such rates or charges hereby fixed and prescribed shall be paid by the consumer to the city by the 18th
day of each month, and shall become due and payable on this date. Any customer paying after the 18th day of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/221
each month, will be charged a 10% penalty. (Ordinance 99-10 adopted 7/1/99; Ordinance 2005-01 adopted
1/20/05)
(c) Average monthly billing residential customer by executing an average monthly payment (AMP)
agreement.
(d) The ordinary method of connection between the utility's sewer system shall be in compliance with the
National Plumbing Code.
Sec. 11.1604 Negotiated Contracts
The city council expressly reserves the right to negotiate contracts for utility abatements, unless contraindicated
by bond ordinance, with commercial customers and entities who are by their nature, in the opinion of the
council, necessities or enhancements for community development.
(Ordinance 99-09 adopted 7/1/99)
ARTICLE 11.1700 WATER SERVICE AND RATES*
Sec. 11.1701 Schedules
The rates and charges for water furnished to customers inside the city limits (including the extraterritorial
jurisdiction) by the city shall be as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
Sec. 11.1702 Policy Statements
(a) Said water capital improvement fund to be separately maintained at the sole discretion of the city council
and designated for water capital improvement project only.
(b) The city shall prohibit service to any structure constructed in a designated floodplain area after January
12, 1995, the date of public environmental notification in area news media. The city may provide service to any
structure existing in a floodplain area prior to January 12. 1995.
(c) Rules and regulations for water service see exhibit A to Ordinance 2018-06.
Sec. 11.1703 Rules and Regulations
(a) The utility will require reasonable security for the payment of its bill, and shall not furnish service to any
customer who is in default in payment of any indebtedness for water usage to the utility. The following
procedures are established to ensure the security of payment:
(1) Residential and commercial water customers deposit will be as provided in the fee schedule
found in appendix A of this code.
(2) The city shall require, or cause to be required, positive and personal identification of any or all
persons applying for utility services from the city prior to any connection of said service.
(3) A valid current (within the previous 12 months) letter of credit from an electricity supplier, of not
less than one year, showing an excellent record of payment.
(4) If the city determines, by a search of records of the city, that any customer applying for service
has had previous unpaid balances for city utility service, they may, at their discretion, cause said
customer to make additional deposit to the city. This applies to both commercial and residential
accounts.
(5) In the event any consumer of water within the city, and using such city facilities does not pay
the utility charges by the 18th or the first business day thereafter, then the city shall cause such
water utility service to go into default mode. In the event of any such disconnection for failure to pay
accounts as stated, the customer shall pay to the city, a reconnection charge, as provided in the fee
schedule found in appendix A of this code, before such connections shall be reestablished. If it is
determined that any disconnected utility meter has been illegally tampered with in any manner by
anyone other than a city employee, the meter shall be removed and re-installed, only upon payment
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/221
of an additional service charge as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. A
fine of up to $500.00 will be imposed and charges will also be filed in municipal court, under theft of
service charge. If municipal court is not attended as court ordered, water service will be subject to
disconnection until payment of utility service and court cost is received in full.
(6) Refund (applying to both residential and commercial) of deposit for water service will be
applied to customer's bill, upon final disconnection of service.
(7) The charge for returned checks or drafts will be as provided in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code for each occurrence. After three (3) occurrences, the customer will no longer
be able to pay by check or draft for a period of one year.
(b) Bills will be rendered by the utility office on the 7th day of each month. In the event any customer does
not pay the utility bill by the 18th of the month, a 10% penalty will be applied to their remaining balance. Late
notices will be sent out on the 19th of each month, with payment due in full by the 25th. If payment is not
received by the 26th at 10:00 a.m., utility services will be disconnected without further notice.
(c) Water services will not be turned off for failure of payment on Fridays or any day prior to holidays.
(d) Average monthly billing for residential or commercial customers is available by executing an average
monthly payment (AMP) agreement and is available to those who have had utility at one location for at least
one year.
(e) The ordinary method of connection between the utility's system shall be in compliance with the National
Plumbing Code.
(f) The utility will, without rental or other charge, furnish a meter for the registration of water usage. The city
has the right to inspect such meter at any time and to pass such regulations as to testing it as may be
necessary to ascertain and ensure its accuracy and efficiency.
(g) The consumer shall provide and at all times maintain, free of expense to the utility, and at a suitable and
easily accessible location within the premises to be supplied with water, sufficient and proper space for the
installation of meters and other similar devices of the utility.
(h) The utility will supply water only through meters or other measuring devices furnished and owned by it.
The utility must be notified when the consumer desires to have such meter or other measuring device installed,
relocated, changed or removed.
(i) The duly authorized agents of the utility shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises for the
purpose of inspecting water lines and meters, removing the utility's property reading meters and other purposes
incident to the carrying out of the contract. The utility, however, does not assume the duty of inspecting the
consumer's water lines or apparatus, and will not be responsible therefor.
(j) The consumer shall properly protect the utility's property on the consumer's premises, and shall permit no
one but the utility's agents, and persons authorized by law, to inspect or tamper with the utility's property.
(k) The consumer assumes all responsibility for the water usage on the consumer's premises, and at and
from the point of delivery thereof, and for the water lines, apparatus and appurtenances used in connection
therewith.
Sec. 11.1704 Miscellaneous Service Charge
(a) Location Change Fee. If a customer moves from one location to another and the city disconnects and
reconnects the water meter, the fee for this service will be as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A
of this code.
(b) Reread at Customer's Request. Meters will be reread at the request of a customer. There will be a fee as
provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code charged, if the original reading was correct. There
will be no charge for an incorrect reading, and an adjustment of billing will be made to correct an error in
reading.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/221
(c) Connect Fee. A service charge for connecting utility service (turning utilities on and reading meters) shall
be as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(d) Records for Nonpayment of Service Charges. Statements will be issued for the service charges herein
contained, to be mailed by the 7th of each month following service. Any service charges remaining unpaid thirty
days after billing date will be added to utility bills as “arrears,” and failure to pay total bill as stated on utility
statement will result in disconnection of utility services.
(e) Tap Fees. As provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
Sec. 11.1705 Penalties
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article or who fails, omits, or neglects to
obey or comply with any lawful order of this article or any part of this provision thereof, legally promulgated by
the city council, involving any of the matters herein contained upon conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, shall be fined any sum of money not to exceed $500.00 for each offense; and each day of such
violation, omission or neglect to obey or comply with such order of ordinances promulgated hereunder shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(b) In construing and enforcing the provisions of this article relating to penalties, the act, omission or failure of
any official, agent, servant or employee of any corporation or person acting within the scope of his official duties
or employment shall in every case be deemed to be also the act, omission or failure of such corporation or
person as herein defined.
(c) There will be no free service or use of the facility permitted by anyone or any entity or business located
within the city limits.
Sec. 11.1706 Miscellaneous Regulations
(a) The benefits of receiving grant funds in connection with the water treatment project will accrue to all
eligible water users.
(b) All residences, commercial businesses, bulk water users, and all other entities, present and future,
located within the city limits, is required to use the city's water system facility.
Sec. 11.1707 Negotiated Contracts
The city council and city administrator expressly reserves the right to negotiate contracts for utility abatements,
unless contraindicated by bond ordinance, with commercial customers and entities that are by their nature, in
the option of the council, necessities or enhancements for community development. The council and city
administrator, therefore, reserve the right to waive, abate, or reduce customary charges for utilities as the
council deems appropriate.
(Ordinance 2018-06 adopted 8/23/18)
ARTICLE 11.1800 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLANS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 11.1801–11.1830 Reserved
Division 2. Water Conservation Plan
Sec. 11.1831 General
This conservation plan has been developed to meet the requirements of 30 TAC, section 288.5 for the city
which is a retail public water supplier of treated water to residents and commercial and industrial businesses
located in the city.
Sec. 11.1832 Utility Profile
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/221
(a) The city operates a 3 MGD reverse osmosis water treatment plant to treat local groundwater for its
customers. The TWDB lists the municipal water use of the city at 180 MG per year or 0.49 MG per day. The
city's certificate of convenience and necessity number (CCN) is 10611. The city's public water supply
identification number (PWS ID) is TX0120001. A map of the city is included in appendix A to Ordinance 2016-
08.
(b) The city obtains groundwater from 19 wells. Some of this water is diverted into a reverse osmosis plant
for nitrate removal and is then blended back into the remaining treated groundwater. The major components of
the water system consists of three ground storage tanks, one elevated storage tank and one standpipe.
(c) The city currently has one wholesale customer: Baylor WSC. Baylor WSC (CCN# 11605) is located
outside the city limits of Seymour. Baylor WSC services 1,758 customers through 927 connections.
Sec. 11.1833 Goals
(a) The average water use for the city over the past five years is 205 gcpd. The goal for municipal water use
is a 5.4 percent reduction by 2060. This goal is to reduce per capita use by 11 gallon per day per user to 194
gcpd. The 5-year water reduction goal is to reduce to 203 gpcd, and the 10-year water reduction goal is to
reduce to 200 gpcd. The average residential water use for the past five years has been 190 gpcd. The 5-year
residential goal is to reduce water use by 5 gpcd to 185 gpcd, and the 10-year residential goal is to reduce
water by 10 gpcd to 180 gpcd. These goals are in line with the overall water conversation goals outlined by both
the state and the TWDB region B water conservation and drought management recommendations.
(b) In addition, the city over the past two years has experienced on average approximately 7% water loss
through the water system, which equates to a water loss of approximately 14 gpcd. The city's 5-year goal is to
reduce water loss to below 6% by the end of approximately 14 gpcd. The city's 5-year goal is to reduce water
loss to below 6% by the end of 2020. The 10-year goal is to reduce water loss to below 5%. The 5- and 10-year
goals will be met through replacement of old meters and distribution lines and through more accurate recording
of unaccounted for water.
Sec. 11.1834 Schedule for Implementing Plan to Achieve Targets and Goals
(a) The city will adhere to the following schedule, to achieve the targets and goals for water conservation:
(1) Annual calibration of the master meters.
(2) Residential water meters will continue to be monitored for accuracy annually and replaced on
a fifteen year cycle or as needed.
(3) Water audits shall be conducted annually.
(A) Real water losses shall be identified and corrected.
(B) Real water losses shall be minimized by replacement of deteriorating water mains and
appurtenances, as is conducted by city staff on an ongoing basis.
(4) The city will make available for viewing at city hall water conservation materials developed by
the staff, materials obtained from the Texas Water Development Board, Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality or other sources.
(5) A leak detection program shall be implemented by the city, which reduces real water losses.
(b) For wholesale customers, every water supply contract entered into or renewed after official adoption of
the water conservation plan, including contract extensions:
(1) Each wholesale customer must develop and implement a water conservation plan or water
conservation measures using the applicable elements of 30 TAC, section 288.5.
(2) If wholesale customers intend on reselling the water, then the contract between the city and its
wholesale customers must provide that the contract for resale of the water have water conservation
requirements in line with 30 TAC, section 288.5.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/221
(3) A reservoir systems operation plan, if applicable; including plans to optimize water supplies as
one of its significant goals.
Sec. 11.1835 Tracking Targets and Goals
The city staff shall track targets and goals by utilizing the following procedures:
(1) Logs shall be maintained for meter calibration, meter testing, and meter replacement
programs.
(2) Annual water audits shall be documented and kept in the utility department files.
(3) Staff will keep a record of the number of mall-outs distributed semi-annually.
(4) Rates shall be tracked by means of ordinances adopted.
(5) Logs shall be maintained for the utility's leak detection program.
Sec. 11.1836 Metering Devices
All metering devices used by the city to meter water are accurate to within plus or minus 5%. The master meter
is calibrated regularly and replaced as needed. The city inspects all residential, commercial and industrial
meters on a regular basis and when the city observes abnormally high or low usage for a customer. These
meters are replaced as needed.
Sec. 11.1837 Universal Metering
All service connections in the city water distribution system are metered. The city promotes an aggressive leak
detection and repair program along with a computerized billing system, which together result in an accurate
accounting of delivery of water.
Sec. 11.1838 Unaccounted-For Water Use
The city utilizes a record management program which includes water purchased, water sold, water loss and
daily average water usage. In addition, the city separates water users and sales into categories of residential,
commercial and industrial. The city visually inspects distribution lines for leaks on a daily basis and repairs
reported and visually detected leaks in a timely manner. With detailed record management and leak detection
programs, the city is able to minimize unaccounted-for water use.
Sec. 11.1839 Continuing Public Education and Information
The city has available at their main office posted information, pre-printed brochures, etc. pertaining to water
conservation, which water customers can view and pickup at their convenience. The city also holds meetings
open to the public where questions and comments can be discussed pertaining to water conservation.
Sec. 11.1840 Nonpromotional Water Rate Structure
Seymour has adopted a nonpromotional water rate structure as outlined in the fee schedule found in appendix
A of this code. With a water rate structure which includes a per thousand gallon charge, the city shifts the cost
of supplying water to those customers who use water the most. The rates contained in this plan are subject to
change from time to time as deemed appropriate and necessary by city council.
Sec. 11.1841 Enforcement Procedure and Plan Adoption
This water conservation plan has been adopted by the city on June 16, 2016 and a copy of this article adopting
the plan is included in appendix B to Ordinance 2016-08. The adopted plan will be enforced by the city by
providing water service only to customers complying with the plan and discontinuing service to customers who
do not pay their water bills or refuse to comply with the plan.
Sec. 11.1842 Coordination with Region B Planning Group
The service area of the city is located within the region B water planning area and the city has provided a copy
of this water conservation plan to region B planning group.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/221
Sec. 11.1843 Plan Review and Update
The city will review and update this water conservation plan, as needed, based on new or updated information,
such as adoption or revision of the regional water plan. The water conservation plan will be updated again
before May 1, 2019 and every five (5) years thereafter.
Secs. 11.1844–11.1860 Reserved
Division 3. Drought Contingency Plan*
Sec. 11.1861 Declaration of Policy, Purpose, and Intent
In order to conserve the available water supply and/or to protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with
particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public
health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply
emergency conditions, the city adopts the following drought contingency plan (the plan).
Sec. 11.1862 Public Involvement
Opportunity for the public and wholesale water customers to provide input into the preparation of the plan was
provided by the city by means of scheduling and providing public notice of a public meeting to accept input on
the plan.
Sec. 11.1863 Wholesale Water Customer Education
The city will periodically provide wholesale water customers with information about the Plan, including
information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the
drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of
mailing a copy of the plan to the wholesale customers.
Sec. 11.1864 Coordination with Regional Water Planning Groups
The water service area of the city is located within the Brazos Region B and the city has provided a copy of the
plan to the Brazos Region B water planning group.
Sec. 11.1865 Authorization
(a) The city administrator or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable
provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health,
safety, and welfare. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate
drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan.
(b) As a wholesale public water supplier, the city shall review and update, as appropriate, the drought
contingency plan, at least every five years, based on new or updated information, such as adoption or revision
of the regional water plan.
Sec. 11.1866 Application
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all customers utilizing water provided by the city. The terms “person”
and “customer” as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other
legal entities.
Sec. 11.1867 Criteria for Initiation and Termination of Drought Response Stages
(a) The city manager or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a weekly
basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. Customer
notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages will be made by mail or telephone. The
news media will also be informed.
(b) The triggering criteria described below are based on the storage capacity of the Hubbard Creek
Reservoir.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/221
Sec. 11.1868 Drought Response Stages
(a) Stage 1 Triggers - Mild Water Shortage Conditions.
(1) Requirements for Initiation. The city will recognize that a mild water shortage condition exists
when any of the following exists when water in storage in the city's water storage tank is equal to or
less than 80% of storage capacity.
(2) Requirements for Termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 30 consecutive days. The city will
notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of stage 1 in the same manner as
the notification of initiation of stage 1 of the plan.
(b) Stage 2 Triggers - Moderate Water Shortage Conditions.
(1) Requirements for Initiation. The city will recognize that a moderate water shortage condition
exists when any of the following exists when the water table reaches level of nine feet.
(2) Requirements for Termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 30 consecutive days. Upon
termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative. The city will notify its wholesale customers and
the media of the termination of stage 2 in the same manner as the notification of initiation of stage 1
of the plan.
(c) Stage 3 Triggers - Severe Water Shortage Conditions.
(1) Requirements for Initiation. The city will recognize that a severe water shortage condition
exists when any of the following exists when the water level drops to six feet and the GPM is
insufficient to operate the R.O. plant.
(2) Requirements for Termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 30 consecutive days. Upon
termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative. The city will notify its wholesale customers and
the media of the termination of stage 3 in the same manner as the notification of initiation of stage 2
of the plan.
(d) Stage 4 Triggers - Critical Water Shortage Conditions.
(1) Requirements for Initiation. The city will recognize that an emergency water shortage condition
exists when any of the following exists when a major water line breaks, or pump or system failures
occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capabilities to provide water services; or natural or
manmade contamination of the water supply source(s).
(2) Requirements for Termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 10 consecutive days. The city will
notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of stage 4.
Sec. 11.1869 Drought Responses
The city manager or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions and, in accordance
with the triggering criteria set forth in section 11.1868, shall determine that mild, moderate, or severe water
shortage conditions exist or that an emergency condition exists and shall implement the following actions:
(1) Stage 1 Response - Mild Water Shortage Conditions.
(A) Target. Achieve a voluntary ten percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Best Management Practices for Supply Management.
(i) Reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/221
(ii) Inform all wholesale customers to initiate voluntary water restrictions and invoke
stage 1 of the drought contingency plan.
(C) Water Use Restrictions for Reducing Demand.
(i) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will contact wholesale water customers to
discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and will request that wholesale water
customers initiate voluntary measures to reduce water use by:
a. Limit irrigation of landscaped and gardens to Sundays and Thursdays for
even-numbered addresses and Saturdays and Wednesdays for odd-numbered
addresses.
b. Request customers check for leaks, dripping faucets, and running toilets.
(ii) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will provide a weekly report to news media
with information regarding current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected
water supply and demand conditions if drought conditions persist, and consumer
information on water conservation measures and practices.
(2) Stage 2 Response - Moderate Water Shortage Conditions.
(A) Target. Achieve a ten percent reduction in total weekly water use.
(B) Best Management Practices for Supply Management. All requirements of stage 1 shall
remain in effect during stage 2. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use
restrictions shall also apply to all persons:
(i) Limit irrigation of landscaped and gardens to Sundays and Thursdays for evennumbered
addresses and Saturdays and Wednesdays for odd-numbered addresses.
(ii) Request customers check for leaks, dripping faucets, and running toilets.
(iii) Washing of any motor vehicle is prohibited unless conducted on a commercial
carwash and only permitted between noon and five o'clock p.m.
(iv) The use of water for washing sidewalks, driveways or other paved or concrete
areas is prohibited.
(v) The use of water to fill, or add to any swimming pool, wading pool, or Jacuzzi type
pool is prohibited.
(C) Water Use Restrictions for Reducing Demand.
(i) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will initiate weekly contact with wholesale
water customers to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and the possibility of
pro rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries.
(ii) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will request wholesale water customers to
initiate mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use.
(iii) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will initiate preparations for the
implementation of pro rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries by preparing
a monthly water usage allocation baseline for each wholesale customer according to the
procedures specified in section 11.1870 of the plan.
(iv) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will provide a weekly report to news
media with information regarding current water supply and/or demand conditions,
projected water supply and demand conditions if drought conditions persist, and
consumer information on water conservation measures and practices.
(3) Stage 3 Response - Severe Water Shortage Conditions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/221
(A) Target. Achieve a twenty percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Best Management Practices for Supply Management. All requirements of stage 2 shall
remain in effect during stage 3. In addition, the following applies:
(i) Outdoor watering by handheld hoses or watering cans can only occur between six
a.m. and eight a.m. and eight p.m. and ten p.m. Other methods of irrigation are
prohibited.
(C) Water Use Restrictions for Reducing Demand.
(i) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will contact wholesale water customers to
discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and will request that wholesale water
customers initiate additional mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use.
(ii) The city manager or his/her designee(s), will initiate pro rata curtailment of water
diversions and/or deliveries for each wholesale customer according to the procedures
specified in section 11.1870 of the plan.
(iii) The city manager or his/her designee(s) will provide a weekly report to news media
with information regarding current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected
water supply and demand conditions if drought conditions persist, and consumer
information on water conservation measures and practices.
(4) Stage 4 Response - Emergency Water Shortage Conditions.
(A) Target. Discontinue operations of the water system.
(B) Best Management Practices for Supply Management.
(i) All requirements of stage 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4. In addition, the
following applies:
a. Irrigation of landscaped areas is prohibited at all times.
b. Such restrictions as determined by the mayor at the recommendation of city
staff that are determined to be required to maintain public health and safety,
including elimination of service to all or part of the system.
(ii) Whenever emergency water shortage conditions exist as defined in section 11.1868
of the plan, the city manager shall:
a. Assess the severity of the problem and identify the actions needed and time
required to solve the problem.
b. Inform the utility director or other responsible official of each wholesale water
customer by telephone or in person and suggest actions, as appropriate, to
alleviate problems (e.g., notification of the public to reduce water use until service is
restored).
c. If appropriate, notify city, county, and/or state emergency response officials for
assistance.
d. Undertake necessary actions, including repairs and/or clean-up as needed.
e. Prepare a post-event assessment report on the incident and critique of
emergency response procedures and actions.
Sec. 11.1870 Pro Rata Water Allocation
In the event that the triggering criteria specified in section 11.1868 of the plan for stage 3 - severe water
shortage conditions have been met, the city manager is hereby authorized initiate allocation of water supplies
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/221
on a pro rata basis in accordance with Texas Water Code section 11.039.
Sec. 11.1871 Enforcement
During any period when pro rata allocation of available water supplies is in effect, wholesale customers shall
pay the following surcharges on excess water diversions and/or deliveries:
(1) Five times the normal water charge per million gallons in excess of the monthly allocation up
through 5 percent above the monthly allocation.
(2) Five times the normal water charge per million gallons in excess of the monthly allocation from
5 percent through 10 percent above the monthly allocation.
(3) Five times the normal water charge per million gallons in excess of the monthly allocation from
10 percent through 15 percent above the monthly allocation.
(4) Five times the normal water charge per million gallons more than 15 percent above the
monthly allocation.
(5) The above surcharges shall be cumulative.
Sec. 11.1872 Variances
(a) The city manager or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant a temporary variance to the pro rata water
allocation policies provided by this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting the public health, welfare, or safety and if one or more of the following
conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water
supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in
water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this plan shall file a petition for variance with the
city manager within 5 days after pro rata allocation has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be
reviewed by the city council and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Detailed statement with supporting data and information as to how the pro rata allocation of
water under the policies and procedures established in the plan adversely affects the petitioner or
what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this resolution.
(3) Description of the relief requested.
(4) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(5) Alternative measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan
and the compliance date.
(6) Other pertinent information.
(c) Variances granted by the city council shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or
modified by the city council or its designee:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has
failed to meet specified requirements.
(d) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the
issuance of the variance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/221
Sec. 11.1873 Wholesale Contracts
All future wholesale customer contracts or contract extensions to existing wholesale contracts shall include the
following provision:
“In the case of a shortage of water resulting from drought, water to be distributed shall be divided in accordance
with Texas Water Code, section 11.039.”
(Ordinance 2016-08 adopted 6/16/16)
ARTICLE 11.1900 BACKFLOW CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL*
Sec. 11.1901 Standards
Every source of contamination or possible contamination from any contaminant which originates from or is
located at a residential or commercial establishment, that is connected to any public water supply or that
provides water to the public, shall be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this article.
Sec. 11.1902 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other
technical terms used, shall have the meaning or definitions listed in the most recent adopted edition of the city
plumbing code and/or the most recent manual of cross-connection control published by the University of
Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC FCCCHR). The
following definitions shall apply to this article.
Air Gap. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or
appurtenance and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An “approved airgap
separation” overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device in no case less than one inch.
Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Backflow Prevention Device or Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker or AVB. A device
used to prevent backsiphonage. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure backflow.
Auxiliary Supply. Any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the
building or on the property including ground water or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other
purpose.
Backflow Prevention Assembly or Assembly. An assembly to counteract back pressure or prevent
backsiphonage.
Backflow. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases,
or substances into the water system.
Backpressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply
pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of
flow.
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure
in the potable water supply system.
Boresight or Boresight to Daylight. Means providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies
installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain pipe.
City or The City. The City of Seymour, Texas or its representative.
Commercial Establishment. Property or location which is used primarily for manufacture, production, storage,
wholesaling or retailing of services which is or may be placed in the flow of commerce or any property or
location which is used primarily for the provision of any service.
Commission. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/221
Contaminants. Any foreign material, solid, liquid or gaseous, that is not common to the potable water supply
which makes the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption.
Contamination. The admission of contaminants into the potable water supply system.
Cross-Connection. Any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any
plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it is possible for any nonpotable,
used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable
water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Cross-Connection Control Device. Any approved or recognized device placed upon any connection, physical or
otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment
or device, which is designed to prevent nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other
substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Customer Service Inspection. An inspection designed to inspect and detect any actual or potential crossconnection
hazards and/or exceedence of the lead action level in solder or flux, pipe or pipe fittings.
Degree of Hazard. The low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential crossconnections.
(1) Health Hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to
the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to
health.
(2) High Hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that
potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable
water supply.
(3) Low Hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that
potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to
backflow into the potable water supply.
(4) Pollution Hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or
the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system, but which would not constitute a
health or system hazard, as defined. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution which the potable
water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances.
(5) System Hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the
public or consumers potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a
detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
Director. The city administrator, the city administrator's designated water utility superintendent, or his designee
who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection
control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this section.
Double Check Detector Backflow Prevention Assembly or Double Check Detector or DCDA. An assembly
composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and
an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly or Double Check Assembly or Double Check or DC. An
assembly which consists of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient
seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test
cocks.
Fireline Tester. A tester who is employed by a state approved fireline contractor and is qualified to test backflow
prevention assemblies on firelines.
General Tester. A tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial,
industrial or irrigation service except firelines.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/221
Manual of Cross-Connection Control. The latest edition as published by the University of Southern California
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (abbreviated as USC FCCCHR).
Mobile Unit. Any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system
from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to; carpet cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles,
street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles.
Nonresidential Use. Water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and
include all uses not specifically included in “residential uses.”
Person. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, firm, club, trustee, receiver, and bodies politic and
corporate.
Point-of-Use Isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumers water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.
Potable Water Supply. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and
structures located on it.
Premises Isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water
system and the water user.
Pressure Vacuum Breaker Backflow Prevention Assembly or Pressure Vacuum Breaker or PVB. An assembly
which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against
backpressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used
with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate
valves and resilient seated test cocks which allow the full testing of the assembly.
Public Water System or System. Any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public
domestic use. The system includes all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of
producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption.
Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly or Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly or RP
Assembly or RP. An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located resilient
seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at each end of the assembly.
Reduced Pressure Principle Detector Backflow Prevention Assembly or Reduced Pressure Detector or RPDA.
An assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing
a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter
shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
Regulatory Authority. Any municipal officer or department of the city, appointed by the city administrator to
administer this section.
Representative of the Water System. A person designated by the city to perform cross-connection control
duties that shall include, but are not limited to, cross-connection inspections and water use surveys.
Residential Use. Water used by any residential customer of the water supply and include single family
dwellings, duplexes, multiplex, housing and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter
or in cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the units are full-time dwellings.
Service Connection. The point of delivery which the water purveyor loses control of the water.
Spill-Resistant Pressure Vacuum Breaker or SPVB. An assembly containing an independently operating,
internally loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side
of the check valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly
closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/221
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Tester. A person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with
the city and the TCEQ.
Thermal Expansion. Heated water that does not have the space to expand.
Used Water. Water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the
service connection.
Water Use Survey. A survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the local authority designed to identify
possible sources of pollution and/or contamination to the potable water supply.
Sec. 11.1903 Right-of-Way Encroachment
No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except
as provided in this section.
(1) A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be installed upon or within any city
right-of-way only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing
the assembly, and installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. The city
retains the right to approve the location, height, depth of enclosure, and other requisites of the
assembly prior to its installation.
(2) All permits and inspections required by the city code to perform work in the right-of-way shall
be obtained.
(3) The assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding grade except when it is not
practicable to install it in this manner. Any assembly or portion of an assembly that extends above
ground shall be located no closer than eighteen inches (18") to the face of the curb.
(4) The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a
right-of-way.
(5) A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate a
backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is
necessary for street or utility construction or repairs for purposes of public safety.
(6) A person commits an offense if after receiving a written order from the regulatory authority; he
or she fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way.
Sec. 11.1904 Multiple Connections
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be
required to install a backflow assembly on each of the service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will
be determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the
water systems on the premises.
Sec. 11.1905 Protection Required; Installation
(a) The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under this article shall be any of the USC
FCCCHR recognized and approved backflow prevention assemblies, or as approved by the regulatory
authority. The regulatory authority prior to installation must have approved each backflow prevention assembly.
Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly may result in the
backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority
shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. An
assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but the customer is in no way limited to the
following circumstances:
(1) The nature and extent of any activity of the premises, or the materials used in connection with
any activity of the premises, or materials stored on the premise, if said activity or material could
contaminate or pollute the potable water supply;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/221
(2) Premises having any one or more cross-connections and the cross-connection(s) are
protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB);
(3) Internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable;
(4) Intricate plumbing arrangements that are present which make it impractical to ascertain
whether cross-connections exist;
(5) There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with
sufficient frequency to assure that cross-connections do not exist;
(6) Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to
accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the city;
(7) An appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the water utility
maintenance department of the city upon request of the city;
(8) A fire suppression system that is connected to the city's water system;
(9) All new construction if deemed necessary in the customer service inspection. The type of
assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard;
(10) When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is
not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be
installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use;
(11) Any used water return system;
(12) In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by
this section, a premises isolation assembly will be required;
(13) If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system
without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may be required;
(14) All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank; or
(15) Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city deems
necessary to meet the intent of this section.
(b) All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of this article shall be installed in a
manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection and testing by the regulatory authority of the city or registered
testers. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies which are located in inaccessible locations or
where the tester is subject to physical danger shall be relocated to approved locations.
Sec. 11.1906 Testing of Assemblies
(a) The regulatory authority shall require all backflow prevention assemblies to be inspected and tested in
each of the following circumstances:
(1) Immediately after installation;
(2) Whenever the assembly is moved;
(3) A minimum of once a year;
(4) For premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to re-occupancy; and
(5) Immediately after repairs.
(b) All assembly testing shall be performed by a state certified backflow prevention assembly tester,
approved and registered by the regulatory authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/221
(c) Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter
any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this section. Persons and
occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the
city or its representative's ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, testing, records examination, or in the performance of any of its duties. Where persons or occupants
of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before
entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with
their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(d) The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly which may occur during testing.
(e) The regulatory authority may cause a water use survey to be conducted at any establishment located in
the city which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination by
the regulatory authority that the establishment falls under the provisions of this section and requires a backflow
prevention assembly, the regulatory authority shall issue a notice to abate the condition or order the
establishment to install the proper backflow prevention assembly.
(f) It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to have all assemblies tested annually
in accordance with this section. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the regulatory
authority deems necessary.
(g) All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on the
city's backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report or a form that has been approved by the
regulatory authority.
Sec. 11.1907 Thermal Expansion
It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal
expansion if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly.
Sec. 11.1908 Pressure Loss
Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the
city.
Sec. 11.1909 Residential Service Connections
Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or
potential cross-connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross-connection or have an
approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this article
Sec. 11.1910 Rental Properties
Any person who owns or controls property is responsible for the installation, test and repair of all backflow
assemblies on their property.
Sec. 11.1911 Water System Connections; Water Distribution Infrastructure
(a) All water distribution infrastructure must be constructed, installed and tested in accordance with TCEQ
rules and regulations, as amended, for public water systems.
(b) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to any newly constructed infrastructure until after the city
has received the results of the bacteriological test(s) and the results show that no bacteria is present.
(c) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to any newly constructed infrastructure until an inspection
is completed by the regulatory authority or representative to insure that all state regulations and local codes
have been met.
(d) Temporary water services which pose a potential cross-connection threat to the potable water supply
shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/221
Sec. 11.1912 Customer Service Inspection
(a) Pursuant to TCEQ rules and regulations for public water systems, a customer service inspection for
cross-connection control shall be completed by the regulatory authority prior to providing continuous water
service in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Newly constructed facility or previously non-existent premises;
(2) After any material improvement to building(s) or premises;
(3) Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises; and
(4) As the regulatory authority deems it necessary.
(b) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to newly constructed facilities until after the customer
service inspection is completed by the regulatory authority or its representative.
(c) Temporary water service which poses a potential cross-connection threat to the potable water supply shall
be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly.
Sec. 11.1913 Installation Guidelines and Requirements for Backflow Prevention Assemblies
(a) General. To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the most
current guidelines contained in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control which is adopted hereto by reference
and incorporated herewith, shall apply to the installation of these assemblies. Additionally, the following shall
also be required:
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the current TCEQ rule
and these regulations. The assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have
the installation inspected by a certified backflow assembly prevention tester.
(2) The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage resulting from installation,
operation, and/or maintenance of a backflow assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping
all backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris.
(3) At facilities which require a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the point of
delivery of the water supply, such installation of the assembly must be before any branch in the line
and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city right-of-way and the
landowner's property. The city may specify other areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies
that must be installed or are located on city right-of-way are the responsibilities of the business or
entity that water line is serving.
(4) Assemblies must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(5) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of type and model approved by the city.
(6) All vertical installations of backflow assemblies must have prior approval by the city.
(7) Assemblies larger than four (4) inches and installed more than five (5) feet above floor level
must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel.
(8) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line
must not be installed.
(9) Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two (2)
assemblies installed in parallel. They should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will
provide the maximum flow required.
(10) Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tap may be
required ahead of the assembly.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/221
(11) All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a
backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type
so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed.
(12) Upon completion of installation, the city shall be notified and all assemblies must be
inspected and tested. All assemblies must be registered with the city and shall provide the date of
installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow assembly, and initial test
report.
(b) Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assemblies (RPZ's). May be utilized at premises where
a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RPZ
is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RPZ shall be effective against both backsiphonage
and back-pressure.
(1) RPZs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises
being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for
specific performance data.
(2) The assembly must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in
an area water damage to building or furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. The
property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages caused by water discharge from an RPZ
assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RPZ assemblies.
(3) No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in
water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPZ's are typically installed above grade in well
drained areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a Boresight drain to daylight, is
provided. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and
shall be screened on both ends.
(4) Enclosures shall be designated for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum
clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller
assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the
assembly.
(5) Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least six (6) inch clearance on both sides
and on top of the assembly and twelve (12) inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies
larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the backside, twenty-four
(24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least twelve (12) plus
nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six (6) feet
zero inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirtysix
(36) inches is required on all vault lids.
(6) All RPZ assemblies must be tested in accordance with this section. Tests are the responsibility
of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention
assembly.
(7) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations
must have prior written approval of the city.
(c) Reduced Pressure Principle Detector Backflow Prevention Assemblies (RPDA). May be utilized in all
installations requiring reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering.
(1) RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure
principle backflow assemblies (RPZ).
(2) The line-size RPZ assembly and the bypass RPZ assembly must each be tested. A separate
test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester.
(d) Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assemblies (DC). May be utilized at premises where a
substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable
water system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/221
(1) DC's must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for premises being
served. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data.
(2) Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two (2)
assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly
will provide the minimum water requirements while the two (2) together will provide the maximum
flow required.
(3) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance.
DC's may be installed below grade, providing all tests cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All
vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for minimum
clearances established below.
(4) Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller have at least six (6) inch clearance below and on both
sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than
twenty-four (24) inches below grade. All assemblies larger then two (2) shall a minimum clearance of
twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and twelve (12)
inches below the assembly. Headroom of six (6) feet zero inches is required in vaults without fully
removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches is required on all vault lids. “Y”
pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the
test cocks face upward. These clearance standards apply to all assemblies installed in vaults,
enclosures, and meter boxes.
(5) Vertical installations of DC's are allowed only on sizes to and including four (4) inches that
meet the following requirements:
(A) Internally spring-loaded check valves;
(B) Flow is upward through assembly;
(C) Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position; and
(D) Approved by the city.
(6) All DC's must be tested in accordance with this section. Tests are the responsibility of the
assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow
prevention assembly.
(7) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations
must have prior written approval by the city.
(e) Double Check Detector Backflow Prevention Assemblies (DCDA). May be utilized in all installations
requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering.
(1) DCDA's shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve
assemblies (DC's).
(2) The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each be tested. A separate test
report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester.
(f) Pressure Vacuum Breaker Backflow Prevention Assemblies (PVB). May be utilized at point-of-use
protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if
introduced into the potable water system. PVB's protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed
where is potential for backpressure.
(1) Assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above highest downstream
piping.
(2) PVB's shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from
water discharge.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/221
(3) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum
clearance of twelve (12) inches all around the assembly.
(4) All PVB's must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the
assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority of any backflow prevention
assembly.
(5) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations
must have prior written approval of the city.
(6) Spill Resistant Pressure Vacuum Breaker Backflow Prevention Assembly (SVB). May be
utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVB's shall comply with the
installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies.
Sec. 11.1914 Air Gap Separation
Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and should be utilized at all locations where “high”
hazardous substances are at risk of entering the potable water system.
(1) An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured
vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel and in no case less than one inch (1") if splashing
is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a forty-five degree
(45°) angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed.
(2) Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the regulatory
authority and must be available for inspection at all reasonable times.
(3) Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge
of the spout opening a distance greater than three (3) times the diameter of the effective opening for
a single, or a distance greater than four (4) times the effective opening for two intersecting walls.
Sec. 11.1915 Fire Suppression Systems
(a) All new installations of fire suppression systems which utilize the city's potable water supply shall have
installed an approved backflow prevention devices according to the degree of hazard.
(b) An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector
assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not
approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each twenty-four
(24) hour period, unless a variance has been issued in writing from the regulatory authority. A (RPDA) must be
installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system.
(1) It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by
the conditions of this section. In the event of any changes to the fire suppression system, it is the
responsibility of the property owners to notify the regulatory authority. All costs associated with this
article and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of (DCDA) or (RPDA) devices is the
responsibility of the property owner and persons in change of any premises.
(2) Upon the approved installation of the (DCDA) or (RPDA) device, a device test report
completed by a licensed fireline tester must be sent to the attention of the regulatory authority or his
representative and include the information required by this section.
Sec. 11.1916 Fire Hydrant Protection
All approved double check device backflow prevention assembly (DCD) or reduced pressure detector
assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a
temporary water supply during any construction or other times which would pose a potential hazard to the
public water supply. A (RPDA) must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced
into the system.
(1) It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use of a fire hydrant water meter to abide
by the conditions of this section. All fire hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/221
requirements as provided for by the city.
(2) Only city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed
to be used within the potable water system.
(3) A refundable deposit is required to insure the return of all water meter and backflow
assemblies to the city water operations department. Failure to return or any misuse of the
assemblies can result in the forfeiture of deposit and/or enforcement action being taken against the
responsible party, as allowed for in the penalty section of this article
(4) All nonapproved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the city will be confiscated
and enforcement action taken against the responsible party, as allowed for in section 11.1922.
Sec. 11.1917 Responsibilities of Property Owner Tester and Regulatory Authority
(a) It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the
conditions of this article and to comply with the following:
(1) Payment of all costs associated with this section and the purchase, installation, testing and
repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
(2) To install and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this article and
acceptable industry practice.
(3) All commercial establishments shall cause to have all backflow prevention assemblies on their
premises tested annually. Such testing must be conducted by a certified tester who is registered with
the city.
(4) Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including
repairs as required.
(5) Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner that allows them to be tested by a
method that has been approved by the regulatory authority.
(6) All records related to backflow prevention assembly installation testing and repair shall be
maintained on the premises for the lifetime of the assembly while in use.
(b) Certified backflow prevention assembly tester (BPAT) shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Annually register with the regulatory authority and pay the required fee.
(2) Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/calibration.
(3) Maintain the design or operation characteristics of an assembly.
(4) Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and TCEQ rules and
regulations.
(5) Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on backflow prevention
device test forms that have been approved by the regulatory authority.
(6) Report test results to the regulatory authority within thirty (30) days of testing.
(7) Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of
any premises.
(8) Maintain testing and/or repair records indefinitely.
(c) The regulatory authority shall ensure the inspection and testing of all backflow prevention assemblies
installed pursuant to the requirements of this article. For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be
provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. Except in cases where
the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or
auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until all backflow
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/221
prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. The city shall not be liable for damage caused to
any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing.
Sec. 11.1918 Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester Certification; Registration Required
Only approved TCEQ-licensed backflow prevention assembly testers can test in the city. Testers must register
annually with the regulatory authority, provide proof of TCEQ certification, and provide proof that testing
equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2-psid accuracy and pay an annual,
nonrefundable, tester registration fee.
Sec. 11.1919 Fees
All fees and/or deposits referred to in this section are located in the city's schedule of fees found in Appendix A
of this code.
Sec. 11.1920 Compliance for Lawn Irrigation
All lawn irrigation system installations shall obtain a permit issued by the building inspection department for
such installations. Installation requirements must comply with the current city plumbing code and guidelines for
the appropriate device found in this article. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water
source are prohibited unless appropriate backflow protection is installed. High hazard backflow protection
devices must be installed if any mechanical injection stations are used with the irrigation system.
Sec. 11.1921 Mobile Units
The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless an air gap or an approved
backflow prevention assembly protects such connection. Prior approval and annual device testing of any
backflow prevention assembly must be received from the regulatory authority before connecting to any potable
water system.
Sec. 11.1922 Enforcement
This article shall be enforced by the city administrator or the designated representatives or employees.
(1) Violations.
(A) A person fails to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article.
(B) A person fails to comply with a repair order issued by the city.
(C) A person commits a backflow from premises he owns, operates or manages enters the
public water supply system.
(D) A person fails to pay any fees required by this article.
(E) A person violates any section of this article.
(F) A person who reinstates water service to premises discontinued or disconnected under
this article, except as directed by the city.
(G) A person allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work at their establishment.
(H) A person tests a backflow prevention assembly within the city without being registered
with the city.
(I) A person tests a backflow prevention assembly within the city without being certified by
the TCEQ.
(2) The city is entitled to pursue all criminal and civil remedies available for violations of this
article. A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(3) In addition to sanctions provided for by this section, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions
provided for by other ordinances of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/221
(4) A certified testers' registration may be reviewed and revoked by the city if the regulatory
authority determines that the tester:
(A) Has falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly reports;
(B) Has used inaccurate gauges;
(C) Has used improper testing procedures; or
(D) Has created a threat to public health or the environment.
Sec. 11.1923 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
found in Section 1.106 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 2005-03 adopted 1/20/05)
ARTICLE 11.2000 PUBLIC WATER PROTECTION*
Sec. 11.2001 Sanitary Control Easement
(a) The purpose of this article is to protect the water supply of the city by means of sanitary control.
(b) The construction and operation of underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks, liquid
transmission pipelines, stock pens, feed lots, dump grounds, privies, cesspools, septic tanks or sewage
treatment drain fields, improperly constructed water wells of any depth, and all other construction or operation
that could create an unsanitary condition within, upon, or across the property subject to this section are
prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, improperly constructed water wells are those wells
which do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards of a public water supply well.
(c) The construction of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers,
and cemeteries are specifically prohibited within a one hundred fifty foot (150') radius of any water well
described below.
(d) This article permits the construction of homes or buildings upon the property described below as long as
all items in restrictions two and three above are recognized and followed.
(e) Normal farming and ranching operations are permitted except that livestock shall not be allowed within
fifty feet (50') of any water well.
(f) The property subject to this section is all of that area within a one hundred fifty foot (150') radius of any
water well located on any property owned or used by the city, for the production of water for public consumption
and includes present wells and any and all future wells drilled or dug by the city.
(g) This section shall be binding upon all persons and shall run with the land until the use of said land as a
source for public water ceases.
(h) Enforcement of this section shall be by proceeding in law or in equity against any person or persons
violating or attempting to violate the restrictions in this section, whether to restrain the violation or to recover
damages.
(i) Invalidation of any one of the restrictions or uses (covenants) by a judgment or court order shall not affect
any of the other provisions of this section, which shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ordinance 2004-02 adopted 2/19/04)
ARTICLE 11.2100 DISTRIBUTED GENERATION
Division 1. General Provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/221
Sec. 11.2101 Short Title
This article shall be known and cited as the distributed generation ordinance.
Sec. 11.2102 Intent
This article is intended to provide for the orderly, safe and effective interconnection and parallel operation of
distributed generation facilities within the city's electric system by customers of the city's electric utility.
Sec. 11.2103 Authority
The city is authorized to enact this article by the Public Utility Regulatory Act, Tex. Util. Code Ann., section
31.005 (Vernon 1998 and Supp. 2005) (PURR) and successors, which authorizes and encourages electric
utilities to establish customer option programs that encourage the reduction of air contaminant emissions
including distributed energy generation technology. Also, the Public Utility Regulatory Act, Tex. Util. Code Ann,
section 39.101(b)(3) (Vernon 1998 and Supp. 2005) (PURR) entitles all state electric customers to access to
on-site distributed generation. Finally, the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, Tex. Util. Code Ann, section
39.916 (Vernon 1998 and Supp. 2005) (PURR) and its successors authorizes electric utilities to establish
requirements for and allow the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed renewable generation, and
requires the public utility commission of the state to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of
interconnection and parallel operation of distributed renewable generation.
Sec. 11.2104 Definitions
As applied in this article, the following words and terms shall be used:
City Manager. The city manager and/or his/her duly authorized representative.
Commission. The Public Utility Commission of Texas.
Customer. An entity interconnected to the city's electric system for the purpose of receiving or exporting electric
power from or to the city's electric system.
Distributed Generation. An electrical generating facility located at a customer's point of delivery (point of
common coupling) of ten megawatts (MW) or less and connected at a voltage less than 60 kilovolts (kV) which
may be connected in parallel operation to the city's electric system.
Interconnection. The physical connection of distributed generation to the utility system in accordance with the
requirements of this article so that parallel operation can occur.
Networked Secondary. Two or more utility primary distribution feeder sources electrically tied together on the
secondary (low voltage) side to form one power source for one or more customers. The service is designed to
maintain service to the customers even after the loss of one of these primary distribution feeder sources.
Parallel Operation. The operation of distributed generation by a customer while the customer is connected to
the city's electric system.
Point of Interconnection (Point of Service, Point of Common Coupling). The point where the electrical
conductors of the company utility system are connected to the customer's conductors and where any transfer of
electric power between the customer and the utility system takes place, such as switchgear near the meter.
Pre-certified Equipment. A specific generating and protective equipment system or systems that have been
certified as meeting the applicable parts of this article relating to safety and reliability by an entity approved by
the commission.
Stabilized. The city's electric system shall be considered stabilized when, following a disturbance, the system
returns to the normal range of voltage and frequency for a duration of two minutes.
Sec. 11.2105 Applicability
This article applies to all persons or entities that desire to interconnect or operate in parallel a distributed
generation system within the city's electric system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/221
Sec. 11.2106 Application and Agreement Required
(a) Before a person or entity may interconnect or operate in parallel a distributed generation system within
the city's electric system, that person or entity must apply with the city on the form provided by the city (an
example is attached to Ordinance 2011-02 as exhibit A) and execute an agreement with the city that
establishes the terms and conditions for the interconnection and parallel operation of the distributed generation
system. The agreement shall be in the general form of the agreement in exhibit B to Ordinance 2011-02.
(b) The city council hereby delegates to the city manager the authority to execute agreements with
customers for the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation within the city's electric
system in accordance with this article, the public utility commission of the state rules and regulations, and in
accordance with all state and federal laws applicable. The agreement shall not vary substantially in form and
intent from exhibit B to Ordinance 2011-02.
(c) Substantial changes to the form and/or intent of the agreement in exhibit B to Ordinance 2011-02 must be
approved by the city council before the execution of the agreement.
(d) The interconnection shall not be energized prior to the execution of the agreement as required herein.
(e) The application, exhibit A to Ordinance 2011-02, may be modified from time to time by the city manager
as is required for smooth processing of applications.
Sec. 11.2107 Utility Contact Person
(a) Per the P.U.C. SUBST. R. 25.11(I), the city manager shall designate the appropriate city staff member or
members as contact person or persons for all matters related to distributed generation interconnection.
(b) The city manager shall identify to the public utility commission of the state the contact person or persons
for all matters related to distributed generation interconnection.
(c) The city manager shall cause the city's internet website to provide convenient access through the internet
website to the names, telephone numbers, mailing addresses and electronic mail addresses for the distributed
generation contact person or persons.
(d) The designated contact person or persons shall review applications for distributed generation with
attached technical documentation and determine compliance with the city technical requirements for
interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation.
(e) When satisfied that a customer has complied with the application requirements and that the customer's
system complies with the technical requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed
generation, the contact person shall recommend to the city manager that an agreement be executed with the
customer for the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation. The city manager shall review
the application and technical information submitted, and if the city manager finds that the customer has
complied with the application requirements and that the customer's system complies with the technical
requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation, the city manager shall execute
an agreement with the customer substantially in the form attached to Ordinance 2011-02 as exhibit B.
Secs. 11.2108–11.2130 Reserved
Division 2. Technical Requirements
Sec. 11.2131 General Requirements
(a) All interconnections shall comply with P.U.C. SUBST. R. 25.212 and successors. In addition, all
interconnections shall comply with applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
(b) All interconnections shall comply with local building and electric codes as adopted by the city. Installation
of all interconnections shall be inspected by the city. Inspection and approval of the installation by the city is a
condition of interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation.
(c) Variations from the technical requirements herein must be reviewed and approved by the city manager
prior to implementation. Variations in the point of interconnection must be approved by the city manager and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/221
included in the agreement approved by the city council.
Sec. 11.2132 Manual Disconnect
The customer shall provide and install a manual load break switch that provides clear indication of the switch
position at the point of interconnection to provide separation between the City of Seymour (COS) electrical
system and the customer's electrical generation system. The location of the disconnect switch must be
approved by the COS. The disconnect switch shall be easily visible, mounted separately from metering
equipment, readily accessible to COS personnel at all times, and capable of being locked in the open position
with a COS padlock. The city reserves the right to open the disconnect switch isolating the customer's electrical
generating system (which mayor may not include the customer's load) from COS electrical system for the
following reasons:
(1) To facilitate maintenance or repair of the COS electrical system.
(2) When emergency conditions exist on the COS electrical system.
(3) When the customer's electrical generating system is determined to be operating in a
hazardous or unsafe manner or unduly affecting the COS electrical system waveform.
(4) When the customer's electrical generating system is determined to be adversely affecting
other electric consumers on the COS electrical system.
(5) Failure of the customer to comply with applicable codes, regulations and standards in effect at
the time.
(6) Failure of the customer to abide by any contractual arrangement or operating agreement with
the city.
Sec. 11.2133 Power Quality
(a) Voltage. The city shall endeavor to maintain the distribution voltages on the electrical system but shall not
be responsible for factors or circumstances beyond its control. The customer shall provide an automatic method
of disconnecting generation equipment from the COS electrical system within 10 cycles should a voltage
deviation greater than +5% or -10% from normal be sustained for more than 30 seconds (1,800 cycles) or a
voltage deviation greater than +10% or -30% from normal be sustained for more than 10 cycles. If high or low
voltage complaints or flicker complaints result from the operation of the customer's electrical generation, the
customer's generating system shall be disconnected until the problem is resolved.
(b) Frequency. The city shall endeavor to maintain a 60-hertz nominal frequency on the electrical system.
The customer shall provide an automatic method of disconnecting generation equipment from the COS
electrical system within 15 cycles should a deviation in frequency of +0.5Hz or -0.7Hz from normal occur.
(c) Harmonics. In accordance with IEEE 519, the total harmonic distortion (THO) of voltage shall not exceed
5% of a pure sine wave of 60-hertz frequency or 3% of the 60-hertz frequency for any individual harmonic when
measured at the point of interconnection with the COS electrical system. Also, the total current distortion shall
not exceed 5% of the fundamental frequency sine wave. If harmonics beyond the allowable range result from
the operation of the customer's electrical generation, the customer's generating system shall be disconnected
until the problem is resolved.
(d) Flicker. The distributed generation facility shall not cause excessive voltage flicker on the COS electrical
system. This flicker shall not exceed 3% voltage dip, in accordance with IEEE 519 (section 10.5), as measured
at the point of interconnection.
(e) Power Factor. The customer's electrical generation system shall be designed, operated and controlled at
all times to provide reactive power requirements at the point of interconnection from 0.95 lagging to 0.95
leading power factor. Induction generators shall have static capacitors that provide at least 95% of the
magnetizing current requirements of the induction generator field. The COS may, in the interest of safety,
authorize the omission of capacitors. However, where capacitors are used for power factor correction,
additional protective devices may be required to guard against self-excitation of the customer's generator field.
Sec. 11.2134 Loss of Source
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/221
The customer shall provide approved protective equipment necessary to immediately, completely and
automatically disconnect the customer's electrical generation equipment from the COS electrical system in the
event of a fault on the customer's system, a fault on the COS system or loss of source on the COS system.
Such protective equipment shall conform to the criteria specified in UL 1741 and IEEE 1547. The customer's
generating system shall automatically disconnect from the grid within 10 cycles if the voltage on one or more
phases falls and stays below 70% of nominal voltage for at least 10 cycles. The automatic disconnecting device
may be of the manual or automatic reclose type and shall not be capable of reclosing until after the COS
service voltage and frequency are restored to within the normal operating range and the system is stabilized.
Sec. 11.2135 Coordination and Synchronization
The customer shall be solely responsible for coordination and synchronization of the customer's electrical
generating system with all aspects of the COS electrical system, and the customer assumes all responsibility
for damage or loss that may occur from improper coordination and synchronization of its generating system
with the COS electrical system.
Sec. 11.2136 Metering
The actual metering equipment required, its voltage rating, number of phases and wires, size, current
transformers, number of input and associated memory is dependent upon the type, size and location of the
electric service provided. The customer shall pay for the installation of the interval recorder (meter) that is
capable of measuring the usage of the facility and the output of the DG system on a single or two-meter
configuration.
Sec. 11.2137 Interconnection Study
If COS determines that an interconnection study is necessary, COS shall perform the study under reasonable
terms and conditions agreed upon by both the customer and COS and at the customer's sole expense. No
study fee will be charged if the proposed generation site is not on a networked secondary and if all of the
following apply:
(1) Proposed generation equipment is pre-certified.
(A) Generation equipment that are less than 20 kW AC shall be considered pre-certified if a
UL 1741 listed inverter that also meets IEEE 1547 specifications is used. For solar PV
installations, to be pre-certified system must have UL 1703 listed PV modules.
(2) Proposed generation system does not expect to export more than 15% of total load on the
feeder.
(3) Proposed generation system does not contribute more than 25% of the maximum possible
short circuit current of the feeder.
Sec. 11.2138 Protection
The distributed generation facility must have interrupting devices capable of interrupting the maximum available
fault current, an interconnection disconnect device, a generator disconnect device, an over-voltage trip, an
under-voltage trip, an over/under frequency trip and a manual or automatic synchronizing check (for facilities
with standalone capability). Facilities rated over 10kW, three phase, must also have reverse power sensing and
either a ground over-voltage or a ground over-current trip depending on the grounding system. Grounding shall
be done in accordance with UL 1741, IEEE 1547 and NEC Article 250.
Sec. 11.2139 Three-Phase Generators
(a) Synchronous Machines.
(1) The distributed generation facility's circuit breakers shall be three-phase devices with
electronic or electromechanical control.
(2) The customer is solely responsible for proper synchronization of its generator with the COS
system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/221
(3) The excitation system response ratio shall not be less than 0.5.
(4) The generator's excitation system shall conform to the field voltage versus time criteria
specified in ANSI Standard C50. 13-1989.
(b) Induction Machines. The induction machines used for generation may be brought up to synchronous
speed if it can be demonstrated that the initial voltage drop at the point of interconnection is within the flicker
limits specified in this document.
(c) Inverters.
(1) Line-commutated inverters do not require synchronizing equipment.
(2) Self-commutated inverters require synchronizing equipment.
Sec. 11.2140 Standards
The distributed generation equipment shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with,
but not limited to, ANSI standards, UL standards, IEEE standards, the National Electrical Code, ERCOT
operating guides and any other applicable local, state or federal codes and statutes. In the case of a conflict
between the requirements in this document and any of those standards or codes, this document shall prevail.
Secs. 11.2141–11.2160 Reserved
Division 3. Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 11.2161 Liability
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes, which are hereby
found and declared to be in the furtherance of the public health, safety, and welfare. Any member of the city
council, city official, or employee charged with enforcement of this article, acting for the city in the discharge of
his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable; and is hereby relieved from all
personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of said duties.
Sec. 11.2162 Penalty
Any person violating this article by interconnecting distributed generation to the city's electric system without a
complete application and executed agreement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined up to $1,000.00 per violation, and each day that a violation continues or each occurrence shall be
considered a separate offense and punished accordingly.
Sec. 11.2163 Violation
Any violation of this article can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in court of competent
jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penalty provision in this article.
(Ordinance 2011-02 adopted 8/18/11)
CHAPTER 12
PLANNING & ZONING
ARTICLE 12.100 JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD*
Sec. 12.101 Joint Airport Zoning Board Created
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/221
Subject to like provision being made by the respective commissioner's court of Baylor County, Texas, by proper
order, duly promulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of chapter 391 of the
Acts of the Regular Session of the 50th Legislature, 1947, there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board,
to be known as the Seymour Municipal Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise
the duties set forth in sections 2 and 3 of chapter 391 of the Acts of the Regular Session of the 50th Legislature,
1947. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 3, Section 2-41)
Sec. 12.102 Membership
The Seymour Municipal Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of five (5) members, two (2) to be
appointed by the city council of the City of Seymour, and two (2) to be appointed by the commissioner's court of
Baylor County. The fifth member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and said fifth
member shall serve as chairman of said board until such time as a majority of the board shall elect the
chairman from their group. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 3, Section 2-42)
ARTICLE 12.200 AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS†
Sec. 12.201 Definitions
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) Airport. Seymour Municipal Airport.
(2) Airport elevation. The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area.
(3) Airport hazard. Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or
is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft in landing or taking-off at the airport.
(4) Airport reference point. The point established as the approximate geographic center of the
airport landing area and so designated.
(5) Board of adjustment. A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the governing
bodies as provided by law.
(6) Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and
shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
(7) Landing area. The area of the airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft.
(8) Landing strip. The graded area used or intended for use in take-off and landing of aircraft.
(9) Nonconforming use. Any structure, tree or use of land which is lawfully in existence at the time
the regulation as prescribed in the article or an amendment thereto becomes effective and does not
then meet the requirements of said regulation.
(10) Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, or body politic; and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor,
guardian, or other representative.
(11) Structure. An object constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, towers,
smokestacks, buildings and overhead transmission lines.
(12) Tree. Any object of natural growth.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-51)
Sec. 12.202 Zones
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which
include all of the land lying within the approach zones, horizontal zone, conical zone, primary surface and
vertical surfaces. Such areas and zones are shown on the Seymour Municipal Airport Zoning Map, consisting of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/221
one sheet prepared by O.H. Bartley and dated the 13th day of July, 1965, which is attached to this article and
made a part hereof. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1) Approach zones. An approach zone is established at each end of the landing strip on Seymour
Municipal Airport for landings and take-offs. The dimensions of the approach zones shall be shown
as indicated on the airport zoning map.
(2) Horizontal zone. A horizontal zone is hereby established as the area within a circle with its
center at the airport reference point and having a radius of five thousand (5,000) feet. The horizontal
zone does not include the approach zone.
(3) Conical zone. A conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the
periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a distance of three thousand (3,000)
feet. The conical zone does not include the approach zone.
(4) Primary surface. A primary surface is established symmetrically located with respect to the
centerline of the landing strip. The length of the primary surface is equal to the length of the landing
strip and it has a width of two hundred (200) feet. The elevation of any point on the transverse or
longitudinal profile of the surface coincides with that of the runway centerline elevation.
(5) Vertical surfaces. Vertical surfaces are established extending upward from each side of the
primary surface and approach zones to its intersection with the horizontal zone.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-52)
Sec. 12.203 Height Limitations
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow,
or maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for
such zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
(1) Approach zones. One (1) foot in height for each twenty (20) feet in horizontal distance
beginning at the end of the landing strip and at the elevation of the end of the landing strip and
extending to an elevation of 1,494 feet above mean sea level, which is the intersection with the
horizontal surface.
(2) Horizontal zone. One hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation or a height of 1,494
feet above mean sea level.
(3) Conical zone. One (1) foot in height for each twenty (20) feet of horizontal distance beginning
at the periphery of the horizontal zone, extending to a height of three hundred (300) feet above the
airport elevation.
(b) Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall
prevail.
(c) Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any
tree or structure to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-53)
Sec. 12.204 Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land within any zone established by
this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport
and aircraft; make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others; result in glare in the eyes
of flyers using the airport; impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or otherwise endanger the landing, takeoff,
or maneuvering of aircraft. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-54)
Sec. 12.205 Nonconforming Uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/221
(a) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the
removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date of this article; or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article, and which is diligently
prosecuted.
(b) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance
thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the mayor to indicate to the operators of
aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-55)
Sec. 12.206 Permits
(a) Future uses. Except as specifically provided in paragraphs (1) and (2) hereunder, no material change
shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise
established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each
application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to
permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
(1) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the
ground, except when because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure
would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone.
(2) In the area lying within the limits of the approach zone but at a horizontal distance of not less
than two thousand (2,000) feet from each end of the landing strip, no permit shall be required for any
tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zone.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this
article except as set forth in Section 12.203.
(b) Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport
hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater
hazard to air navigation that it was on the effective date of this article or any amendments thereto, or than it is
when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be
granted.
(c) Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the mayor determines that a nonconforming
structure or tree has been abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit
or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
(d) Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of
any tree, or use of his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the
board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. Such variance shall be allowed where it is duly found
that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship, and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but would do substantial justice and
be in accordance with the spirit of this article.
(e) Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require
the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the city at its own expense, to install, operate and
maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport
hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/221
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-56)
Sec. 12.207 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the mayor to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for
permits and variances shall be made to the mayor upon a form furnished by him. Applications required by this
article to be submitted to the mayor shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him. Applications for
action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the mayor. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-57)
Sec. 12.208 Board of Adjustment
(a) There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the mayor in the enforcement of this article;
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article; and upon which such board
of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass;
(3) To hear and decide specific variances.
(b) The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the governing bodies and each
shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members
first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two for a term of two (2) years, and two for a
term of three (3) years. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written
charges, after a public hearing.
(c) The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the
provisions of this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times
as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
immediately be filed in the office of the mayor, and shall be a public record.
(d) The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon
which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article.
(e) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the mayor, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in this article.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-58)
Sec. 12.209 Appeals
(a) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the mayor made in his administration
of this article, if of the opinion that a decision of the mayor is improper application of these regulations, may
appeal to the board of adjustment.
(b) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of
adjustment, by filing with the mayor a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The mayor shall forthwith
transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
(c) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the mayor certifies
to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the agency from which the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/221
(d) The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice
to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(e) The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm in whole or
in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-59)
Sec. 12.210 Judicial Review
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to the
Court of record as provided by article 46e, section #11, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended. (1988
Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-60)
Sec. 12.211 Conflicting Regulations
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any
other regulation applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of a structure or
trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 2, Article 4, Section 2-61)
ARTICLE 12.300 SALE OR CONVEYANCE OF RESTRICTED PROPERTY*
(a) Any person who sells or conveys restricted property located inside the boundaries of the City of Seymour,
Texas, shall first give to the purchaser thereof written notice of restrictions and notice of the City of Seymour's
right to enforce compliance with those restrictions.
(b) The above referred to notice to the purchaser shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of each -purchaser;
(2) The name of each seller;
(3) The legal description of the property;
(4) The street address of the property;
(5) A statement that the property is subject to deed restrictions and the City of Seymour is
authorized to enforce the restrictions;
(6) A reference to the volume and page, clerk's file number. or file code number where the
restrictions are recorded; and
(7) A statement that provisions that restrict the sale, rental or use of the real property on the basis
of race, color, religion, sex or national origin are unenforceable.
(c) The above referred notice must be given to the purchaser of such restricted property at or before the final
closing of the sale and purchase. The seller and purchaser shall each sign and acknowledge said notice and
following the execution, acknowledgment and closing of the sale and purchase, the notice shall be recorded in
the real property records of Baylor County, Texas.
(d) The city secretary of the City of Seymour is directed that after final passage of this ordinance, it shall be
filed in the records of the Baylor County Clerk's office.
(e) The above referred to notice shall be in substantially the following form:
“NOTICE OF RESTRICTIONS
The Seller of real property under Subchapter 14, Chapter 230, Local Government Code, Section 230.005 gives
the following notice:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/221
Purchaser:
Seller:
Legal:
Street Address:
The above described property is subject to Deed Restrictions and the municipality wherein the property is
located is authorized to enforce the restrictions.
The restrictions are recorded in the County Clerk's Office as follows:
Volume and Page or County Clerk's File No. or Film Code Number:
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
Any provision that restricts the sale, rental or use of the real property on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or
national origin are unenforceable.
This notice shall be given to the Purchaser at or before the final closing of the sale and purchase of the above
described property and shall be recorded in the real property records of the county wherein the real property is
located.
______________________________
______________________________
Seller
______________________________
______________________________
Purchaser
STATE OF _________________
COUNTY OF _______________
This instrument was acknowledged before me on the ______ day of ____________, by
_____________________________________________.
______________________________
Notary Public, State of
Notary's Printed Name:
______________________________
Commission Expires: ____________
STATE OF ______________________
COUNTY OF ____________________
This instrument was acknowledged before me on the ____ day of ________________, by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/221
_______________________________________________.
______________________________
Notary Public, State of
Notary's Printed Name:
______________________________
Commission Expires: ___________”
(f) Failure of any seller to comply with this article shall be a misdemeanor enforceable in the municipal court
of the City of Seymour and said seller, or each of said sellers should there be more than one, shall be subject to
fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 89-20 adopted 2/9/89)
ARTICLE 12.400 ZONING ORDINANCE*
Sec. 12.401 Adopted
Ordinance No. 2018-08, approved by the city council on October 8, 2018, establishes the comprehensive
zoning ordinance for the city. It is included in this Code of Ordinances by reference as though it were set out in
detail herein. A copy of this ordinance is on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance 2018-08 adopted
10/8/18)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE 1.000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Sec. 1.100 Whiteside Center of Performing Arts
The following rental options and associated fees shall be set for the Whiteside Center of Performing Arts:
(1) $150.00 per day plus $150.00 refundable deposit. Includes use of the auditorium, upstairs
conference area, one handicap accessible bathroom located on the second level landing, and upper
level bathrooms. Check/cash made payable to the city.
(2) $250.00 per day plus $150.00 refundable deposit. Includes use of the auditorium, upstairs
conference area, both second level handicap bathroom and upper level bathrooms, and projector
equipment. Day usage of the Whiteside Center of Performing Arts will require payment of $150.00
fee and $150.00 refundable deposit made payable to the city, and an additional $100.00 fee will be
made payable to the STAR council.
(3) $100.00 for 3 hours maximum, no deposit. Includes use of the auditorium, projector
equipment, and one handicap accessible bathroom located on the second level landing. Check/cash
made payable to STAR council.
(4) All concession stand proceeds will benefit the STAR council unless otherwise agreed to by the
STAR council.
Code reference–Chapter 1, Article 1.1400, Section 1.1401
(Ordinance 2016-11 adopted 12/15/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/221
ARTICLE 2.000 ANIMAL CONTROL FEES
Sec. 2.100 Licensing Fees
(a) Neutered (testoctomy) male or spayed (ovarectomy) female dog or cat: $5.00.
(b) Female dog or cat that has not been spayed or any male dog or cat that has not been neutered: $7.00.
Code reference–Chapter 2, Article 2.1100
Sec. 2.200 Impound and Shelter
(a) Impoundment Fee: $10.00.
(b) Shelter Fee: $3.00.
(c) Vaccination Fee: $20.00.
(d) Adoption Fee:
(1) Private individual: $35.00.
(2) Private kennel: $15.00.
Code reference–Chapter 2, Article 2.1200
Sec. 2.300 Livestock, Fowl, Other Animals, Permits and Other
(a) Annual Permit Fee: $20.00.
(b) Collection and Disposal of Dead Animals from the City: $20.00.
Code reference–Chapter 2, Article 2.1400
Sec. 2.400 Kennel Permits
(a) Business Kennel: $40.00.
(b) Nonbusiness Kennel: $10.00.
Code reference–Chapter 2, Article 2.1500
Sec. 2.500 Dangerous Dogs
(a) Registration. Annual registration fee of $50.00.
(b) Transfer of Registration. $25.00.
Code reference–Chapter 2, Article 2.300, Section 2.305
Sec. 2.600 Private Care Facilities (Rescue Shelters)
(a) Annual Permit Fee.
(1) Nonprofit Private Care Facilities (that have shown proof of nonprofit status or application):
$10.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/221
(2) Private Care Facilities (that do not have a nonprofit status): $40.00.
(b) Adoption Fee. $15.00.
Code reference–Chapter 2, Article 2.1700, Sections 2.1703, 2.1704
(Ordinance 2016-03 adopted 4/21/16)
ARTICLE 3.000 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION RELATED FEES
Sec. 3.100 Fees for Electrical Inspections
$5.00 for inspection of not more than two circuits and $1.00 for each additional.
Code reference–Chapter 3, Article 3.500
Sec. 3.200 Early Electrical Turn On Fee
$10.00 for residential and $20.00 for commercial business.
Code reference-Chapter 3, Article 3.500
(Ordinance 2005-01 adopted 1/20/05)
Sec. 3.300 Master Electrician's Fee; Bond
(a) No master electrician's license shall be issued except upon payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the
city secretary, together with the filing of a bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000) conditioned upon compliance
with the ordinance of the city regulating electric wiring and apparatus and the faithful performance of all
contracts entered into for the installation of electric wiring and apparatus inside any building for use in
connection with electric light, heat or power. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 5, Article 3, Section 5-83)
(b) Said master electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the business of installing
wiring and apparatus inside buildings for use in connection with electric light, heat or power within the limits of
the city for the period of one year from date of issue. On or before expiration date, the master electrician's
license shall be renewed; renewal fee to be twenty dollars ($20.00) per year. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 5, Article 3, Section 5-84)
Code reference-Chapter 3, Article 3.500
ARTICLE 4.000 BUSINESS RELATED FEES
Sec. 4.100 Application to Establish New Junk or Scrap Yard Business
(a) Application. Application shall be made in the office of the city secretary with all necessary information
required by the city to be supplied by the applicant. Upon receipt of said application and filing of a fifteen dollar
($15.00) permit fee, the city shall send a letter to all property owners located within three hundred (300) feet of
applicants' lot or tract as shown by tax office records, notifying them of the scheduling of a public hearing on the
application at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. (1988 Seymour City Code, Chapter 6, Article
3, Section 6-23)
(b) Fee. Any person who is required to obtain a license by the provisions of this article may apply for either a
thirty (30) day license or a twelve (12) month license. When a thirty (30) day license is issued to any such
person, such licensee shall pay to the city secretary or her designated representative, a license fee of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00), which sum shall be used to defray part of the expense of administration and enforcement
of this article. When a twelve (12) month license is issued to any such person, such licensee shall pay to the
city secretary or her designated representative, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which sum shall be used
to defray part of the expense of administration and enforcement of this article.
(Ordinance 91-4 adopted 6/13/91, Article V, Section C)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/221
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.300
Sec. 4.200 Application to Establish Photographic Studio
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to do or perform any of the things enumerated in Section 4.701 shall
file with the city secretary an application in writing, stating the name and address of such person, firm or
corporation and which one or more of such things is desired to be done or performed. At the time such
application is filed there shall be paid to the city secretary by the applicant the sum of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) which sum shall be used to pay the expenses of investigating the reputation, reliability and
dependability of such applicant. The application shall stay on file for a period of fifteen (15) days and if at the
expiration of said fifteen (15) days it shall have been determined that said applicant is of reasonably good
reputation, is reliable and dependable and has not in the past made and/or developed obscene photographs,
and has not solicited photographs or photographic reproductions and failed to deliver the same after having
received an order and partial payment for the same, the city secretary shall issue the applicant a permit in
writing to do and perform one or more of the things enumerated in Section 4.701. (1988 Seymour City Code,
Chapter 6, Article 7, Section 6-74)
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.700
Sec. 4.300 Fees for Construction Within Fire Limits
There shall be charged and collected a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for issuance of permits under this article.
(Seymour City Code, Chapter 9, Article 3, Section 9-38)
Code reference-Chapter 5, Article 5.600
Sec. 4.400 Peddlers and Transient Vendors
(a) License Fee.
(1) Thirty-day license: $25.00.
(2) Six-month license: $50.00.
(Ordinance 2001-13 adopted 4/19/01)
Code reference–Chapter 4, Article 4.400
ARTICLE 5.000 LANDFILL AND GARBAGE RELATED FEES AND RATES
Sec. 5.100 Garbage Service Rates
(a) City Residential. $18.85 per month.
(b) Commercial Garbage Service Rates–Three-Yard Containers.
Once per Week Twice per Week Three Times per Week
$42.90 $54.35 $60.75
Each Additional
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/221
$35.50 $43.40 $57.50
95-Gallon Roll-Out
$22.00 $40.90 ––––
(c) Residential Garbage Service Outside of City Limits.
(1) Transport own refuses to transfer station: $18.85.
(2) Roll-out picked up by contractor at residence: $25.15 (95-gall. roll-out).
(3) 3-yard container: $48.15.
(d) Commercial Garbage Service Outside of City Limits (Extraterritorial Jurisdiction):
Once per Week Twice per Week
3-Yard Container $48.15 $60.50
Each Additional $42.85 $48.10
(Ordinance 2018-06 adopted 8/23/18)
(e) Trailers/Commercial/Brush Only.
(1) Residential subscribers residing: Brush only inside the corporate city limits:
(A) Per pickup load or smaller: Free.
(B) Brush on a trailer up to 16 ft.: Free.
(C) Trailer over 16 ft.: $15.00.
(2) Dumping in bins:
(A) 8' trailer or under: Free.
(B) 9 ft.–16 ft.: $5.00.
(C) Over 16 ft.: $10.00.
(D) Truck: $20.00.
(3) Outside corporate city limits:
(A) Household garbage (bags of trash): $2.00 per bag.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/221
(B) Brush:
(i) Pickup load: $5.00.
(ii) 16 ft. or under trailer: $10.00.
(iii) Over 16 ft. trailer: $15.00.
(iv) Truck: $25.00.
(4) Dumping in bins, use commercial rates for outside city limits:
(A) Pickup loads: $15.75.
(B) Trailer loads: $2.65 per linear ft.
(C) Commercial bobtail loads: $68.25.
(5) Trailers, commercial/brush only:
(A) 16 ft. or under: $10.00.
(B) Over 16 ft.: $20.00.
(C) Truck: $25.00.
Noncompactable material (roof shingles) per ton is $50.00, weight ticket is required. This material must
originate at a construction site in the county, out-of-county construction debris will not be accepted.
(Ordinance 2018-11 adopted 11/15/18)
(f) Deposit.
(1) Outside city limits: $50.00.
(Ordinance 2006-02 adopted 3/23/06)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Articles 11.100 and 11.400
Sec. 5.200 Reserved
Sec. 5.300 Reserved
(Ordinance 2005-01 adopted 1/20/05)
Sec. 5.400 Specifying Charges for Disposal of Solid Waste
Governmental agencies and schools hauling their own waste may, after obtaining annual commercial
license/permit, be billed on a monthly basis for number and size of loads from the attendant's dumping receipt
book, payable on each agency's statements. (Ordinance 92-12 adopted 9/10/92)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.200
Sec. 5.500 Specifying Charge for Disposal of City Flatbed Truck Loads
Flatbed trucks which the city parks for city residents in the evening or weekend will be as follows:
Truck load fee: $65.00.
(Ordinance 2018-06 adopted 8/23/18)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.200
ARTICLE 6.000 UTILITY FEES AND RATES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/221
Sec. 6.100 Electric Deposit
(a) Residential Customers. $200.00 minimum, providing that customer does not owe a past due bill,
otherwise, it will be at the discretion of the city administrator or city secretary on how much the deposit will be.
(b) Commercial Customers. Deposit will equal to a two-month average bill. In the event of new construction
where no monthly average bill exists, the deposit will be computed from a previous bill similar to location. The
deposit will never be less than $300.00.
(Ordinance 2014-02 adopted 3/20/14)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.800
Sec. 6.200 Water Deposit
(a) Residential Water Customers: $75.00.
(b) Commercial Water Customers: $125.00.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.400; 11.1700
Sec. 6.300 Reconnection Charge for Water Services
(a) Nonpay Reconnection Fee: $50.00.
(b) Illegal Meter Turned On or Tampering: The meter will be removed and reinstalled, only upon payment of
an additional $150.00 service charge.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.1700
Sec. 6.400 Water Rates; Capital Improvements; Miscellaneous Service Charges
(a) Water Rates.
(1) Residential. The rates or charges for water furnished to customers inside the city limits
(including the extraterritorial jurisdiction) shall be as follows:
(A) Base rate: $22.85.
(B) Per 1,000 gallons: $3.96.
(2) Church/Commercial. The rates or charges for water furnished to customers inside the city
limits (including the extraterritorial jurisdiction) shall be as follows:
(A) Base rate: $29.70.
(B) Per 1,000 gallons: $3.96.
(Ordinance 2018-06 adopted 8/23/18)
(b) Water Capital Improvements. A water capital improvements has been established from a portion of the
revenues created by this and prior ordinances and funded on a monthly basis:
Residential/Church/
Commercial
Per Month
Inside and outside city limits As able
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/221
Said water capital improvement fund to be separately maintained at the sole discretion of the city council and
designated for water capital improvement project only.
(Ordinance 2014-08 adopted 9/18/14)
(c) Miscellaneous Service Charges.
(1) Location Change Fee: $25.00.
(2) Reread at Customer's Request: $15.00 charged, if the original reading was correct. There will
be no charge for an incorrect reading, and an adjustment of billing will be made to correct an error in
reading.
(3) Connect Fee: $25.00 during regular office hours, Monday–Friday, 8:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.
(4) Records for Nonpayment of Service Charges: Statements will be issued for the service
charges herein contained, to be mailed by the 7th of each month following service. Any service
charges remaining unpaid thirty days after billing date will be added to utility bills as “arrears,” and
failure to pay total bill as stated on utility statement will result in disconnection of utility services.
(5) Tap Fees:
(A) 3/4" Tap: $400.00 plus $100.00 for breaking pavement.
(B) 1" Tap: $550.00 plus $100.00 for breaking pavement.
(C) Water 2" Tap: $1,100.00.
(D) Water 6" Tap: $3,300.00
(E) Sewer Tap: $500.00.
(d) Return Checks or Drafts. $35.00 each occurrence, after 3 occurrences, you will no longer be able to pay
by check or draft, for a period of one year.
(Ordinance 2018-06 adopted 8/23/18)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.1700
Sec. 6.500 Water Supply to Airport; Charges
(a) The city shall install a two (2) inch water line adjacent to the lots leased to the lessees at the Seymour
Municipal Airport. Service lines, three-quarter (3/4) inch in diameter, will be provided to each lot or hangar with
an outlet. The cost of the water service line, water tap, and monthly service shall be as follows:
(1) The water service line and water tap cost shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00), payable in
advance, prior to installation for all lessees.
(2) The monthly service charge shall be billed in accordance with Ordinance 88-16, and water
rates shall be the same as in city nonresidential use, as detailed below:
First 2,000 gallons @$9.00 (minimum)
Next 98,000 gallons @$1.75/M
All over @$1.25/M
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/221
(b) All charges shall become due on or before the 10th of the month. 10% penalty will be added on payments
not received by the 10th of each month. Any amendments to Ordinance 88-1, pertaining to rats shall be
applicable to airport water rates.
(c) In the event the monthly service charge is not paid, service will be discontinued and the unpaid balance
will be assessed against the lessee's annual lease agreement.
(d) Lessees at the Seymour Municipal Airport desiring to install water lines not connecting to the city's main
water line shall require authorization from the city administrator. Any private water line installed shall be
maintained by the lessee utilizing said water line. Any liability incurred through the installation or use of said
water line shall be borne entirely by the lessee.
(Ordinance 89-6 adopted 8/3/89)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.400
Sec. 6.600 Sewer Rates
(a) Residential (per month).
(1) Base rate: $14.41.
(2) Per 1,000 gallons: $1.33.
(a) Commercial (per month).
(1) Base rate: $20.13.
(2) Per 1,000 gallons: $1.33.
(Ordinance 2018-06 adopted 8/23/18)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.1600.
Sec. 6.700 Miscellaneous Service Charges
(a) Temporary Service and/or Changing of Service Entrance. The fee for this service shall be $25.00.
(b) Location Change Fee. $25.00.
(c) Reread at Customer's Request. $15.00 charged, if the original reading was correct. There will be no
charge for an incorrect reading, and an adjustment of billing will be made to correct an error in reading.
(d) Connect Fee (Establishing Services). $25.00 during regular office hours.
(e) Recourse for Nonpayment of Service Charges. Statements will be issued for the service charges herein
contained, to be mailed by the 7th of each month following service. Any service charges remaining unpaid thirty
days after billing date will be added to utility bills as “arrears,” and failure to pay total bill as stated on utility
statement will result in disconnection of utility services.
(f) Return Checks or Drafts. $35.00 each occurrence, after 3 occurrences, you will no longer be able to pay
by check or draft, for a period of one year.
(Ordinance 2014-02 adopted 3/20/14)
(g) Sewer Tap Fees. $400.00 plus $100.00 for breaking pavement. (Ordinance 2014-07 adopted 8/21/14)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.400; 11.800
Sec. 6.800 Reconnection Charge for Electric Services
(a) Nonpay Reconnection Fee: $50.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/221
(b) Illegal Meter Turned On or Tampering: The meter will be removed and reinstalled, only upon payment of
an additional $150.00 service charge.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.800
Sec. 6.900 Electric Rate Schedules
The following schedules or rates are hereby adopted and fixed as the minimum rates which may and/or shall be
charged for electric service hereinafter furnished to any consumer or customer, as above defines.
(1) Residential Service.
(A) Applicable:
(i) To residential customers for all domestic use in individual private dwelling or
individually metered apartments where such service is taken through one meter at one
point of delivery. Three (3) phase service to less than five (5) horsepower furnished only
under special contract guaranteeing continuous use of service for not less than twelve
(12) months.
(ii) Where any portion of such service is used for nonresidential purpose, the general
service schedule will apply to all service, except that where separate circuits are provided
for residential and nonresidential service.
(B) Rate:
(i) Winter Residential Electric Rates. Effective December 1st through May 1st billing:
a. Customer charge: $7.50/month.
b. First 250 kwh: $0.064 (6.4c) per kwh.
c. Next 450 kwh: $0.049 (4.9c) per kwh.
d. All over 700 kwh: $0.0446 (4.46c) per kwh.
e. Above rates plus power cost adjustment and city sales tax.
(ii) Summer Residential Electric Rates. Effective June 1st through November 1st
billing:
a. Customer charge: $7.50/month.
b. First 250 kwh: $0.064 (6.4c) per kwh.
c. Next 450 kwh: $0.049 (4.9c) per kwh.
d. Next 550 kwh: $0.0475 (4.75c) per kwh.
e. All over 1250 kwh: $0.0446 (4.46c) per kwh.
f. Above rates plus power cost adjustment and city sales tax.
(iii) Multiple-Dwelling Unit. Where more than one family or housekeeping unit is served
through one meter, the number kwh in each block of the rate and minimum bill charge will
be multiplied by the number of families or housekeeping units served.
(2) General Service.
(A) Applicable: For general service customers with a demand under 50 KVA or 50 KW.
(B) Character of Service: AC, 60 cycle, single phase, 120/240, 120/208 volts, 3-phase, 4
wires.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/221
(C) Rate:
(i) Customer charge: $7.55 (minimum bill).
(ii) First 250: $0.08635 (8.635c) per kwh.
(iii) KVA X 85X: $0.08635 (8.635c) per kwh.
(iv) KW X94 X: $0.08635 (8.635c) per kwh.
(v) All over: $0.04675 (4.675c) per kwh.
(vi) General service users allowed 1 KVA or 1 KW, plus power cost adjustment, state
and city sales tax.
(D) Excess demand: For each KVA, or major fraction thereof in excess of 1 KVA, add 85
kwh to the $0.08635 rate block; for each KW, or major fraction thereof in excess of 1 KW, add
94 kwh to the $0.08635 rate block.
(E) Billing Demand: Demand meter will be installed where the customer uses more than 250
kwh per month or has a connected load which is clearly capable of creating demands in
excess of 2 KVA or 2 KW.
(3) Large General Service.
(A) Applicable: For general service customer with a demand of 50 KVA or 50 KW up to 500
KVA or 500 KW.
(B) Character of Service: AC, 60 cycle, single phase, 120/240, 120/208 volts; 3 phase, 4
wire, 120/240, 120/208,7200/123670; 3 phase, 3 wire, 480 volts as available at point of
delivery.
(C) Rate:
(i) Minimum bill: $52.00/month.
(ii) Customer charge: $9.02/month.
(iii) Demand charge: $3.0800 per KVA; $3.1275 per KW.
(iv) Energy charge: All KWH $0.0484 per KWH.
(v) Plus power cost adjustment, state and city sales taxes.
(D) Billing Demand: Maximum measured 15 minute KA or KW demand developed during the
month.
(4) City Service and Streetlights.
(A) Applicable: For city service and streetlights.
(B) Rate: $0.055/KWH, plus power cost adjustment.
(5) Yard Light Service.
(A) Applicable: To any customer for unmetered lighting service supplied exclusively to one or
more outdoor lamps as specified below, operating, automatically from dust to dawn. Installation
and maintenance of yard lights at customer's expense.
(B) Monthly Rate:
(i) Mercury vapor:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/221
Watts KWH Lumens Cost
175 70 7000 $7.10
400 160 20000 $10.84
(ii) Sodium vapor:
Watts KWH Lumens Cost
100 40 9500 $7.43
200 80 22000 $10.51
(iii) Plus power cost adjustment and applicable state and city sales taxes.
(6) Yard Light Contract Service.
(A) Availability: Available for private outdoor area lighting service. Under this schedule the
city will construct, own, operate and maintain overhead mercury vapor or sodium vapor
luminaries, mounted on wood poles, of a design approved by the city and cause each light to
operate from dust to dawn.
(B) Rate:
(i) Mercury vapor:
Watts KWH Lumens Cost
175 70 7000 $9.00
400 160 20000 $12.50
(ii) Sodium vapor:
Watts KWH Lumens Cost
100 40 9000 $13.50
200 80 22000 $16.50
(iii) Plus power cost adjustment and applicable state and city sales taxes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/221
(iv) The above rates could vary up or down based on the city's estimated cost of
owning, installing and maintaining the lights.
(C) Facilities Provided:
(i) The city will install, own and maintain at its own cost and expense at each light
location, one mercury vapor or sodium vapor luminary (of the applicable size selected by
the customer) and necessary operating equipment mounted on a 30-foot wood pole and
one span of 120 volt secondary line not to exceed 100 feet, including a guy and anchor
when needed. Where service is requested by a customer at a location which requires
facilities in excess of the foregoing, the additional cost shall be paid by the customer.
(ii) Customer must sign a contract agreeing to pay the city the charge per luminary for
a period of not less than 12 months.
(iii) It is specifically understood and agreed that the city has the right to cancel service
at any time in the event maintenance or lamp replacement becomes excessive due to
vandalism or other causes.
(Ordinance 2014-02 adopted 3/20/14)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.800
Sec. 6.1000 Wastewater Recover Fees
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal
system for the implementation of the program established herein:
(1) Inspections: $10.00/inspection.
(2) Hauled Waste Disposal : $0.5/gal.
(3) Hauled Waste Permits: $50.00/annually.
(4) Trip Tickets: $0.10/ticket.
(Ordinance 94-1 adopted 3/10/94)
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.900
Sec. 6.1100 Gas Lines Inspection
The water/wastewater operations superintendent shall serve as the plumbing inspector and gas line inspector
for the city. The following fees will be charged for his services:
(1) Permit to Install or Replace Gas Lines.
(A) Permit: $10.00.
(B) Inspection: $10.00.
(C) No permit is required on hot water heater inspections.
Sec. 6.1200 Plumbing Permits/Inspection
The water/wastewater operations superintendent shall serve as the plumbing inspector for the city. The
following fees will be charged for his services:
(1) Permit Fees.
For issuing each permit $13.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/221
Plus the following when provided
Plumbing fixture, floor drain or trap (including
water and drainage piping)
$5.50 each
House sewer $8.00 each
House sewer having to be replaced or repaired $8.00 each
Cesspool $8.00 each
Septic tank and seepage pit or drainfield $13.00 each
Water heater and/or vent $5.50
Installation, alteration or repair of water piping
and/or water treating equipment
$8.00
Repair or alteration of
drainage or vent piping
$8.00
Vacuum breakers or backflow
prevention devices installed
subsequent to the installation
of the piping or equipment
served (and not otherwise
addressed in the backflow
prevention device article)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/221
One to five (sprinkler
system)
$5.50
More than five $1.50
each
(Ordinance 2005-01 adopted 1/20/05)
Sec. 6.1300 Schedule of Fees; Backflow Cross-Connection Control Program Fees
(a) Backflow Prevention Assembly Registration Fee. There is a nonrefundable registration fee for each new
backflow prevention assembly device installed of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per each separate device.
(b) Deposit Fee for Fire Hydrant Water Meter With Backflow Prevention Device. There shall be a refundable
deposit fee for fire hydrant meters with backflow prevention devices of eight hundred dollars ($800.00). This fee
shall be refunded when the meter/device is returned in good working order.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.1900
(Ordinance 2005-03 adopted 1/20/05)
Sec. 6.1400 Water Conservation Plan
Nonpromotional water rate structure:
(1) First 2,000 gallons: $22.85.
(2) All over 2,000 gallons: $3.96 per 1,000 gallons.
(Ordinance 2016-08 adopted 6/16/16)
ARTICLE 7.000 PARKS AND RECREATION
Sec. 7.100 City R.V. Park
There is a fee of seventeen dollars ($17.00) per night to park a vehicle in the City R.V. Park. (Ordinance 2003-
01 adopted 1/16/03)
Code reference–Chapter 1, Article 1.1000, Section 1.1026
Sec. 7.200 Park Shed Rentals
(a) If any person or persons, representing family reunions, or similar groups desire to use the city park
facilities located in the city, and desire to use the sheds or cooking facilities located in the park, may do so, by
reserving their choice of shed at the city office, depending upon the availability of said facilities. The fees for the
use of sheds will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one (1) day and forty dollars ($40.00) for two (2) days.
(b) Fees for park sheds will be due in full when reserved in person, if reservations are made by telephone or
mail, they will be allowed ten (10) days.
(Ordinance 2008-07, sec. 1, adopted 7/17/08)
Cross reference–Chapter 1, Article 1.1000, Section 1.1001
Sec. 7.300 Portwood Art and Civic Center Fees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/221
(a) Monday-Friday Rates: $12.50 per hour with a 3 hour minimum and a 12 hour maximum, plus a $50.00
cleaning deposit.
(b) Summer Weekend Rates (May 1st–September 30th):
(1) Flat fee of $150.00 plus $50.00 deposit for one (1) day.
(2) $300.00 plus $50.00 deposit for two (2) days.
(c) Winter Weekend Rates (October 1st–April 30th): $12.50 per hour with a 3 hour minimum and a 12 hour
maximum, plus a $50.00 cleaning deposit.
(d) Deposit Refundable: The city will refund the deposit, after inspection has been approved by the attendant.
(Ordinance 2008-07, sec. 2, adopted 7/17/08)
Cross reference–Chapter 1, Article 1.1000, Section 1.1002
ARTICLE 8.000 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 8.100 Services, Equipment and Materials
(a) The city is authorized to assess and collect fees for services, equipment and materials rendered, used or
expended by the city's volunteer fire department in connection with the following events or incidents:
(1) Vehicle fires.
(2) Vehicle collisions.
(3) Extrications as a result of a vehicle collision or machinery malfunction.
(4) Hazardous material spills or releases.
(5) Rescues or rescue attempts at low water crossings.
(6) Structure fires.
(A) Residential fires - no direct bill to homeowner.
(B) Commercial fires - no direct bill to business owner.
(7) Wildland fires - no direct bill to landowner.
(b) No fees shall be directly assessed against residents of the city in connection with vehicle collisions or
vehicle fires, except in those instances in which a resident has been convicted of an offense that constitutes at
least a class B misdemeanor that caused or resulted in the collision or fire.
Sec. 8.200 Vehicles
(a) Engine (staffed with 3 personnel) per hour: $450.00.
(b) Brush truck (staffed with 3 personnel) per hour: $300.00.
(c) Rescue truck (staffed with 4 personnel) per hour: $400.00.
(d) Rescue van (staffed with 2 personnel) per hour: $400.00.
(e) Command unit (staffed with 2 personnel) per hour: $200.00.
(f) Utility vehicle (staffed with 1 personnel) per hour: $100.00.
Sec. 8.300 Personnel
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/221
(a) Firefighter per hour: $25.00.
(b) Chief per hour: $35.00.
(c) Officers/captains per hour: $30.00.
Sec. 8.400 Fire Equipment Used
(a) Water extinguisher (each): $20.00.
(b) ABC Dry chemical extinguisher (each): $20.00.
(c) CO 2 extinguisher (each): $40.00.
(d) Chain saw (each): $40.00.
(e) Generator (per hour): $50.00.
(f) Bolt cutters: $10.00.
(g) Fans (per hour): $50.00.
(h) Pike pole, halligan tool, axe, etc.: $15.00.
(i) Carbon Monoxide Detector: $25.00.
(j) SCBA (each): $50.00.
(k) SCBA (refill): $10.00.
(l) Thermal imaging camera: $75.00.
(m) Fire flapper: $20.00.
(n) Shovel/scoop/hand tool (each): $10.00.
(o) Broom: $10.00.
Sec. 8.500 Rescue Equipment Used
(a) Hydraulic rescue system (each) (includes: spreaders, rams, cutter, hoses and power unit): $275.00.
(b) Saws - all saw: $35.00.
(c) Air bag rescue system: $100.00.
(d) Stabilization jacks: $50.00.
(e) Air impact tools: $50.00.
(f) Flairs/LZ: $20.00.
(g) Lights: $25.00.
(h) Bee suit (each): $20.00.
Sec. 8.600 Miscellaneous Supplies
(a) Absorbent, per bag: $18.00.
(b) Barricade tape, roll: $20.00.
(c) Disposable gloves: $5.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/221
(d) Class A foam, per gallon: $20.00.
Sec. 8.700 Protective Equipment Replacement
(a) Helmet, each: $350.00.
(b) Nomex hood, each: $50.00.
(c) Bunker coat, each: $1,200.00.
(d) Bunker pant, each: $900.00.
(e) Firefighter boots, pair: $225.00.
(f) Firefighter gloves, pair: $85.00.
(g) Firefighter SCBA mask: $400.00.
(h) Wildland coverall, each: $500.00.
(i) Wildland gloves, pair: $35.00.
(j) Wildland helmet, each: $75.00.
(k) Extrication gloves, pair: $75.00.
Sec. 8.800 Fire equipment Replacement
(a) Hose 1" red line, each 50': $125.00.
(b) Hose 1.50", each 50': $150.00.
(c) Hose 2.5", each 50': $175.00.
(d) Hose 6", each 15': $150.00.
(e) Fog nozzle 1.5", each: $800.
(f) Fog nozzle 1.0", each: $575.00.
(g) Fog nozzle 2.5", each: $1,200.00.
(h) SCBA unit, complete: $6,900.00.
(i) SCBA cylinder, each: $1,000.00.
(j) 10' roof ladder, each: $300.00.
(k) 14' roof ladder, each: $325.00.
(l) 24' extension ladder, each: $700.00.
(m) Thermal imaging camera, each: $13,500.00.
(n) Motorola portable radio, each: $1,500.00.
(o) Motorola pager, each: $350.00.
(p) Shovel, each: $50.00.
(q) Broom, each: $60.00.
(r) Axe: $50.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/221
(s) Flapper: $75.00.
(t) Flashlight, mag, each: $85.00.
(u) Chain saw, each: $500.00.
(Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 8/21/14)

skip navigation
City of Seymour, Texas
City
Chamber
Events
Notices
Contact
Subscribe
SEYMOUR ZONING INFORMATION
CITY OF SEYMOUR, TEXAS

ORDINANCE NO. 2020-07

AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE BASIC ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SEYMOUR, TEXAS AS PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL, ESTABLISHING AND PROVIDING FOR ZONING REGULATIONS; CREATING USE DISTRICTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; REGULATING WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS THE SIZE AND USE OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS THAT MAY BE OCCUPIED; ESTABLISHES PARKING REQUIREMENTS; PROVIDES FOR THE ISSUANCE OF SPECIFIC USE PERMITS; REGULATES HOME OCCUPATIONS; REQUIRING OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING; PROVIDES FOR SCREENING; REGULATES SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; PROVIDES FOR THE CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES; REGULATES NON-CONFORMING USES; PROVIDES FOR AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE; PROVIDES FOR THE CREATION, APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS; PROVIDES ZONING DEFINITIONS; PROVIDES FOR THE INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICTS; PRESERVES RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER EXISTING ORDINANCES; REPEALS CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; PROVIDES FOR SEVERABILITY OF EACH SECTION, PARAGRAPH, SENTENCES, CLAUSES AND PHRASES OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE; PROVIDES FOR A GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS NOT TO EXCEED $200.00 FOR EACH OFFENSE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.

WHEREAS, the City of Seymour is empowered by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code to establish a zoning ordinance;

WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Seymour has given appropriate and reasonable consideration to the zoning regulations and districts most appropriate for the City and made such recommendations to the Seymour City Council.

WHEREAS, both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council of the City of Seymour have duly held public hearings and given proper notice pertaining to the adoption of this zoning ordinance;

WHEREAS, the Seymour City Council finds that the zoning ordinance represents the best interest of all citizens of Seymour and promotes the aesthetics, health, safety, general welfare and convenience of the people.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SEYMOUR, TEXAS:

SECTION 1. TITLE

This ordinance, together with all subsequent amendments thereto, shall hereby referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Seymour, Texas.”

SECTION 2. PURPOSE AND INTENT

This ordinance is prepared under the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 211, to promote health, safety, morals, and for the protection and preservation of places and areas of historical and cultural importance and significance, and the general welfare of the community. These zoning regulations are made in accordance with the spirit of the city comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote the general welfare of the community; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. These regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.

SECTION 3. ZONING ADMINISTRATION

A. ADMINISTRATION

The city secretary is hereby designated by the city council as the zoning administrator to supervise the administration and enforcement of these regulations. The city secretary may appoint an assistant to help him or her with the general administration and enforcement duties required for the implementation of this zoning ordinance.

It is the intent of this ordinance that the duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include:

Review all zoning request for amendments, appeals, conditional uses, and variances.
See that property owners within two hundred feet (200') of any property on which a change in zoning regulations, or district boundaries are notified by mail. Such notice shall be given, not less than ten (10) days before the day set for hearing.
Prepare copies of zoning material for public bearings to the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Adjustment, and City Council and serve as their support staff in zoning matters.
Present zoning application and conditional use permit request to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council during public hearings.
Keep the Zoning District Map updated as district boundaries and conditional uses and overlay zones are approved by the City Council.
Notify in writing action taken by the City Council to the appropriate property owner or owners to their zoning request.
If the zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official finds that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, the zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official shall order the discontinuance of any illegal use of land, buildings or structures, the removal of any illegal buildings or structures or of any illegal additions, alterations or structural changes, the discontinuance of any illegal work being performed; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of these provisions.
B. INTERPRETATION AND APPEALS

It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the zoning administrator or his or her designated representative, and that such questions shall be presented to the zoning board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative official, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law.

C. CITY COUNCIL DUTIES

The city council shall consider and adopt or reject proposed amendments to this ordinance or of its repeal. In addition, the city council shall establish a schedule of fees and charges as stated in subsection D herebelow.

D. FEES

The city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, establish a schedule of fees and charges for the permits, zoning change requests, zoning board of adjustment appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees and charges may be altered or amended only by action of the city council. Until all applicable fees and charges have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any zoning application or appeal.

SECTION 4. ZONING DISTRICT MAP

A. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP

The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map, which together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this zoning ordinance. This map shall be kept on tile in the office of the city secretary and shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the zoning administrator, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: “This is the official zoning map as adopted by part of Ordinance No. _______on _________, 199__ 20__ by the City Council of the City of Seymour, Texas.

When changes are made in any zoning district boundaries, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council. No zoning change shall become effective until after its approval by the city council.

B. ZONING MAP REPLACEMENT

The city council may, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map should the original official zoning map be damaged, destroyed, lost or become ambiguous because of the nature or number of changes and additions. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall also be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the zoning administrator, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words:

            “This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map             adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as a part of the zoning ordinance of the City of             Seymour, Texas.”

C. RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following shaIl apply:

            (1) When the district boundaries are roads or streets, unless otherwise shown, and where the designation of the district map indicates that the various districts are bounded by a road or street line, the center line of such road or street shall be construed to be the district boundary line;

            (2) Where the district boundaries indicated follow platted lot or tract lines, the district boundaries shall be construed to follow such lot or tract lines.

            (3) Where the district boundaries indicated appear to follow city limit boundaries, the district             boundaries shall be construed to follow the city limit boundaries.

            (4) Where district boundaries indicated as dividing a lot or tract, the district boundaries shall be construed as being located as shown on the Zoning District Map. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.

            (5) Where district boundaries are disputed or not otherwise clearly designated, or where the physical or structural features are at variance with the official zoning map or in other circumstances not covered in this section, the zoning board of adjustment shaIl interpret the district boundaries.

SECTION 5. ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY

A. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS

For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Seymour, Texas, is hereby divided into ten (10) zoning districts as follows:

“R-1” – Single Family Residential District

“R-2” – Two Family Residential District

“R-3” – Single, Two and Manufactured Home Residential District

“R-4” – Multi-Family Residential District

“MH” – Manufactured Home District

“B-1” – Restricted Commercial District

“B-2” – General Commercial District

“I”      – Industrial District

“PD”  – Planned Development District

“FP”  – Flood Plain District

B. NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY

            (1) Annexed Territory to be Temporarily Zoned R-1

            All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily zoned as “R-l” District, until permanent zoning is established by the city council, except as provided in paragraph (3) below.         The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on newly annexed territory shall conform to the      procedure established by law for the adoption of the original zoning regulations. However, nothing herein shall prevent the granting of permanent zoning at the time of annexation and zoning such territory other than an “R-1 District”

            (3) Concurrent Re-Zoning and Annexation

            Application(s) for permanent zoning of a newly annexed area may be considered by the city at the same time as the area is being considered for annexation, although annexation procedures must be completed prior to any final zoning actions by the city council.

C. GENERAL COMPLIANCE WITII DISTRICT REGULATIONS

The regulations established by this ordinance within each zoning district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class and kind of structure or land, and in accordance with the following:

            (1) Conformity with District Required

            No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located.

            (2) Height and Lot Coverage to Conform with District Regulations

            No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed the height or to occupy a greater percentage of the lot area which is prescribed for the district in which it is located.

            (3) Height and Area Exceptions

            The regulations contained herein relating to the height of buildings or structures and the size of             yards and other open spaces shall be subject to the following exceptions:

                        (a) Chimneys, non-commercial television receiving antennas, and satellite dishes as part of a residential development or use are hereby exempted from the height regulations as established herein.

                        (b) Church steeples or spires, belfries, cupolas, cooling towers, tanks, water towers, microwave radio and television relay or broadcasting towers, mast or aerials and necessary mechanical appurtenances are hereby excepted from the height regulations as established herein; provided, a specific use permit or variance is granted when the maximum height allowed in the zoning district is exceeded.

                        (c) When a lot has an area less than the minimum number of square feet, lot width or lot depth as required for the district in which it is located, and was of record as such at the time of the passage of this zoning ordinance, such lot may be continued to be occupied or used and nothing herein shall prohibit the erection a single family dwelling. However; no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered on         such non-conforming lot unless a variance has been granted to do so.

                        (d) An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front, back or side yard setback for a distance of not more than ten (10) feet, but shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies.

            (4) Yards to Conform with District Regulations

            No building or other structure shall have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than herein required or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions of these regulations unless existing at the time of passage of this ordinance, in which case, they shall not be further reduced in size without a variance.

            (5) No Yard or Other IntegraI Component Required for Any Building Shall be Counted Twice

            No part of a yard or other open space, off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with these zoning regulations shall be included as a part of a yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.

            (6) Visibility at Intersections Required

            On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between heights of two and one-half feet (2-1/2') to ten feet (10') above ground level measured from thirty feet (30') from the comer intersection.

            (7) Access to Structures

            Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street; and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.

            (8) Refuse Containers Prohibited in Front or Side Yard of Business

            Refuse containers or dumpsters shall not be located in the front or side yard of any business establishment or property zoned for commercial or industrial use. This restriction shall not apply in cases where compliance would cause such containers to be inaccessible to refuse collection vehicles. For the purposes of this restriction, the zoning administrator shall determine after reasonable investigation whether the container is so accessible or not.

            (9) Number of Dwellings Per Lot Restricted

            No more than one dwelling shall be permitted on any lot of record which is zoned as an “R-1”,     “R-2”, and “R-3” District and on any lot in the “MH” District subdivided for a single manufactured home.

            (10) Tiny House Variance Rules

            Section II. DEFINITIONS: For purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter ascribed thereto.

A.  City: City of Seymour, Baylor County, Texas and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.

B. City Council: City Council of the City of Seymour, Texas.

C. Common Access Route / Internal Street: Private drive allowing principle means of access to individual Tiny Houses.

D. Driveway: Minor entrance way off the common access route, into an off-street parking area serving one or more Tiny Houses.

E. Variance: Written variance and or application issued by the City Council allowing the placement, alteration or extension of a Tiny Home under the provisions of this Ordinance and regulations issued hereunder.

F. Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation.

G. Tiny Houses: Residential structures with less than 900 square feet total living space. Living space shall exclude porches, garages, and other space not heated or cooled by any means.  Minimum square footage of 320 square feet.

Section III: Zoning/ and variances

A. Variance required: A variance is required to locate a Tiny House in any subdivisions of the City as identified on the Zoning Map of the City, Applicant is required to go before the City Council for approval.

B. Application Requirements for a Variance: All tiny home builders must complete an application for building. Including but not limited to the following:

(1) Name and Address of Applicant

(2) Telephone Number

(3) Location, Legal Property description, Block and Lot where Tiny House is to be located

(4) Dimensions of the Tiny House and additional structures

(5) Description of material being used to build the Tiny House

(6) Plat or blueprints identifying connections to city services including Water, Sewer and Sanitation, if available

(7) Photographs of the tiny house, if available

(8)  Detailed Site Plan of property and structures

C. Issuance of Variance: In considering the application, the City Council or Planning & Zoning Commission may take into account the proposed location of the Tiny House in relation to the present and anticipated land use and development. After review of the application and determining the application and the proposed home complies with this Ordinance and other applicable laws, codes regulations and zoning ordinances, the variance shall be issued.

D. Denial of Application / Hearing:   Any person whose application for a variance has been denied may, within 10 (ten) days of the denial, request in writing a rehearing on the matter and offer additional evidence at the hearing if desired.

Uses allowed with a specific use variance:  Subject to approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission and the City Council, the following specific uses may be allowed in any district:

(A)  Tiny Houses that meet the following requirements:

                        (1)  Footprint:  The tiny house shall have a minimum square foot living area footprint of 320 square feet with a maximum of 900 square feet, not to include the exterior porches.

                        (2)  Lot Coverage:  Maximum Lot coverage (structures only) shall be forty (40) percent.

                        (3)  Permanent Foundation: 

All concrete must be 5 Sack Concrete

All rebar used in construction must be graded at 60 or above

Minimum Footing requirements are to include a ten inch wide by eighteen inch deep (10”x 18”) footing with a minimum of four (4) one-half inch ( ½”) bars of rebar tied off at twenty-five percent (25%) and seventy-five percent (75%) measured from the bottom of the ditch.

(a)  Pier and Beam Construction:

Must include minimum footing requirements

Piers to be placed ten inches wide by eighteen inches deep (10”x18”)

Two inch by four inch (2”x4”) floor joist construction requires pier holes four foot (4’) from center to center

Two inch by six inch (2”x6”) floor joist construction requires pier holes six foot (6’) from center to center

(b)  Slab Construction:

Must include minimum footing requirements

Minimum thickness to be four inches (4”) thick with three-eighths (3/8”) rebar every eighteen inches (18”) on center throughout the slab in both directions and tied at 50%

(4)  Floor Construction:

Floor constructed with two inch by four in (2”x4”) lumber will have a brace every four feet (4’)

Floor constructed with two inch by six inch (2”x6”) lumber will have a brace every six feet (6’)

                        (5) Roofing Construction:

Roof constructed with two inch by four inch (2”x4”) lumber will have a brace every four feet (4’)

Roof constructed with two inch by six inch (2”x6”) lumber will have a brace every six feet (6’)

Gabled roof construction only.

                        (6)  Roof Finishing:

Shingle finishing will be constructed with a minimum of three inch to twelve inch drop ratio (3:12)

Metal finishing will be constructed with a minimum of two inch to twelve inch drop ratio (2:12)

                        (7)  Exterior Appearance:  The Tiny House shall be in good condition and free from severe rust, peeling paint or other forms of deterioration.  Tiny Houses shall have a minimum of two (2) exits for fire safety purposes.

(a)  One (1) door and a thirty inch by sixty inch (30”x60”) egress window no

more than three feet (3’) from the ground measured from the exterior of the structure to the ground.

(b) Two (2) full doors. 

                        (8)  Review:  All units must be reviewed by the city administrator and/or code enforcement and must meet all current city ordinances and requirements.  Tiny houses must be placed on site for review and be anchored to a permanent foundation.  No composting toilets will be permitted.

                        (9) The Tiny House must have a driveway.  

                        (10) Tiny House construction must abide by Section 5, Schedule D of District Regulations adopted for an R-1 excluding minimum living area and garage.

                        (11)  All units must be clearly marked with 911 addresses

                        (12)  “Tiny House On Wheels” THOW Not Permitted:  Tiny Houses that are on trailers or “on wheels” are not permitted to be used as a residence within this specific use permit.  THOWs are considered to be a recreational vehicle and are only permitted in a B2 Commercial lot with appropriate commercial hook ups or within a Manufactured Housing (MH) zoned district.

Section V. Penalty Provisions. Any person violating this Ordinance or any portion thereof shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00 for each day that such violation continues. Each day may be considered a separate offense and punishable accordingly.

D. SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED

The following table of district regulations is hereby adopted and shall be considered as part of each applicable zoning district regulation as hereafter described in this ordinance:

SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS

Area Regulations	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	B-3	I
Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)	6,500	(a)	(a)	(b)	(c)	3000	N/A	N/A	N/A
Minimum Lot Width (Feet)	50	50	50	50	40*                  60**	25	25	N/A	N/A
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	110	110	110	120	75*                      100**	120	N/A	N/A	N/A
Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet)	25	25	25	25	25*                      25**	(d)	(d)	N/A	20
Minimum Front Yard Setback – Major Street (Feet)	35	35	35	35	25*                      25**	(d)	(d)	N/A	N/A
Minimum Side Yard Setback (Feet)	7	7	7	7	6*                         6**	(e)	(e)	N/A	(4)                (10)
Minimum Side Yard Setback – Corner Lot	25	25	25	25	25*                      25**	20	20	N/A	20
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet)	25	25	25	25	20*                      25**	(f)	(f)	N/A	(5)            20
Maximum Hgt. (Stories)	3	2.5	2.5	3	1.5	3	8	8	8
Height of Structure (Ft.)	35	35	35	45	25	45	100	100	100
Maximum Lot Coverage	40%	40%	40%	40%	50%	N/A	N/A	N/A	50%
Minimum Living Area – Excluding Garage	1,000	800	(g)	(h)	N/A*                   450**	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A

Footnotes:

            (a) The minimum lot area for the R-2 District is 6,500 square feet for a single family unit, 7,000 square feet for a two-family unit and 1,500 square feet for each additional unit in excess of two.

            (b) The minimum lot area for the R-3 District is 6,000 square feet for a single family unit, 7,000 square feet for a two-family unit and 1,500 square feet for each additional unit in excess of two.

            (c) For mobile home lots which are individually owned, the minimum lot area shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet when a public sewer system is available. When septic tanks are used the square feet of the lot area shall be the size specified by the state agency that monitors wastewater systems.

            For mobile home parks, the minimum lot area shall be at least three times larger than the mobile             home to be placed thereon and in no event less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area when a public sewer system serves the park. Where no public sewer system is available and septic tanks are used for sewerage disposal, the minimum lot area shall be size specified by the state agency that monitors wastewater systems.

            (d) No front yard or setback is required for commercial or industrial structures except where a lot adjoins a residential district or lot, in which the front yard in the commercial or industrial district     shall be provided for a distance of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary of said residential district or lot.

            (e) No side yard shall be required for commercial or industrial structures except that a side yard of not less than six (6) feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district.

            (f) No rear yard is required for commercial or industrial structures except that a rear yard of not   less than fifteen (15) feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting upon a residential district or lot.

            (g) The minimum living area for a manufactured home is four-hundred fifty (450)square feet, eight hundred (800) square feet for a single family dwelling and an average of eight hundred (800) square feet per unit for dwellings with more than one unit.

            (h) The minimum living area per unit shall be five hundred (500) square feet for an efficiency, six             hundred fifty (650) square feet for one (1) bedroom, eight hundred (800) square feet for two (2) bedrooms, and nine hundred (900) square feet for three (3) bedrooms. However, the average living area for all apartments in an apartment building must be a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet

SECTION 6. “R-l” SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “R-1” Single Family Residential District is established to allow for single family dwellings.

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses permitted in the “R-I” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 21 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 16 and 19 hereof. Parking for at least two motor vehicles shall be provided by an enclosed garage or carport for any single family dwelling constructed after the date of adoption of this ordinance.

F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED

(1) Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with SEYMOUR Code of Ordinances.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or persons shall be permitted to display more than two, or combination thereof, of the following: motor vehicles; boats or other similar vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shells per lot at any time.

SECTION 7.  “R-2” SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “R-2” district permits a medium density development

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses permitted in the “R-2” District include those listed in “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted use.

C. SPECIAL USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action for the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 16 and 19 hereof. Parking for at least two motor vehicles shall be provided by an enclosed garage or carport for each dwelling unit constructed after the date of adoption of this ordinance.

F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED

(1) Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with SEYMOUR Code ofOrdinances.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A ., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or persons shall be permitted to display more than two, or combination thereof, of the following: motor vehicles; boats or other similar vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shells per lot at any time.

SECTION 8. “R-3” SINGLE, TWO, AND MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “R-3” Residential District is established to meet the needs for low and medium density residential development that provides for affordable to traditional dwellings and manufactured homes.

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses shall permitted in the “R-3” District in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIAL USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5.D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Section 16 and 19 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required, however, carports and garages are encouraged.

F. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED

(1) Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with SEYMOUR Code of Ordinances.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or family shall be permitted to display more than one of the following at any time: motor vehicles, boats or vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31, or camper shells.

SECTION 9 “R-4” MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “R-4” Multi-Family Residential District is established to meet the needs for medium to high density residential development where such areas are suitable for higher impact development and higher volume traffic while encouraging the provision of conveniently located rental accommodations.

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses permitted in the “R-4” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 16 and 19 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required, however, carports and garages are encouraged.

F. MINIMUM SETBACK REOUIREMENTS FOR CARPORTS AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS

Carports or other detached accessory buildings shall be located within the rear portion of the lot and shall not exceed one (1) story in height nor shall any such structure be located closer than fifteen feet (15') to the main building nor closer than four feet (4') to a side lot line, nor closer than ten feet (10') to any rear lot line nor closer than ten feet (10') to any side street.

G. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED

(1) Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with SEYMOUR Code of Ordinances.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A ., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or persons shall be permitted to display more than two of the following, or combination thereof, per lot at any time: motor vehicles, boats or other similar vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31, or camper shells per lot at any time.

SECTION 10. “MH” MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “MH” Manufactured Home District is intended to provide for quality manufactured home park subdivision development containing many of the characteristics and atmosphere of a conventional type single family residential subdivision. The minimum size of manufactured home park shall be five (5) acres.

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses permitted in the “MH” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REOUIREMENTS

Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 16 and 19 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is especially required, however, carports and garages are encouraged.

F. MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR CARPORTS AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS

Carports or other detached accessory buildings shall be located within the rear portion of the lot and shall not exceed one (1) story in height nor shall any such structure be located closer than fifteen feet (15') to the main building nor closer than four feet (4’) to a side lot line, nor closer than ten feet (10') to any rear lot line nor closer than ten feet (10’) to any side street.

G. SALES DISPLAYS PROHIBITED

(1) Garage sales shall be permitted in accordance with SEYMOUR Code or Ordinances.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be displayed for sale or lease at one time on any lot any motor vehicle; boat or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A ., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31; or camper shell designed for use on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is owned by the actual occupant of the premises. However, no person or persons shall be permitted to display more than two of the following, or combination thereof, per lot at any time: motor vehicles, boats or other similar vessels subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code, Chapter 31, or camper shells per lot at any time.

SECTION 11. “B-1” RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “B-1” Restricted Commercial District has been established to limit commercial uses and operations within enclosed buildings and prohibiting the outside storage and display of goods, materials, vehicles and equipment. This district is intended to accommodate the basic shopping and service needs of residents and to provide retail and office space for merchants and financial, administrative, government and business services.

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses permitted in the “B-1” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unlessotherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; AND BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 16 and 19 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required.

F. ALL COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS AND SALES TO BE ENCLOSED: EXCEPTION

All commercial uses, operations, and sales, except for off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. However, the City Council may grant a permit to businesses for sidewalk sales for a period up to thirty (30) days.

SECTION 12. “B-2” GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “B-2” General Commercial District is established to accommodate most commercial activities that cannot generally be accommodated in “B-1” District. This district permits the storage of goods, materials, equipment, machinery and vehicles outside of enclosed buildings.

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses permitted in the “B-2” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unlessotherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Off-street parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the parking schedule found in Sections 16 and 19 hereof. No enclosed or covered parking is specifically required.

SECTION 13. “I” INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

The “I” Industrial District is established to accommodate most industrial and manufacturing uses, provided such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of emission of odors, soot, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations.

B. PERMITTED USES

The uses permitted in the “I” District include those listed in the “Schedule of Uses” found in Section 16 hereof. Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT

In order to allow for certain uses which, because of their nature or unusual character, cannot be unconditionally permitted in this district, yet would or could be an appropriate or compatible use under certain controlled circumstances and locations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward their recommendations of action to the City Council, after public hearing thereon. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and may authorize and grant the issuance of a specific use permit for such uses allowed in the schedule of uses in Section 17 of this ordinance. The issuance of the permit by the City Council shall be contingent upon reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards, including the length of time, so as to properly protect any adjacent property, use or neighborhood character, as well as insure the appropriate conduct of the conditional use of the land and buildings granted.

D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front, side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” found in Section 5. D and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. PARKING REOUIREMENTS

The minimum off-street parking space requirements for manufacturing and industrial uses shall be one (1) space for each two (2) employees or one (1) space for each one thousand square feet of gross floor area of all buildings used for the such manufacturing or industrial purposes, whichever is greater. Such off-street parking shall also be in accordance with Sections 16 and 19 hereof.

SECTION 14. “PD” PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE AND SCOPE

The “PD” Planned Development District is established to provide a greater flexibility in development planning and the opportunity of the application of modern planning concepts than is permitted under conventional regulations. “PD” Districts may combine a variety of land uses and/or housing types. Mixed uses may include any combination of residential, commercial or industrial uses as long as the uses are compatible with each other and with potential and existing uses surrounding the district. “PD” Districts may be established on parcels of land which are suitable for and of sufficient size to be planned and developed in a manner consistent with the purposes and objectives of this zoning ordinance.

In addition, property may be classified under the “PD” District in combination with any other zoning district (or base district) and so designated by the letters “PO” affixed to the code letters of that base district.

B. PERMITTED USES

The following uses may be permitted in a designated “PD” District. These uses shall not be considered to be all-inclusive.

Residential Uses, including Detached, Attached or Semi-Attached Single Family Dwellings, Townhouses, Condominiums, Patio Homes, Two-Family Dwellings and Multi-Family Dwellings. No manufactured homes or manufactured borne parks shall be allowed;
Business Park;
Office Building;
Shopping Center;
Hotel; Motel;
Medical Clinic; Hospital;
Industrial Park;
Library; Museum; Art Gallery;
Community, Recreation, or Civic Center;
Park; Playground; Golf Course;
Church;
Public or Private School; College; University;
Police; Fire Station;
Governmental Building;
Water Pumping Station; Water Reservoir; Water Tower; Artesian Well; Sewage; Lift Station; Septic Tank;
Telephone Exchange;
Satellite Dish; and/or
Radio and Television Transmitter.
Whenever a property is classified as a “PD” District in combination with any other zoning district as an overlay district, the permitted uses shall primarily be those allowed under the base district. In no event shall more than thirty percent (30%) of the land area of this district be utilized as any other use than that permitted in the base district unless otherwise agreed to by a concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the city council, and only after public hearings and proper notices to all parties affected in the manner as required for zoning amendments.

C. EXISTING USES IN “PD” DISTRICTS VALIDATED; ADOPTION OF SUBSEOUENT “PD” DISTRICTS

Concurrently with the adoption of this zoning ordinance, certain “PD” Districts may be created as indicated on the official zoning map of the City of SEYMOUR. The uses permitted in these “PD” Districts shall be those uses in existence at the time of adoption of the “PD” District. However, such existing uses shall be restricted to the particular lot, tract or parcel of land on which that use is located. Any change in the use of land in a “PD” District shall require a zoning change or the adoption of a new and separate “PD” District in accordance with the provisions contained herein.

In rendering a decision on an application for a “PD” District, the SEYMOUR Land Use Plan and any other comprehensive plan of the city shall be taken into consideration by the planning and zoning commission and the city council.

D. APPLICATION FOR “PD” DISTRICT

Application for a “PD” District or development in a “PD” District shall be made in the same manner as an application for any amendment to this zoning ordinance and shall include the following additional information:

            (1) Proposed Uses

            An application for a “PD” District or development in a “PD” District shall specify and describe the category or type of use or the combination of uses proposed. The permitted uses under “PD” District zoning shall be specified in each “PD” District ordinance and shall be limited to only         these uses. If such ordinance specifies permitted uses by reference to a conventional zoning district, the permitted uses shall mean those uses permitted in the referenced district.

            (2) Development Requirements

            An application for a “PD” District or development in a “PD” District shall include a list of proposed development standards which may be incorporated into the “PD” District ordinance. Development standards shall include, but not be limited to: density; lot size; setbacks; building sizes; height and exterior requirements; lot coverage; parking ratios; screening; landscaping; and any other requirements the council may deem appropriate.

Whenever a property is classified as a “PD” District in combination with any other zoning district, the standards set forth in the specific zoning district will be used as a guideline for the planned development. Modifications of standards may be considered if the modification substantially meets the intent of this ordinance and improves the overall development design or if a unique project design is proposed which cannot readily be accommodated through other zoning districts, provided, that pecuniary reasons shall not be the sole reason for modifying standards.

            (3) Concept Plan Required

            An application for a “PD” District or development in a “PD” District shall include a conceptual plan showing a preliminary layout of proposed uses, access, buildings, parking, open space and the relationship to existing natural features and adjacent properties and uses.

Upon submission of the application for a “PD” District or development in a “PD” District and after proper notice has been given to all affected parties and public hearings have been held, the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall review the application and may either give approval, with or without modifications, or reject it. In approving the application, the city council may impose conditions and these conditions shall be complied with before permit is issued for the use of land or any structure which is part of the “PD” District. Ten (10) copies of the concept plan shall be required to be submitted to the city at the time of application.

E. SITE PLAN

            (1) Approval Required

            In establishing a “PD” District, a comprehensive site plan of the development is required. However, this site plan requirement may be waived by the planning and zoning commission if they determine the proposed development does not significantly alter or impact the surrounding development. Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the “PD” ordinance. The approval of the development site plan may also serve as preliminary plat approval, provided that all requirements of the city’s subdivision regulations are satisfied. Six (6) copies of the development site plan will be required to be submitted to the city prior to the approval of the PD ordinance.

            Upon approval of the development site plan and approval of the final plat, if required, application may be made for the permits necessary for construction. Subsequent to such approval, minor changes to the site plan may be authorized by the zoning administrator when such changes will not cause any of the following circumstances to occur:

                        (a) a change in the character of the development;

(b) an increase in the ratio of the gross floor area in structures to the area of any lot;

                        (c) an increase in the intensity of use;

(d) a reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings or setbacks;

                        (e) an increase in the problems of traffic circulation, safety and utilities;

                        (f) an increase in the external effects on adjacent property;

                        (g) an increase in ground coverage by structures;

                        (h) a reduction in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space; or

                        (i) a change in the locations, lighting or orientation of approved signs.

            (2) Compliance with Approvals of Site Plan

            The development site plan must comply with all provisions of the “PD” ordinance specifying development standards and substantially reflect the precepts and layout set forth in the concept plan. If, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission or the city council, a development site plan does not comply with the provisions of the “PD” ordinance and the concept plan, the planning and zoning commission or the city council may reject such site plan, in which case a new site plan may be resubmitted or application must be resubmitted to amend the “PD” ordinance. If a “PD” ordinance does not specify development standards or has not incorporated a concept plan, the development site plan approval must specify such standards. Development requirements on such site plan may be revised under the same review, notice and approval procedures as applied to the original approval of the site plan.

            (3) Site Plan Information

            (a) Every application for approval of a site plan under the terms of this section shall contain             sufficient information delineating:

the characteristics of the site, changes in those characteristics as may be proposed by the development,
how the development will relate to public services and facilities, and
what protection features are included to insure that the development will be compatible with existing and allowable development on adjacent property.
            (b) The site plan shall show at least the following items of information:

Site/Adjacent Property Information: The land area included within the site; the land area of all abutting sites and zoning classification; all public and private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the site and the abutting sites which are proposed to be continued, created. relocated and/or abandoned; and the north arrow, date and scale;
Building Layout: The location of each existing and each proposed structures on the site; the general category of use or uses to be contained therein; the number of stories, gross floor area and the location of entrances and exits to buildings; front, side and rear building setback lines; and elevation views or renderings indicating architectural design and building materials proposed; A table showing the type of units by size, number of bedrooms and number and type for all residential dwellings. including floor plans, will also be required;
Traffic Circulation and Parking: The location, dimensions and proposed construction of all streets, private drives, alleys, parking areas and drive approaches, as well as their alignment with existing thoroughfares; location and dimensions of sidewalks, off-street parking areas, fire lanes and loading zones;
Drainage and Utilities: Existing and proposed finished grade of the site shown to contour intervals not exceeding two (2) feet, proposed handling of on-site surface drainage, location of any floodway or flood-prone area as shown on current FIA mapping; existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer layout; and existing and proposed fire hydrants; and
Screening. Landscaping and Recreational Facilities: The location, height and building materials for any proposed or required walls or fences; height, location and type of any proposed berms or living screens; proposed landscaping plan; location and size of any proposed recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts and playgrounds.
SECTION 15. “FP” FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT

A. PURPOSE

To provide for the appropriate use of land which has a history of inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard and to promote the general welfare and to provide protection from flooding, the “FP” District is hereby established. This district may also be coextensive with or overlay any or all of the other zoning districts or portions thereof as provided for herein.

Where a tract of land or portion thereof is zoned for the uses of one of the other zoning districts and is also zoned “FP” District, the restrictions contained in the “FP” District shall take precedence over the other zoning districts and shall be the controlling regulations for that district or portion of that district.

B. PERMITTED USES

The following uses shall be permitted in the “FP” District:

Arboretum or Botanical Garden;
Agricultural activities, including the ordinary cultivation or grazing of land and legal and permitted types of animal husbandry;
Christmas Tree Sales;
Orchard;
Park, Playground or Golf Course;
Parking Facilities;
Freight or service buildings; and/or
Wildlife Sanctuary or Preserve.
Any use not expressly authorized and permitted herein is expressly prohibited in this district, unless otherwise allowed in conformance with Section 22 of this ordinance dealing with new and unlisted uses.

C. SPECIFIC USES WHICH MAY BE PERMITTED

The following uses may be allowed in an “FP” District only if expressly authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a conditional use permit and subject to the provisions of Section 17:

Carnival or Circus;
Excavation and Mining Operation;
Produce Market;
Stadium or Sports Arena;
Theater, drive in type;
Shooting Range;
Storage Facility or Warehouse;
Rodeo Arena;
Stable for Horses and Livestock;
Car Wash;
Granary or Gin;
Public Utilities, including Water Treatment Plant, Water Pump Station, Water Reservoir, Water Tower, Water Well, Sewage Treatment Plant, Sewage Lift Station, Septic Tank, Electrical Substation, Gas Odorizing Station and Gate Station provided precautions have been adequately taken to prevent the intrusion of flood waters and construction complies with applicable state and federal standards;
Radio and Television Transmitter or Satellite Dish;
Telephone Exchange; and/or
Recreational Vehicle Park.
D. AREA; YARD; HEIGHT; LOT COVERAGE; BUILDING SIZE

The requirements regulating the minimum lot size, minimum yard sizes (front. side and rear), maximum building height, maximum percent of lot coverage by buildings and the minimum size of buildings, as pertains to this district, shall conform with the provisions of the “Schedule of District Regulations” and any other applicable regulations as herein provided.

E. GENERAL REGULATIONS

No building or structure shall be erected in any “FP” District unless such building or structure has been constructed in accordance with the flood damage prevention regulations established in SEYMOUR Ordinances.

Owners of buildings in flood-prone areas are encouraged to participate in the flood insurance program made available by insurance companies with the support of the Federal Insurance Administration of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).

X	Designates use permitted in district
 	Designates use prohibited in district
S	Use permitted with specific use permit
F. CITY NOT LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES

The fact that land is, or is not, within a district having a floodplain designation, shall not be interpreted as assurance that such land or area is, or is not, subject to periodic flooding. The city shall not be held responsible for failure to designate any lands as flood-prone areas and shall not be responsible for any such damages caused by any such failure or action.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure in a floodplain designated area unless and until deed restrictions are executed in favor of the city reciting that the owner and his successors will indemnify and hold harmless the city from any damages caused by flooding.
SECTION 16 SCHEDULE OF USES AND OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS

A. SCHEDULE OF USES AND OFF-STREET PARKING ESTABLISHED

Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the following listed uses but no land shall hereinafter be used and no building or structure shall hereinafter be occupied. used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished, or converted which is arranged or designed to be used for other than those uses specified for the district in which it is located as set forth by the following schedule of uses:

NOTE:  Gross floor area is abbreviated as g.f.a.  Also, any numbers in parenthesis represents a footnote and all footnotes are found at the end of this schedule of uses.

Residential Use:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Single Family Dwelling	X	X	X	X	 	        (1)	       (1)	       (1)	2/dwelling unit
Two-Family Dwelling	 	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Three-Family Dwelling	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Four-Family Dwelling	 	 	 	X	 	X	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Apartment or Multi-Family Bldg.	 	 	 	X	 	X	 	 	2.5/dwelling unit
Manufactured Home	 	 	X	 	X	 	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Industrialized Housing	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Manufactured Home Park	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Townhouse	 	 	 	X	 	X	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Condominium	 	 	 	X	 	X	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Trailer Camp or Park	 	 	 	 	X	S	X	 	1/dwelling unit
Recreational Vehicle	 	 	 	 	X	S	X	 	1/dwelling unit
Boarding (Rooming) Lodging House	 X	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	1/dwelling room
Child Day Care Home	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	2/dwelling
Group Home	S	X	S	S	S	 	 	 	2/dwelling
Group Day Care Home	S	S	S	S	S	 	 	 	Specified by SUP
Halfway House	S	X	S	S	S	 	 	 	1/2 occupants
Guest House or Quarters	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	1/dwelling unit
Accessory Building	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	None
Tennis Court (private)	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	None
Swimming Pool (private)	X	X	X	X	 	X	 	 	None
Home Occupation	          (2)	        (2)	        (2)	          (2)	         (2)	 	 	 	None
Agriculture/Ranch Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Farm	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Farmer’s Market	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	2/stall
Granary or Gin	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	1/2000 site area
Orchard	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	1/employee
Produce Stand	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Ranch	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	2/dwelling unit
Rodeo Ground, Arena	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	Specified by SUP
Stable, Private	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	None
Stable, Public	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	1/2 stalls
Utility/Solid Waste Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Cable TV lines	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	None
Electric Substations	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	None
Gas Line (6? or larger)	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	None
Gas Regulating/Gate Station	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	None
Microwave Tower	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	None
Radio and Television Tower	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	None
Railroad Freight Terminal	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	1 per employee
Railroad Yard	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	1 per employee
Recycling Center	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	1 per employee
Refuse Transfer Station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	1 per employee
Sewer Lift Station	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	None
Telephone Exchange	S	X	S	S	X	X	X	X	None
Telephone Poles and Lines	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	None
Utility Mains and Lines	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	None
Wastewater Treatment Plant	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	2 minimum
Water Pump Station	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	None
Water Storage Tank	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	None
Water Treatment Plant	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	2 minimum
Water Well	S	S	S	X	S	S	S	S	None
Gov’t & Institutional Uses	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Athletic Field or Stadium	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	1/4 seats
Auditorium or Amphitheater	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/4 seats
Cemetery or Mausoleum	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	None
Church or Rectory	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	1/4 seats
College or University	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	X	1/3 students
Community Center	S	X	S	S	X	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Convalescent Center	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	 	1/3 beds
Fire Station	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	2/bay
Hospital	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	1/bed
Library	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Museum or Art Gallery	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Park or Playground	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	1/2000 site area
Police Station	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	X	2 visitor spaces
Post Office	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Prison or Penitentiary	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	1/6 cells
Sanitarium	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	1/6 beds
School (nursery or kindergarten)	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	X	1/10 children
School (trade or business)	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/3 students
School (elementary or middle)	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	1/15 students
School  (high school)	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	1/3 students
Government Office	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Swimming Pool (public)	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	10 minimum
Tennis Court (public)	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	2/court
Religious Camp	S	S	S	S	 	S	X	 	1/3 beds
Commercial Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Amusement Park	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/500 site area
Animal Shelter	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/500 g.f.a.
Antique Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Apparel or Clothing Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Appliance Repair Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Appliance Store (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Arcade	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Art Supply Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/300 g.f.a.
Athletic or Fitness Club	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Auction	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Audio Store (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Auto Inspection Station	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	2/service bay
Auto Paint & Body Shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Auto Rental	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1.25/rental car
Auto Repair Garage	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	3/service bay
Auto Sales Lot	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/1000 site area
Bakery (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	S	1/200 g.f.a.
Bank or Financial Institution	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/300 g.f.a.
Bed & Breakfast Accommodation	X	S	S	X	 	X	X	 	1/guest room
Barber or Beauty Shop	S	S	S	S	 	X	X	 	1/chair
Bicycle Sales & Repair	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/300 g.f.a.
Boat Sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Boat Storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/1000 site area
Book Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Bowling Alley	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	6/lane
Building Materials/Lumber Yard	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/500 g.f.a.
Bus Terminal	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Business Office	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Cabinet Shop	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Camera Store (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Commercial Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Car Wash	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/wash bay
Carnival or Circus	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	S	Specified by SUP
Carpet Store (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Cemetery Monument Sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Child Care Center or Facility	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/6 children
Christmas Tree Sales	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/1000 site area
Computer Store (retail/service)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Contractor Yard (outside storage)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/2000 site area
Dental Clinic or Office	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Department Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Electrical Sales & Service	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Electronics Store (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Employment Agency	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Farm Implement Sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Feed Store	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Feed Store with animal sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	1/400 g.f.a.
Fire Wood Sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/1000 site area
Florist Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/300 g.f.a.
Flea Market (inside)	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	1/200 g.f.a.
Flea Market (outside)	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	1/1000 site area
Fraternity/Sorority Lodge	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Furrier	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Furniture Store (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Game Hall	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/100 g.f.a.
Gift or Novelty Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Go-Cart Track	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/go-cart
Golf Course	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	2/green
Golf Course, miniature	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1.5/hole
Golf Driving Range	S	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	1/driving tee
Grocery Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Gun Shooting Range (indoor)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	1/500 g.f.a.
Gunsmith Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Hardware Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Heating/AC Sales & Service	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Heavy Equipment Sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/1000 site area
Hobby Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Hotel or Motel	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/guest room
Insurance Sales Office	S	S	S	S	S	X	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Jewelry Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Kennel	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Commercial Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Laboratory, Medical or Dental	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Laundry or Dry Cleaners	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Lawnmower Sales & Service	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Leather Goods Shop (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Lithographic Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Locksmith Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Meat Market	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Medical Clinic or Office	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/300 g.f.a.
Mini-warehouse	 	 	 	S	 	S	X	X	1/500 g.f.a.
Manufactured Home Sales Lot	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/1000 site area
Massage Establishment	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	1/200 g.f.a.
Mortuary or Funeral Home	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/3 sanctuary seats
Motorcycle Sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Movie Theater (drive-in)	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/employee
Movie Theater (indoor)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/3 seats
Musical Instrument Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Newspaper Office	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Newsstand	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Nightclub or Dance Hall	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/100 g.f.a.
Office Supply Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Optical Clinic or Office	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Optical Dispensary Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Paint Sales Store (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Pawnshop	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Pet Grooming Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Pet Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Pharmacy or Drug Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Photography Studio	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Picture Framing Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Plant Nursery	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Plumbing Sales & Service	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Pool or Billiard Hall	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/100 g.f.a.
Print Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Private Club (serving alcohol)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/100 g.f.a.
Professional Offices	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Racquetball Court	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	2/court
Real Estate or Leasing Office	          (3)	        (3)	        (3)	          (3)	         (3)	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Recording Studio	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/300 g.f.a.
Recreational Vehicle Storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Commercial Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Rental Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Restaurant or Café (inside)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/3 seats
Restaurant (drive-in)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/100 g.f.a.
Restaurant (kiosk)	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/100 g.f.a.
Second Hand Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Service Station	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	4 minimum
Sexually Oriented Business	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	Specified by SUP
Shoe or Boot Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Shopping Center or Mall	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Sign Shop	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Skating Rink	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Snow Cone Stand	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	2 minimum
Sporting Goods Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Tack Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Tailor or Seamstress Shop	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Tanning Salon	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	1/200 g.f.a.
Tattoo Shop	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	S	1/200 g.f.a.
Taxidermist	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Tire Sales & Repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Title and Abstract Office	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Tool & Equipment Rental	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Trailer Sales and Rental	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/1000 site area
Travel Agency	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Truck Rental	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	1/400 g.f.a.
Truck Repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Truck Sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	1/1000 site area
Truck Wash	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	2/wash bay
Upholstery Shop	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	1/400 g.f.a.
Veterinary Clinic	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/300 g.f.a.
Veterinary Hospital	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	1/300 g.f.a.
Video Store	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	1/200 g.f.a.
Washateria (self-service)	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	1/wash machine
Industrial Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Airport	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	Specified by SUP
Ammonia Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Apparel Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Appliance Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Artificial Limb Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Asphalt Batching Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Industrial Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Bakery, Commercial	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	See Sec. 13-E
Bleach Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Bookbinding & Publishing	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Bottling Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Box Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Brewery	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Brick or Tile Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Canning Operation	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Carpet Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Chemical Storage or Mfg.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Chlorine Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Cold Storage Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Concrete Batching Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Concrete Product Casting Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Contractor Yard (outside storage)	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	See Sec. 13-E
Creamery	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Creosote Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Distribution Center (small)	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	X	See Sec. 13-E
Distribution Center (large)	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Distillation Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Dyeing Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Electrical Components Mfg.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Electroplating	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Envelope Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Explosives Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Fertilizer Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Fiberglass Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Fireworks Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Food Processing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Foundry	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Freight Terminal, Motor	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Freight Terminal, Railroad	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Furniture Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Garment Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Glass Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Glue Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Granary or Gin	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Gypsum Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Heliport or Helistop	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	See Sec. 13-E
Ice Cream Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Industrial Uses:	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	MH	B-1	B-2	I	PARKING
Ice Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Incinerator	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	See Sec. 13-E
Insecticide Processing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Junkyard	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Laundry Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Light Fabrication Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Machine Shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Marble Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Mattress Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Meat Processing Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Metal Fabrication	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Metal Stamping and Extrusion	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Mining, Extraction Operation	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Monument Works	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Packaging Operation	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Paint Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Pallet Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Paper Mill	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Paper Products Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Pesticide Processing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Petroleum Products (wholesale)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Petroleum Refinery or Storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Planing Mill	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Plastic Product Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Pottery Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Poultry Processing Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Radio Transmitting Station	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Rendering Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Rock Crushing Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Salvage Yard	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Smelter Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Tanning Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Television Transmitting Station	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Temporary Construction Office	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	X	None
Textile Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	See Sec. 13-E
Tire Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Tire Recapping Plant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	See Sec. 13-E
Vehicle Conversion Facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	See Sec. 13-E
Warehouse	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Welding Shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	S	X	See Sec. 13-E
Notes to Schedule of Uses:

Allowed with mini-warehouse use only.
Home occupations are permitted when in accordance with Section 18 hereof. Home occupations not specifically permitted in Section 18 may be permitted only with a specific use permit.
Allowed for a period of one year or until the development is sold out, whichever is longer.
SECTION 17 SPECIFIC USE PERMITS

A. STANDARDS

No application for a specific use permit shall be granted by the City Council unless the Council finds all of the following conditions are present:

(1) That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use will not be materially detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals or general welfare;

(2) That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use;

(3) That the establishment of the use will not significantly impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;

(4) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided;

(5) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and

(6) That the use shall conform to all applicable area, yard, height, lot coverage, building size and exterior requirements and parking space regulations of the district in which it is located.

B. CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES

Prior to the granting of any specific use permit, the City Council may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Subsection A above. In all cases in which specific use permits are granted, the City Council shall require such evidence and written guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.

C. EFFECT OF DENIAL OF APPLICATION

No application for a specific use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the City Council shall be re-submitted for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of said denial.

SECTION 18. HOME OCCUPATIONS

The purpose of this section is to permit the conduct of home occupations which are not incompatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located. Such home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in the residential district and are subject to the requirements of that district in which the use is located, in addition to the following:

            (1) Only the person or persons residing in the dwelling shall be engaged in the home occupation;

            (2) The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit, garage, or accessory buildings. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment related to the operation of home occupation shall be visible outside any structure located on the premises;

            (3) Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the living area of the principal building, up to a maximum of 300 square feet, shall be devoted to the home occupation;

            (4) There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a dwelling or exterior evidence of the home occupation other than the one sign permitted advertising the home occupation;

            (5) No home occupation shall create smoke, fumes, glare, noise, dust. vibration, electrical interference or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the district;

            (6) No home occupation shall become a fire hazard;

            (7) The home occupation shall not create any significant increase in vehicular flow or parking and shall not create greater pedestrian traffic than normal for the residential district;

            (8) No home occupation shall cause a significant increase in the use of any utilities, or generate trash or refuse beyond the average of the residences in the neighborhood; and

            (9) No advertising sign may be placed on the premises.

The following are home occupations which are permitted to be conducted in a residential zone provided it is in accordance with this section or other city ordinance or state and federal law. The following uses listed automatically qualify as a home occupation: music instruction, handicraft, dressmaking, preserving, accountant, artist, author, business or management consultant, individual tutoring, millinery, child care of no more than six (6) children, and home-based computer service businesses.

A use considered not within the scope of these home occupation provisions shall be subject to the provisions of the commercial or industrial zones of this ordinance or require a specific use permit.

SECTION 19. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS

A. PURPOSE

To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, minimum off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions.

B. GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING

            (1) Off-street parking required by this zoning ordinance shall be on an all-weather surface and shall be connected by an all-weather surfaced driveway to an approved public or private street or alley. For new construction or development started after the effective date of this ordinance, an   all-weather surface shall be either asphalt or concrete pavement.  For existing development and new residential development located on one or more acres started after the effective date of this ordinance, an all-weather surface shall be either asphalt or concrete pavement, crushed rock, stone, gravel or other similar semipermeable surface.

            (2) No parking space shal1 be less than eighteen feet (18') in length (22' for parallel parking) and nine feet (9') in width. Exception: parking spaces may be reduced in length when a tire-stop curb is installed sixteen feet (16') from the maneuvering lane and a clear space of two feet (2') is provided for a vehicle overhang. The overhang is not permitted over public property or a setback in which parking is not permitted.

            (3) Required off-street parking for residential uses shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the principal use. Required off-street parking for non-residential uses shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the principal use; however, the city may permit either required or additional off-premise parking, as a special exception, under such regulations and conditions as            the City Council may deem advisable when the proposed parking facility is on a platted lot within three hundred feet (300') of the principal use property. In the case of churches, off-site parking may be permitted by the Council; provided, it is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the church building.

            The city council shall approve the location of entrances and exits to these parking facilities and may require screening devices along the parking facility boundaries.

            (4) In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional spaces shall be counted to the nearest whole space. Parking spaces located in buildings used for repair garages or car washes            shall not be counted as meeting the required minimum parking.

            (5) The floor area of structures devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the floor area for off-street parking requirements.

            (6) Where a lot or tract of land is used for a combination of uses, the off-street parking             requirements shall be the composite or sum of the requirements for each type of use and no off-            street parking space provided for one type use or building shall be included in calculation of the off-street parking requirements for any other use or building except as prescribed by this zoning       ordinance.

            (7) Head-in parking spaces so situated that the maneuvering of a vehicle in entering or leaving such spaces is done on a public street or within public right-of-way shall not be classified as off-          street parking in computing any parking requirements herein.

            The construction of head-in parking as described above shall be prohibited hereafter. All such head-in parking facilities in existence at the time of the enactment of this section are hereby declared to be a nonconforming use of land subject to the provisions of Section 23 of this ordinance.

            (8) No off-street parking facility shall be located, either in whole or in part, in a public street or sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right-of-way.

            (9) No off-street parking shall be located, either in whole or in part, within any fire lane required by the city or within aisles, driveways or maneuvering areas necessary to provide reasonable access to any parking space.

            (10) Tandem parking is prohibited, unless specifically authorized by variance granted by the City Council.

            (11) No required off-street parking facility shall be used for sales, non-vehicular storage, repair or service activities.

            (12) Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged as to be reflected away from property zoned or used for residential purposes.

            (13) For all multi-family and non-residential uses, parking spaces shall be striped or otherwise clearly designated on the parking facility surface, and shall not include any fire lane or other area necessary for aisles or maneuvering of vehicles.

C. PARKING IN YARDS PROHIBITED

No person shall park any vehicle or trailer in any front or side yard in any residential district except on an all-weather parking surface which is provided to accommodate off-street parking.

D. HANDICAPPED PARKING REOUIREMENTS

The owner of private property open to the public for public purposes shall designate specific parking spaces for the disabled in conformance with the rules promulgated by the State Purchasing and General Services Commission. All such spaces shall be striped and designated by signs located where it will not be obscured.

E. OFF-STREET LOADINGREQUIREMENTS

All commercial and industrial uses shall be provided with off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. Such off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public street or alley, private service drive, or may consist of a truck berth within the structure. No loading docks shall be constructed facing on any public street or highway unless said loading dock is at least seventy-five feet (75') inside the right-of-way line of the street or highway on which said loading dock fronts.

Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten by forty-five feet (10' x 45') and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:

Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure	Minimum Required Spaces or Berths
0 to 5,000	0
5,000 to 25,000	1
25,000 to 45,000	2
45,000 to 65,000	3
65,000 to 100,000	4
Each additional 50,000 or portion thereof	1
The existence of a twenty foot (20') alley adjacent to the property shall be construed as equivalent to one (1) berth. All off-street loading spaces shall have an all-weather surface of asphalt or concrete construction and shall be accessible by a street, driveway or alley.

F. COUNTING PARKING AND LOADING SPACE TWICE PROHIBITED

No part of any off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with these zoning regulations shall be included as a part of any off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.

SECTION 20 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS

A. SCREENING REOUIRED BETWEEN INCOMPATIBLE ZONING DISTRICTS

City Administrator will determine if screening must be erected, placed, grown and maintained along the common boundary line of incompatible zoning districts before any use is made of the property. This screening requirement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the less restrictive district, with the single family residential district (R-1, R-2 and Districts) being the most restrictive and the industrial district being the least restrictive district. This is illustrated by the following chart:

(Most Restrictive)                 (Least Restrictive)	“R-1”	Single Family Districts
“R-2”	Two Family Residential District
“R-3”	Single, two and Mobile Home District
“R-4”	Multi-Family Residential District
“M-H”	Mobile Home Residential District
“B-1”	Restricted Commercial District
“B-2”	General Commercial Districts
“I”	Industrial District
Such screening shall not be less than six feet (6') in height nor greater than eight feet (8') in height However, no fence, wall, or hedge on a corner lot shal1 have a height in conflict with the regulations governing visibility at intersections as prescribed in Section 5. C(6) of this ordinance.

B. PARKING LOTS, PLAYGROUNDS, BALLFIELDS, TENNIS COURTS AND SWIMMING POOLS    TO BE SCREENED

Any parking lot, playground, ballfield, tennis court, or swimming pool when adjacent to any residential use or district, may be required by the City Administrator or City Council to be suitably screened from view with screening shrubs. Such screening shall be at least two feet (2') in height.

C. GARBAGE, REFUSE AND TRASH COLLECTION/STORAGE AREAS TO BE SCREENED

Garbage, refuse, and trash collection/storage areas in any multi-family residential district, condominium or townhouse project, or non-residential district or use, shall be screened on at least three (3) sides to adequately screen such area from view of the surrounding area.

D. MAINTENANCE OF SCREENING DEVICES

All screening devices shall be perpetually maintained by the owner of the property.

Any structurally unsound screening device may be deemed a public nuisance by the city council and ordered to be repaired, replaced, or removed by the owner of the property in accordance with state law.

SECTION 21. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES

A. PURPOSE AND INTENT

It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market

B. LOCATION RESTRICTIONS

It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of a church, a public or private elementary or secondary school; any residentially zoned property; a public park; or another sexually oriented business. For the purposes of measuring distances, the measurement shall be in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park or residential district The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each sexually oriented business is located.

C. EXCEPTIONS

It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:

            (1) By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;

            (2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported by taxation; or

            (3) In a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and where no more than one nude model is on the premise at any one time.

SECTION 22. CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES

It is recognized that new types of land uses will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate in the city. In order to provide for such uses and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows:

            (1) The applicant shall refer the question of any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning             commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use may be placed. Such request shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage and amount or nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements,      the amount of noise, odor, fumes, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities and sanitation collection.

            (2) The planning and zoning commission shall then consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts, and after public hearing, determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted.

            (3) Following its decision, the planning and zoning commission shall submit its recommendation to the city council for final approval.

            (4) The same procedures should be followed as outlined in Section 25 pertaining to amendments,             including the public notice and hearing requirements, when considering any zoning classification request for a new or unlisted land use.

SECTION 23. NONCONFORMING USES

A. NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE DEFINED

When a use or structure does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the zoning district in which such use or structure is located and was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the adoption of any previous zoning ordinance and has been operating since without continuance, or when on the effective date of this ordinance, the use or structure was in existence and lawfully constructed. located and operating in accordance with the provisions of any previous zoning ordinance or which was a nonconforming use thereunder, and which use or structure does not now conform to the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which the use or structure is located, such use or structure shall be considered as a nonconforming use or structure.

B. BUILDING ON NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD

In any district in which residential, commercial or industrial buildings are permitted, buildings may be erected on any single lot of record or multiple lots, provided there is access to such buildings or houses from a street and it is in the same ownership as recorded on the effective date of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot or lots fail to meet the minimum requirements for area, width, or depth, for the district in which located; however, all other requirements shall still apply. Any construction on nonconforming lots of record shall be permitted only with approval of the board of adjustment.

C. EXPANSIONS OR ENLARGEMENTS PROHIBITED

Repairs and alterations may be made to a legal nonconforming building, provided that no structural alterations shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is changed to a conforming use. No nonconforming use or building may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract of land upon which such nonconforming use or structure is located after the passage of this ordinance except to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space facilities. However, the board of adjustment shall have the authority after a hearing to grant extension of a nonconforming building not to exceed 25% of the existing building area in case of hardship.

To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building for which a specific use permit has been properly secured from the city.

D. WHEN DISCONTINUED, CONFORMANCE REQUIRED

The lawful use of a building or land existing at the date of enactment of this ordinance, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued. However, if the nonconforming use of any land is discontinued for a period of sixty (60) consecutive calendar days, it shall not thereafter be resumed and any future use of such land shall be in conformity with this zoning ordinance. Upon evidence of hardship, the board of adjustment shall have the power to extend the time limits for the nonconforming use not to exceed six (6) months. If a nonconforming building or structure is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive calendar months, it shall not thereafter be resumed and any future use of such land shall be in conformity with this zoning ordinance.

E. CLASSIFICATION CHANGES

A nonconforming use or building changed to a conforming use or building may not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use or building. Also, whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure is changed to a use of a more restrictive classification, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted classification. For the purpose of this regulation, uses permitted in “R-1” Districts shall be deemed to be those in the most restrictive zoning classification while industrial districts shall be the least restrictive.

F. WHEN RESTORATION ALLOWED

A nonconforming building or structure destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, explosion or other casualty, or by the public enemy, to the extent where the cost of restoration would amount to less than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value may be restored. If the damage is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its value, application for restoration shall first be made to the board of adjustment to permit such restoration. The board may grant or deny such restoration only after public hearing and taking into consideration the property owner’s circumstances and the effect on the surrounding property. Homeowners, as shown by the city tax records on the effective date of this ordinance, shall be able to restore their property regardless of the extent of destruction, without making application to the board of adjustment. However, said restoration shall comply with all construction codes then in effect within the city and reconstruction must be started within six (6) months. The failure to start restoration or reconstruction within six (6) months shall forfeit the owner’s right to restore or reconstruct the same unless as a conforming building or structure.

SECTION 24. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION

A. MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT

There is hereby created in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, a City Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the City Council.

B. TERMS OF OFFICE

The terms of three (3) of the members shall expire on January 5th of each odd-numbered year and the terms of two (2) members shall expire on January 15th of each even-numbered year. The members of the Commission shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through five (5). The odd-numbered places shall expire in the odd-numbered years; the even-numbered places shall expire in the even-numbered years. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms, but no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two (2) years. Newly-appointed members shall be installed at the first regular Commission meeting after their appointment

C. OFFICERS

A Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected annually from among the Commissions’ membership at such other times as these offices may become vacant.  In the absence of both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, the Commission shall elect an Acting Chairman.

A Secretary shall be appointed from the members of the Commission or from staff personnel assigned by the City’s Chief Executive Officer to serve the Commission.

D. DUTIES

            (1) The Commission shall advise the City Council on those matters falling within its charged responsibilities in a manner reflecting concern for the overall development and environment of the city as a setting for human activities.

            (2) The members of the Commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Commission and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.

            (3) The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice-Chairman, shall preside at all meetings, shall decide             all points of order or procedure. All letters of transmittal from the Commission to the City Council shall be over the signature of the Chairman.

            (4) The Secretary shall be custodian of the minutes and other official records, shall attend to the correspondence of the Commission, and shall cause to be given such notices as are required and in the manner prescribed by law.

E. QUORUM

A quorum for the conduct of business shall be a majority of the members of the Commission.

F. MEETINGS

The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet at such times in the City Hall as may be designated by the Chairman or Vice Chairman in the absence of the Chairman, and at such regular intervals as may be necessary to orderly and properly transact the business of the Commission.

G. DUTIES AND ZONING RESPONSIBILITIES

The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be an advisory body to the City Council, and shall make recommendations regarding changes of zoning and permanent zoning to be given to newly annexed areas, and shall make recommendations regarding specific use permits and the approval of the plats of subdivisions as maybe submitted to it. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity on any planning related item(s) in the City.

H. PROCEDURE ON ZONING HEARINGS

The procedure and process for zoning changes and/or amendments shall be in accordance with Section 26.

SECTION 25. AMENDMENTS

A. GENERAL

The zoning regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. Such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repeal shall be deemed to amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the comprehensive plan of the city and shall become a part of such comprehensive plan.

An amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by a written request of the owner or his or her agent, the zoning administrator, the planning and zoning commission, or the city council on its own motion when it finds that the public may benefit from the consideration of such matter.

B. PROCEDURE

All requests for amendments to zoning district boundaries shall be submitted, together with required fees to the zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official, whom shall cause notices to be sent and the petition placed on the planning and zoning commission agenda. Requests for changes in zoning districts shall include the proposed designation or designations for the area concerned. Alternative proposals may be made at the time of filing the original request for amendment, however all hearings and deliberations shall be limited to the request as submitted by the applicant at the time of original filing.

C. POSTING SIGN

The zoning administrator, or his or her designated administrative official, shall have at least one (1) sign erected on the property to be rezoned which sign shall have a total area of at least four (4) square feet. This sign shall, if possible, be located adjacent to a street and in a conspicuous place. The sign shall be erected on or before the first date of the first notice to property owners and shall be removed immediately after final action by the city council or when the applicant withdraws the request, whichever comes first. The sign shall state that a zoning change has been requested on that particular property and the telephone number of the city offices from where dates of public hearings and more information about the zoning request may be obtained. The erection or continued maintenance of signs shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the granting of any zoning change or holding of any public hearing.

D. HEARINGS AND NOTICES

The city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein established after receiving a report thereon from the planning and zoning commission. A public hearing on such amendment, supplement, or change shall be held by both the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Notice of bearings shall be given by publication one (1) time in the official newspaper of the city, stating the time and place of such hearings, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. Publication of such change shall be accomplished by publishing a descriptive caption of the proposed change.

Written notice of all public bearings on proposed changes in district boundaries shall be sent to all owners of property, or to the person rendering the same for city taxes, located within the area of application and within two hundred feet (200’) of any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notices may be served by using the last known address as listed on the latest approved city tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail.

E. FAILURE TO APPEAR

Failure of the applicant or his representative to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission for more than one hearing without an approved delay shall constitute sufficient grounds for the Planning and Zoning Commission to terminate the application.

F. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION AND REPORT

The planning and zoning commission, after conducting a hearing on a zoning request, shall report its recommendations on the zoning request to the city council for their consideration. The planning and zoning commission may recommend favorable approval of the request or that the request be denied, with or without prejudice. Every proposal which is recommended favorably or unfavorably by the planning and zoning commission shall automatically be forwarded to the city council for public hearing and consideration. When the planning and zoning commission determines that the proposal should be denied. It shall report the same to the city council and the applicant. A hearing before the city council shall be set on an application recommended for denial only when an appeal is filed by the applicant with the zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official provided the appeal is requested within fifteen (15) days of the planning and zoning commission’s decision.

G. APPLICATIQN NOT TO BE CONSIDERED FOR (180) DAYS AFTER DENIAL OF REQUEST FOR REZONING

No application for rezoning shall be considered within one-hundred-and-eighty (180) days of denial of a request by city council for the same classification on the same property.

H. PROTEST AGAINST CHANGE

In case of a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the land included in such proposed change, or of the land within two hundred (200) feet thereof, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-quarter (3/4ths) of all the members of the city council present and qualified to vote.

I. ACTION ON APPLICATION

The proponent of any zoning change shall satisfy the city council that either the general welfare of all the city affected by the area to be changed will be enhanced, or that the property is unusable for the purposes allowed under existing zoning. If such is proved to the council’s satisfaction, it may grant the requested zoning change; or it may change the zone’s designation of a portion of such property; or it may initiate a request to consider changing all or a portion of such property to a district other than that requested and of a different character.

J. SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED; PETITION FOR ZONING DISTRICT CHANGE OR SPECIFIC USE PERMIT

When, in the opinion of the zoning administrator or his or her designated administrative official, the planning and zoning commission, the city council, or the board of adjustment, greater information is required from the applicant concerning the nature, extent and impact of his or her request than supplied with his or her application for a change in zoning, variance, or specific use permit, in order to properly review and evaluate all relevant factors thereof, the planning and zoning commission, city council, or the board of adjustment may require the applicant to submit a site plan and/or supporting documents conforming with all or a portion of the requirements set forth in this section, prior to rendering a decision thereon.

The applicant is encouraged to meet with the zoning administrator or his or her designated official in an informal work session to ascertain the exact extent of plans and documents required, if any, prior to the city initiating the advertisement for public hearing on the petition.

The general type and extent of plans and supporting documents which may be required of the petitioner include, but are not necessarily limited to:

            (1) Site Plan

            Meeting all of the requirements of a “preliminary plat,” as described in the city’s subdivision regulations, except that topographic and drainage map information provisions may be waived by the reviewing body when the inclusion of such data would not materially contribute to the necessary evaluation of the project’s petition. Additional site plan drawing information which the reviewing body may require include:

                        (a) Existing and proposed zoning district;

                        (b) A tabular summary schedule indicating:

(1) The gross acreage and percent of each type of zoning category proposed;

(2) The gross acreage and percent of each type of land use proposed, with streets and open space categories listed separately, and residential uses further stratified as to type, i.e., single family, two-family, multi-family, townhouse, etc., including the total gross project acreage;

(3) The gross residential density of each type of residential land use proposed, expressed in dwelling units per acre; and based on net residential land use plus one-half (1/2)of any abutting street only;

(4) The quantitative number of dwelling units proposed for each residential dwelling type. i.e., single family, two-family, etc.; and

(5) Proposed maximum lot coverage by building and land use types, i.e., “R-l,”R-2,” “R-3,” ”R-4,” “MH,” “B-1,” “B-2,” and “I” expressed in terms of percent or floor area ratio of the lot or site;

                        (c) General outline of extensive tree cover areas;

                        (d) Drainageways and l00-year flood plain limits;

(e) Proposed treatment for screening the perimeter of the land embraced by the petition, including screening of internal separations of land use, where required;

(f) Proposed internal non-vehicular circulation linkages, such as: pedestrian paths and hike trails; bike trails; and equestrian bridle paths, where applicable, including their interrelationships with vehicular circulation systems and proposed handling of points of conflict; and

            (2) Architectural Drawings

            Elevations, concept sketches, or renderings depicting building types and other significant             proposed improvements, including the treatment and use of open spaces, etc., where the             submission of such drawings would more ‘clearly portray the nature and character of the             applicant’s land use and development proposals; and

            (3) Written Documents

            In narrative form on 8-1/2? x 11? sheets, including:

(a) Statement(s) on planning objectives to be achieved in use/development proposal, including a narrative description of the character of the proposed development and rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant, including use and ownership of open spaces, etc.;

                        (b) Legal description of the total site area proposed for rezoning, development, or conditional use permit;

(c) A development schedule indicating the approximate date(s) when construction of the proposed development, and subsequent stages or phases thereof, if any, can be expected to begin and be completed, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge and belief;

                        (d) A statement as to the present and proposed ownership of the site or parcels thereof embraced by the application;

(e) Economic feasibility and/or market analysis studies, when deemed necessary by the reviewing body to adequately assess the necessity for zoning certain parcels to the sizes indicated by the applicant, or to evaluate the need for granting a conditional use permit;

                        (f) Environmental assessment statement, prepared pursuant to the National                      Environmental Policy Act of 1969, and any subsequent amendments thereto, when                      deemed necessary by the reviewing body to properly assess the impact of the proposed                         development/land use on the existing environment;

(g) Statement(s) as to how and when the applicant proposes to provide water and sewer to the development; and

(h) Signature, title and date of the applicant, at the conclusion of the written documents certifying the information presented in the plans and supporting documents reflecting a reasonably accurate portrayal of the general nature and character of the proposals.

SECTION 26. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT

A. ORGANIZATION OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT

            (1) There is hereby created a board of adjustment which shall consist of five (5) members who are residents of the city, each to be appointed by the city council for a staggered term of two (2) years and removable for cause by the city council. The city council shall designate one (1) member as chairperson. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made.            Provided, however, that the city council may appoint up to four (4) alternate members of the board who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the chairperson of the board, the zoning administrator or the mayor. All cases to be heard by the board will always be heard by a minimum of four (4) members. Alternate members shall serve a term of two (2) years and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner. Alternate members are subject to removal the same as the regular members.

            (2) The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this ordinance or state law. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine, and in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Law. The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the vice-chairperson or acting chairperson, may administer oath and compel the attendance of witnesses.

            (3) The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be a public record.

B. APPEALS TO THE BOARD

            (1) Appeals to the board can be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the zoning             administrator or his or her designated administrative officer, or by any officer or department of     the city. Such appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered by the zoning administrator or administrative officer by filing with the city secretary and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative officer or department from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the records upon which the action appealed from was taken.

            (2) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator or designated administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reasons of facts stated in the certification, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.

            (3) No appeal to the board for a variance on the same piece of property shall be allowed prior to  the expiration of one hundred eighty (180) days from a previous ruling of the board on any appeal to such body unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the said one hundred eighty (180) day period, been changed or acted on by the board or city council so as to alter the facts and conditions on which the previous board action was based. Such change of circumstances shall permit the re-hearing of an appeal by the board, prior to the expiration of one hundred eighty (180) day period, but such conditions shall in no way have any force in law to compel the board, after a hearing, to grant a subsequent appeal. Such subsequent appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and the peculiar and conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.

(4) At a public hearing relative to any appeal, any interested party may appear in person or by his or her agent or attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable action of the board on any appeal or variance request. Any variance granted or authorized by the board under the provisions of this ordinance shall authorize the issuance of a Specific Use Permit as the case may be,   for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of the favorable action of the board unless said board shall have in its action approved a longer period of time and has so shown such specific longer period in the minutes of its action. If the Specific Use Permit shall not have been applied for within said ninety (90) day period or such extended period as the board may have specifically granted, then the variance shall be deemed to have been waived and all rights thereunder terminated. Such termination and waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal and such subsequent appeal shall be subject to the same regulation and requirement for hearing as herein specified for the original appeal.


C. ACTIONS OF THE BOARD

(1) In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Texas, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator or other administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The board shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant

(2) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator or other administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application for a specific use permit on any appearance or any variance.

D. NOTICE OF HEARING BEFORE BOARD REQUIRED

The board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals requests, variance requests made to it and written notice of such public hearings shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who are owners of real property lying within two hundred feet (200') of the property on which the appeal is made. Such notice shall be given no less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same properly addressed and postage paid in the United States Post Office.   Notice shall also be given by publishing the same in the official publication of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing.

Additionally, the zoning administrator should erect a sign on the property of which a variance has been requested. The sign shall be erected adjacent to a street if possible and in a conspicuous place. The sign should have an area of four (4) or more square feet. The sign should state that a request for a variance has been made on that particular property and the telephone number of the city offices from where dates of public hearings and more information about the zoning request may be obtained. The sign should be erected prior to the hearing as early as possible and convenient. The erection and continued maintenance of this sign, however, shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the granting of any zoning variance, or the holding of any public hearing.

E. JURISDICTION OF THE BOARD

When, in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the board may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following variances to the regulations herein established and take action relative to the continuance and discontinuance of a nonconforming use:

            (1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or other administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance;

            (2) Interpret the intent of the zoning district map where uncertainty exists because the physical features on the ground vary from those on the zoning district map and none of the rules set forth in Section 4.C apply;

            (3) Initiate on its motion or cause presented by interested property owner’s action to bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming use;

            (4) Require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under any plan whereby full value of the structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of           this ordinance;

            (5) Permit the change of occupancy of a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use in             accordance with the provisions of Section 23;

            6) Permit the enlargement of a nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions of Section 23;

            (7) Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or building on the lot or tract occupied by such building, provided such reconstruction does not, in the judgment of the board, prevent the return of such property to a conforming use or increase the nonconformity of a nonconforming structure beyond what is permitted by Section 23;

            (8) Require the vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure which is deemed to be obsolete, dilapidated or substandard; and

            (9) Permit such variance such as the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width, lot depth, coverage, minimum setback standards, off-street parking, off-street loading regulations, lot area, maximum height, or building, where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship, or where such variance is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land which differs from other parcels of land in the same district by being of such area, shape or slope that it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the development permitted upon other parcels of land in the same district.

F. APPEALS OF BOARD ACTION

Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, any taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the municipality may present to a court of record (district court) a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the decision of the board and not thereafter.

SECTION 27. DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, certain terms and words are defined and shall have the meanings ascribed in this ordinance unless it is apparent from the context that different meanings are intended.

Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word “building” includes the word “structure,” except as otherwise specified. The term “use” means “used or intended to be used for, or arranged or designed for use.” The word “shall” is mandatory not directory; the word “may” is permissive. The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or corporation as well as an individual. The word “including” means “including, but not limited to.”

Abut-Abuting – Having lot lines or boundary lines in common.

Accessory Building – A subordinate building which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot. Accessory buildings in residential districts shall be limited to: attached or detached garages, carport, servant’s quarters, storage building, bath house, greenhouse, bomb or fall-out shelter.

Accessory Use -A subordinate use which is incidental to the main or primary use.

Adult Arcade – Any place which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, token-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Bookstore – A commercial establishment which as one its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Cabaret – A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features

persons who appear in a state of nudity or give live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an emphasis on specified sexual activities.

Adult Motel – A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

            (1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign     visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or

            (2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or

            (3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.

Adult Movie Theater – A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides or other visual representations are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Video Store – A commercial establishment which as one its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Alley – A way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.

Amusement Park – Any building, lot, tract, or parcel of land used in whole or part for the operation and maintenance of a circus, carnival, miniature golf course, golf driving range, batting cages, skating rinks, go-kart racing tracks and/or minstrel shows.

Animal Hospital or Clinic – A facility operated by a veterinarian for the purpose of examining and treating animalsincluding outdoor facilities for caring for the animals and allowing the keeping of animals overnight.

Animal Shelter – A facility that keeps impounded stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals.

Apartment – A room or suite of rooms in an apartment building intended, designed, or occupied as a home or residence by a single family, individual, or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.

Apartment (Multi-Family) Building – Any building which is intended, designed, or occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.

Arcade – A public place of business where 50% or more of the gross sales are derived from amusement machines. The term amusement machine shall mean every machine of any kind of character whatsoever, when such a machine is capable of use or operations for amusement, other than for the purpose of vending merchandise, music, or a service such as telephone service, laundry service, etc. Included in the description of amusement machines are video games, pinball machines, miniature sports machines, and all other machines which designed for challenge, entertainment, or pleasure.

Asphalt, Concrete Batching Plant – A facility, permanent or temporary, which mixes asphalt or cement with various aggregates and water in large quantities for transport elsewhere.

Attached – Having one or more walls common with a main use building, or joined to main use building by a covered porch or passageway, the roof of which is a part or extension of a main use building.

Automobile/Motor Vehicles – A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, trucks (1-ton G.V.W. or less), buses, motor scooters, motorcycles, and recreational vehicles.

Automobile Service Station – Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline, oil or other fuels, and automobile accessories, and which may include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, mechanical repair, and other normal servicing of automobiles. Painting is not considered within the scope of “other normal servicing.”

Automobile Salvage or Wrecking Yard – An area outside of a building where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or “wrecked,” or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored.

Auto Repair Shop – A building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junkyards.

Auto Sales Lot – An open area or lot used for the display or sale of automobiles, where no repair work is done except minor reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises, and no dismantling of cars for sale or keeping of used car parts or junk on the premises.

Bakery, Retail – An establishment which produces bakery goods and various confectionery items, such as rolls, bread, etc. for direct sale to the consumer.

Basement – Means a story below the first story of a building.

Block – That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other barrier to or gap in the continuity of development along such street.

Boarding (Rooming) House – A dwelling wherein lodging or meals for three (3) or more persons, not members of the principal family therein, is provided for compensation, but not including a building in which ten (10) or more guest rooms are provided.

Buffer Area – An area of land together with specified planting and/or structures thereon, which may be required between land uses of different intensities to eliminate or minimize conflicts between such uses.


Building – Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated will be deemed a separate structure.

Building Area – Means the portion of the lot remaining after the required yards have been provided.

Building Line – A line established in general, parallel to the front street line. No building or structure may be permitted in the area between the building line and the street right-of-way line.

Building Materials and Lumber Yard – A business which stocks building materials, such as fencing, wire, bricks, cement, and lumber, for use in building construction and landscaping.

Main Use Building – A building in which the primary activity associated with the lot is conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling will be a primary building.
Accessory Building -A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary building located on the same lot.
Building Site – A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure.
Building Coverage – The percent of the lot area covered by the building exclusive of all overhanging roofs.

Business – Includes retail, commercial, personal services, excavation, manufacturing and industrial operations and uses.

Business Office – A room or group of rooms where the general administration and affairs of a business, etc., are carried on, but where no actual transactions are conducted.

Cabinet Shop – A building and/or premises used for the design and construction of cabinets, shelves and similar structures for subsequent sales, installation and use in homes, businesses and offices.

Carport – A permanent roofed structure open on at least two sides. designed for the parking and shelter of private passenger vehicles.

Car Wash – A building, or portion thereof, where automobiles or other motor vehicles are automatically or manually washed regularly as a business.

Cellar – A building story with more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.

Cemetery – Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead humans, including crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries.

Child Care Center or Facility – A facility that provides care or supervision for children who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility for less than 24 hours a day for more than twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14), whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers.

Child Care Institutions Providing Basic Child Care – An institution providing basic child care is a child care facility which provides care for more than 12 children for more than a 24-hour period. Basic child care does not include a 24-hour a day specialized program such as that offered by an emergency shelter, therapeutic camp, residential treatment center, half-way house, or institution serving mentally retarded children.

Child Day Care Home – A facility, sometimes referred to as a “Registered Family Home,” that regularly provides care in the caretaker’s own residence for not more than six (6) children under the age of fourteen (14) years of age, excluding the caretaker’s own children. When more than six (6) children are kept in the home, it shall be considered as either a “Group Day Care Home” or “Child Care Center.”

Church or Rectory – A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions including the on-site housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, and nuns.

Clinic -A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, opticians or dentists to treat patients who do not remain overnight.

Community Center – A building used primarily for the social or recreational activities serving the city, neighborhood, or apartment complex.

Conditional Use – A use allowed in a zoning district only if a special use permit is granted by the City Council.

Condominium – See “Townhouse.”

Contractor Yard – A building and/or premises for the storage of materials, tools, products and vehicles used in the conduct of a construction business related to beating and air conditioning service, building construction, electrical service, landscaping service, plumbing service, utility service, etc.

Convalescent Center – Any building or structure used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from illness or suffering from infirmities of age.

Country Club (Private) – An area of land containing either a golf course or tennis courts, or both, and a clubhouse and which is available to members only. Country clubs may contain adjunct facilities such as private club, dining room, swimming pool, and other similar recreational or service facilities.

Courtyard – An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building and bounded on three (3) or more sides by such building; or the open space provided for access to a dwelling group.

Detached – Fully separated from any other building, or joined to another building by structural members not constituting an enclosed or covered space.

Display – The exhibition of vehicles, trailers, boats, goods, wares, or merchandise for sale, rental or lease.

District – A section or sections of the City of SEYMOUR, Texas, for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform.

Distribution Center, Large – A building or group of buildings with cumulative storage space of over 5,000 square feet in area which is used for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares which are intended to be distributed to other retail or wholesale establishments.

Distribution Center, Small – A building or group of buildings with cumulative storage space not to exceed 5,000 square feet in area which is used for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares which are intended to be distributed to other retail or wholesale establishments.

Double Frontage – A lot with double frontage is a lot having lot lines formed by the intersection of two streets, whether public or private, and where the interior angle of such intersection is less than 135 degrees. A lot fronting on a curved street shall also be considered a corner lot if the central angle of the curve is less than 135degrees.


Drive-In Restaurant – Any establishment where food, and/or non-alcoholic beverage is sold to the consumer and where motor vehicle parking space is provided and where patrons may be served in their respective vehicles or inside the establishment

Dry Cleaning or Laundry – Any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance(s).

Dwelling or Dwelling Unit – A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping.

Dwelling, Single Family – A detached building which is designed for or occupied as a home or residence by not more than one (1) family.

Dwelling, Two-Family – A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units, commonly referred to as a duplex, and which is designed for or occupied as a home or residence by not more than two (2) families.

Dwelling, Multi-Family – A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units which is designed for or occupied as a home or residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.

Dwelling, Townhouse or Rowhouse – Three or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of which has a separate outdoor entrance and is designed to be occupied and may be owned by one family.

Electrical Sales & Service – An establishment selling electrical supplies and parts and/or providing the servicing and installation of electrical equipment and fixtures.

Easement – A right given by the owner of a parcel of land to another person, public agency or private corporation for a specific and limited use of that parcel.

Family – One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than five (5) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, but not including a group occupying a hotel, motel, boarding house, club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.

Farm -An area of two (2) acres or more which is used for the growing of farm products such as vegetables and grain as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, dairy cattle, sheep, and swine.

Feed Store – A commercial establishment which sells animal feed; feeding troughs; animal cages, pens, and gates; fencing materials; pesticides; seeds; and other gardening fanning, and ranching supplies. The sale of baby chicks, rabbits, guinea pigs, and other similar small or domesticated animals may be permitted only with a specific use permit and in accordance with all ordinances.

Fence – See Screening (Device) hereafter.

Filling Station or Service Station – Refer to Automobile Service Station.

Fine Arts – Music, painting, sculpture, and including drawing, etchings, ceramics, inlays, needlework, knitting, weaving, and craftwork involving leather, wood, metal and glass.

Flea Market – A collection of two or more stalls, booths, tables or other similar arrangements, used by individual vendors, for the display and sale of various items of new or used personal property.

Flood Plain – The area outside of the floodway which may be inundated with flood water with an average frequency of occurrence in the order of once in one hundred years, normally referred to as the intermediate regional flood by the U.S. Corps of Engineers.

Floodway – The channel of a stream and those portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel that are required to carry and discharge flood waters.

Floor Area – The area of a building, including the walls thereof, but excluding all porches, open breezeways and garages.

Foster Group Home – The foster group home is a child care facility which provides care for 7-12 children for 24- hours a day.

Freight Terminal, Motor – A property or building in which freight is brought by common carriers during and is stored for interstate or intrastate shipment by motor truck, including the necessary warehouse space for storage of transitory freight

Frontage – All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.

Game Hall – A facility open to the public and used primarily for the playing of games of chance, skill, sport or amusement. Such games include but are not limited to the following: dominoes, cards, bingo, billiards, darts, and amusement machines.

Garage Apartment – A dwelling unit for one family attached to a private garage.

Garage, Auto Repair – A building or portion of a building used for the general repair and/or painting of motor vehicles.

Garage, Parking – A building or portion of a building used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles, other than a private garage or a auto repair garage, in which any sale of gasoline, oil, and accessories is only incidental to the storage of the vehicles.

Garage, Private – An accessory building or portion of a main building on the same lot and intended to be used for the parking and storage of private passenger motor vehicles, boats, or other vehicles.

Garage Sale – Shall mean occasional sales at retail by residential owners or occupants conducted in the garage, patio, driveway or yard of the residential premises occupied by the person bolding the sale, for the purpose of disposing surplus personal property accumulated incidentally in the regular course of residential occupancy.

Government Office – Any building or facility either owned or leased for use by local, state or federal governments and in which the affairs of the governmental body are carried on.

Grade – When used as a reference point in measuring height of building the “grade” shall be the average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the main building.

Gross Floor Area – The total area of all floors as measured to the outside walls, excluding open porches, breezeways, balconies, and terraces. In computing the gross floor area of residential uses. garages and carports shall be excluded.

Group Day Care Home – A facility that regularly provides care in the caretaker’s own residence for seven (7) to twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14) years of age, excluding the caretaker’s own children.

Group Home – A residential facility licensed by the Texas Department of Human Resources to house up to six (6) handicapped and/or mentally retarded persons and two (2) supervisors.

Halfway House – A residential facility providing shelter, supervision and residential rehabilitative services for persons who have been inmates of any county, state or federal correctional institution and released and require a group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.

Heating/Air Conditioning (AC) Sales & Service – An establishment selling heating and air conditioning units, supplies and parts and/or providing the servicing and installation of heating and air conditioning equipment.

Heavy Equipment Sales – A business offering for sale, and including the servicing and repair of, equipment as construction graders, earth movers, backhoes, cement mixer trucks, dirt moving trucks, etc.

Height (ofBuilding) – The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the highest ridge board, for gable, hip and gambrel roof.

Historic District – A geographically defined area which possesses significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, structures, sites, areas, or land, which in turn are united by architectural, historical, archaeological, or cultural importance or significance and which the City Council determines shall be protected, enhanced and preserved.

Historic Landmark – Any building, structure, site, district, area, or land of architectural, historical, archaeological, or cultural importance or significance, which the City Council determines shall be protected, enhanced, and preserved.

Hobby – The engagement of a person in an activity such as music, painting, sculpturing, drawing, etching, ceramics, needlework, knitting, weaving, craftwork involving leather, wood, metal and glass, etc. in his or her spare-time activity within his or her premises. No person shall be engaged in a hobby as a business. Such activity shall be carried on within an enclosed or screened area and shall not involve any activity that requires open storage. No activity which is obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, electrical interference, glare, noise, odor, dust, smoke or fumes shall be permitted.

Home Occupation – Any occupation or activity listed in Section 18, “Home Occupation,” of this ordinance which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises and which is carried on wholly within a main building or accessory building by a member of a family residing on the premises and which does not change the character thereof. However, such use will not be obnoxious or offensive due to vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, noise or which increases traffic.

Hospital – An institution or place where sick or injured patients are kept overnight and given medical or surgical care.

Hotel or Motel – A building or arrangement of buildings designed for and occupied as a temporary abiding place by transient guest who are lodged with or without meals for compensation.

House Trailer – Shall mean a vehicle without automotive power designed for human habitation and for carrying persons and property upon its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.

Industrial Park – Shall mean a parcel of land which has been planned and/or coordinated for a variety of industrial and related activities and business uses. This development may be on a one parcel or may be subdivided. The project is either owned, controlled or managed by a single entity and has its own master plan and/or covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

Industrialized Housing – A residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of one or more families, that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent residential site, and that is designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the modules or modular components are transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include any residential structure that is in excess of two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35’) in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof. The term shall not mean nor apply to (a) housing constructed of sectional or panelized systems not utilizing modular components; or (b) any ready-built home which is constructed so that the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another location.

Industrialized Building – A commercial or industrial structure that is constructed on one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site, and that is designed to be used as a commercial building when the modules or modular components are transported to the permanent commercial or industrial site and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include any commercial structure that is in excess of two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance.

Junk – Means copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper, rubber, tires, pipe, plastic, debris, trash, rubbish, waste, metal, and ferrous or non-ferrous materials which are old, scrapped, discarded, second-hand, or otherwise used.

Junkyard – Means any lot or tract of land upon which junk is kept, stored, bought, sold, recycled, or otherwise placed.

Kindergarten or Nursery School – Any facility, whether known or incorporated under such descriptive title or name as “Child Play School,” “Child Development Center,” “Early Childhood Center,” and the like, where six (6) or more children are left for care, training, or education during the day or portion of the day and a fee is charged for this service.

Kennel – Any place or premise where four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals at least four (4) months of age are raised, trained, boarded, or kept with or without charge, except for veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, and animal shelters.

Landscaping – Shall mean living plant material, including but not limited to grass, turf, trees, shrubs, natural land forms, water forms, planters; and other landscape features, including walks and plaza areas consisting of enhanced paving, which are a function of the building and not the streetscape.

Laundry – A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried and pressed by the use of washing, drying, and ironing machines for fee basis and shall include the term “cleaners,” and “dry cleaners.”

Leather Goods, Retail – A commercial establishment which sells leather materials and supplies or leather goods.

Living Area – Shall include that portion of the dwelling unit which is used or designed for occupancy but does not include carports, garages, and open porches, breezeways, balconies, and terraces.

Loading Space – A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by thirty-five (35) feet and a vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet.

Lodging House/Rooming House – A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is equipped to provide lodging regularly) by pre-arrangement for definite periods, for compensation, for three (3) or more persons in contradistinction to hotels open to transients.

Lot – A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a main building and its accessory buildings, or by a group of buildings and their accessory buildings, and having frontage on a dedicated street.

Lot Corner – A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting streets.

Lot Coverage – The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the first story or ground floor of all buildings located on the lot.


Lot Depth – The average depth from the front line of the lot to the rear line of the lot.

Lot, Interior – A lot other than a corner lot.

Lot of Record – A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk, or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to passage of this ordinance.

Lot Width – The width measured at a distance back from the front line equal to the minimum depth required for a front yard.

Main Building – A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.

Manufactured Home – A structure that was constructed within 5 years of the current date and is transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet (8') or more in width or forty body feet (40’) or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems.

Manufactured Home Park – A parcel of land which is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation, and has been developed for rental of lots to tenants with mobile homes.

Manufactured Home Lot – That part of a parcel of land in a manufactured home park which has been reserved for the placement of one (1) manufactured home unit.

Masonry or Masonry Units – Shall mean that form of solid construction composed of stone, brick, concrete, gypsum, hollow clay tile or other similar building units or materials or combination of these materials which must be laid up unit by unit and set in mortar.

Massage Establishment – Any building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or a doctor whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not include duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops or a place wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician’s direction.

Mini-Warehouse – A building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound that contains individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers of varying sizes not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares.

Motel – See “Hotel.”

Motor Vehicle – Shall mean every kind of motor driven or propelled vehicle whether required or not required to be registered or licensed under the laws of the State of Texas, including trailers, house trailers, and semi-trailers, and shall also include motorcycles, dirt bikes, or other off-road/all-terrain vehicles.

Neighborhood Convenience Center – Centers which carry convenience goods, such as groceries, drugs, hardware and some variety items, and also may include some service stores. The neighborhood convenience center may contain one (1) or two (2) small apparel or shoe stores, but it is clearly dominated by convenience goods, which are items of daily consumption and very frequent purchase, sometimes called “spot necessity” items. This neighborhood serving store group is within convenient walking distance of families served (within convenient driving range in low-density areas), with due consideration for pedestrian access and amenity of surrounding areas.

Nightclub or Dance Hall – An establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by any of the following as a principal use of the establishment:

            (a) Live, recorded or televised entertainment, including but not limited to performances by             magicians, musicians or comedians;

            (b) Dancing;

            (c) Any combination of (a) and (b) above.

Nonconformance – A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. This may include but is not limited to failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage or off-street parking requirements.

Nonconforming Use – The use of a building or land that does not conform to these zoning regulations and which lawfully existed at the time these zoning regulations became effective.

Nudity or a State of Nudity – Means less than completely and opaquely covered:

            (a) Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;

            (b) Female breast or breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola,

            (c) Human buttock; or

            (d) Any combination of the above.

Nursing Home – See “Convalescent Center.”

Orchard – An area of one (1) acre or more which is used for the growing of fruit trees.

Park or Playground (Public) – An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the city or the school district and available to the general public for neighborhood use.

Parking Lot – An unenclosed, all-weather surface area used exclusively for the temporary parking and/or storage of motor vehicles.

Parking Space – An area measuring at least nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet in length, surfaced with an all-weather surface, enclosed or unenclosed, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting satisfactory ingress and egress. For computing off-street parking space requirements, parking spaces on public streets, alleys or rights-of-way shall not be used.





Planned Unit Development (PUD) – An area with a specified minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a unified site design plan, containing one or more residential uses, office uses, commercial uses, industrial uses, public and quasi-public uses, or any combination of the same.

Personal Services – Businesses which provide services customized for an individual generally involving the care of the person or his or her apparel including but not limited to barber and beauty shops, shoe and boot repair, dry-cleaning shops, laundries, reducing salons, and health clubs.

Plant Nursery – An establishment which grows and sells plants, flowers, shrubs. grass and other items typically used as and associated with outdoor landscaping or houseplants.

Plumbing Sales & Service – An establishment selling plumbing supplies and parts and/or providing the repair and installation of plumbing and fixtures.

Print Shop – An establishment utilizing letter press, duplicating equipment, rotary presses or Linotype

equipment to produce in printed form orders for its clients or customers.

Private Club – Facilities where food, beverages (including alcoholic beverages), entertainment, or meeting space are provided to members only.

Professional Office – A room or group of rooms occupied by a physician, optometrist, psychologist, chiropractor, dentist, attorney, engineer, surveyor, architect, accountant, planner, management consultant, or any other similar vocation. Veterinary clinics are specifically excluded from this definition.

Ranch – An area of two (2) acres or more which is used for the keeping or raising farm animals and livestock including but limited to horses, mules, cows, cattle, and swine.

Recreational Vehicle – A vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling recreational or sporting purposes, The term recreational vehicle shall include, but not be limited to: travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks and buses, and boats and boat trailers.

Recreational Vehicle Park – Any development, site, parcel or tract, of land designed, maintained or intended to be used for the purpose of providing short-term occupancy of camper vehicles, recreational vehicles, tents, or trailers.

            (a) Residential- more than 50% of tenants on site for 2 weeks or more.

            (b) Recreational- more than 50% of tenants on site for 2 weeks or less.

Recycling Collection Facility – A facility designed to collect, sort, and package, by either manual or mechanical processes, recyclable items for transport to a processing plant

Rental Store – An establishment which offers and array of items such as appliances, furniture, stereo equipment, televisions, etc. at a stated price for a fixed interval of time under a lease or rental agreement.

Residential Density – The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located or residing within a residential area.

            Gross Density – The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons, located within the total acreage of a residential area.

            Net Density – The number of lots, dwelling units, or persons located within the total acreage of residential area, exclusive of street rights-of-way, easements, non-residential land use sites, and acreage unsuitable for development

Resort – Any tract of land used primarily to provide recreation and entertainment especially, but not exclusively, to tourists or vacationers and generally but not necessarily provides overnight accommodations for their guests in the form of hotels, motels, cabins, R. V. parks, R. V. rentals, etc.

Restaurant – Any eating or drinking establishment where the preparation and serving of food is the primary business of such establishment including cafes, bistros, cafeterias, and other fast food and drive-in food establishments.

Salvage – Shall mean and necessarily include:

Any discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked, dismantled, worn out, or ruined motor vehicles (including automobiles, trucks, tractor, trailers, and buses) motor vehicle parts, boats, travel trailers, trailers, cranes, machinery or equipment, machinery or equipment parts, and or recreational vehicles; and/or
Any junk.
Salvage yard – Shall mean and necessarily includes a salvage yard, automotive wrecking yard, and automotive graveyard shall mean any lot or tract of land upon which three (3) or more discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked, dismantled, worn out, or ruined motor vehicles (including autos, trucks, tractor-trailers, and buses), motor vehicle parts, boats, travel trailers, trailers, and/or recreational vehicles are either:

Kept, stored, bought, sold, recycled, or otherwise placed; or
Disassembled, dismantled, stripped, scrapped, recycled, or cut up.
School – A place having a curriculum for the purpose of giving instruction, training or education in a service, art, trade, or for general knowledge.

Screening (Device) – Shall mean any of the following:

            (a) Any solid fence or wall constructed of metal, brick, masonry or concrete; the vertical surface of which shall be without gaps, except openings for access.

            (b) Any dense, screening shrubs providing a visual barrier, for which such material shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition; or

            (c) Landscaped earth berms may, when appropriate in scale, be considered and used as a screening element in lieu of a fence, wall, hedge, or other dense planting material.

Screening Shrubs, Large – Shall mean shrubs with an installed minimum height of three (3) feet as identified below, or any other shrubs which, when mature, shall reach a minimum height of six (6) feet, provide a dense visual barrier, be drought resistant, and possess compact root systems posing minimum danger to integrity of public utilities. The large screening shrubs included on the following list are recommended to be planted to screen incompatible land uses, parking facilities, and dumpsters by forming a visual barrier.

Common Name	Botanical Name
Photina	Photina Serrulata
Fraser’s Photina	Photina Fraseri
Burford Holly	Dex Comuta Burfordi
Chinese Holly	llex Comuta Rotunda
Waxmyrtle	Myrica Cerifera
Yaupon Holly	llex Vomitoria
Nellie R. Stevens Holly	Llex Cornuta
Screening Shrubs, Small – Shall mean shrubs with an installed minimum height of two (2) feet as hereinafter identified, or any other shrubs which, when mature, shall reach a minimum height of two (2) feet and provides a dense visual barrier. The small screening shrubs included on the following list are recommended to be planted to screen parking lots, playgrounds, ballfields, swimming pools, and tennis courts by forming a visual barrier.

Common Name	Botanical Name
Compact Nandina	Nandina Compacta
Dwarf Abelia	Abelia Edward Goucher
 	Abelia Prostata
Dwarf Burford Holly	Dex Cornuta Burfordii Nana
Dwarf Yaupon Holly	Dex Vomitora Nana
Seat – As used in determining parking requirements for this ordinance, a seat shall mean such sitting space as needed or which is designed to be used for one person to sit down and occupy.

Second Hand Store – An establishment specializing in the sale of previously used materials, goods, and merchandise of less than twenty (20) years of age and of that material, goods and merchandise over twenty (20) years of age which do not derive a value as a result of their age.

Servant or Caretaker’s Quarters -A secondary dwelling unit located on a lot with a main residential structure and used as living quarters for persons employed on the premises and not for rent or use as a separate domicile by persons other than those employed on the premises or their immediate family.

Service Station – A business establishment where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and the servicing of vehicles occurs, but not including the major overhaul of automobiles, body work, or repair of heavy trucks and equipment. A service station is sometimes referred to as a “gas station,” “filling station,” or “fuel service station.”

Setback – The required minimum distance between any structure and any property line of the lot on which it is located. Setbacks shall be measured perpendicular to lot lines. The terms “setback” and “required yard” shall mean the same and can be interchanged.

Sexually Oriented Business – Shall mean a love parlor, nude modeling studio, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.

Shopping Center or Mall – A planned and coordinated grouping of retail business and service uses on a single site or a combination of sites where special attention is given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, and building design and orientation.

Sign – An outdoor device or structure which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, announcement, direction or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered to the public.

Site Development Plan – A drawing showing the provisions for a proposed project, including such information that enables the drawing to serve as a plat, together with information pertaining to all covenants relating to land use, location and bulk of structures, intensity of use or density of development, private streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities, and all other reasonable information required by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a part of the review process.

Small Animal Clinic – An office or group of offices for one or more veterinarians engaged in treating diseases or injuries to small domestic animals. Structures are to be soundproof and no outside facilities are permitted.

Special Use Permit – A use that may be allowed if it meets certain specified requirements or conditions and meets the approval of the City Council.

Specified Anatomical Areas – Means human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

Specified Sexual Activities – Means and includes the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals; sexual acts including intercourse, copulation, or sodomy, or masturbation; or excretory functions as part of or in connection with any sexual act or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals.

Stable, Private – An accessory building used by the residents of the premises for sheltering and quartering of horses owned by the occupants and for which no fee is charged for stabling the horses.

Stable, Public – A lot or tract of land used for the sheltering and quartering of horses for which a fee or charge is made for the stabling of the horses.

Stone Screenings – Washed stone 1/2 inch or 1-1/2 inch in size.

Story – That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of a floor and the surface of a floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the portion of the building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling or roof above it.

Story, Half – The topmost story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet (4') above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes shall be deemed a full story.

Street – A public or private thoroughfare or road which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.

Structural Alteration – Any change, addition or modification in construction in the supporting members of a building, such as exterior walls, bearing walls, beams, columns, foundations, girders, floor joists, roof joists, rafters or trusses.

Structure – Anything constructed or erected having location on or under the ground or attached to something having location on or under the ground.

Swimming Pool, Private – A recreational facility used for swimming which is used the owners, employees, or residents of the property and their guests.

Swimming Pool, Public – A recreational facility used for swimming which is open to the public for which a membership is required or a fee or charge is made for the use of the facility.

Tack Store – A commercial establishment which sells horse equipment such as saddles, bridles, blankets, riding accoutrements, etc.

Television Satellite Dish – An earth-based station shaped like a dish which is used for the reception of satellite signals for television programs.

Tennis Court, Private – A concrete or clay court which is used for the playing of tennis by the owners, employees, or residents of the property and their guests.

Tennis Court, Public – A concrete or clay court which is used for the playing of tennis by the general public and for which membership is required or a fee or charge is made for the use of the facility.

Tool and Equipment Rental – An establishment which offers and an array of tools and equipment and machinery such as cranes, backhoes, trucks, tractors, etc. at a stated price for a fixed interval of time under a lease or rental agreement.

Townhouse – A single family dwelling constructed as part of a series of dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent dwelling or dwellings by party or common walls or are located immediately adjacent thereto with no visible separation between walls or roofs. This definition shall also include the term “condominium.”

Trailer Camp or Park -An area designed, arranged or used for the parking or storing of one or more recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, motor coaches, pick-up campers, and camping trailers which are occupied or intended for occupancy as temporary living quarters by individuals or families.

Trucks – A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people and having a G.V.W.R. in excess of one (1) ton.

Turfs – Shall mean the following list of turfs and any other turfs which can be demonstrated to the building official to be drought resistant.

Common Name	Botanical Name
Bermuda Grass	Cynodon Dactylon
Bermuda Grass hybrids	 
St. Augustine	Stenotaphrom Secondatum
Buffalo Grass	Buchloe Dectyloides
Fescue & combinations	Festuca Arundinacea
Underground Shelter – A concrete structure designed for the protection of humans from tornadoes or from nuclear blast, heat, or fall-out, the main portion of which is underground.

Use – The purpose for which land or a building or structure thereon is designed, arranged, intended or maintained or for which it is or may be used or occupied.

Use, Accessory – A subordinate use on the same lot with the principal use and incidental and accessory thereto.

Used Auto Sales Lot – A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the purchase, trade, display, and sale of automobiles that are in condition to be driven on or off the lot, under its own power. Use Used car lots shall not be used for the storage of wrecked automobiles, or the dismantling of automobiles, or the storage of automobile parts.

Variance – An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the zoning ordinance to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district.

Veterinary Clinic – An establishment for the care and medical veterinary practice on or for domestic household animals, conducted completely within an enclosed structure. This term shall also include “animal clinic.”

Veterinary Hospital – An establishment for the care and medical veterinary practice on or for large animals and household domestic animals and which animals may be boarded during treatment in outside pens, runs or stables. This term shall also include “animal hospital.”

Warehouse – A building or group of buildings used for the storage of merchandise, goods, and wares.

Washateria – A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried on a self-service basis by the use of washing, drying, and ironing machines and shall include the term “self-cleaning laundry.”

Yard – An open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building and which is not obstructed from ground level to the sky except for roof overhangs, fences, trees, and shrubs.

Yard, Front – A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a depth equal to the shortest distance between the front line of the lot and the nearest portion of the main building, including an enclosed or covered porch, provided that the front yard depth shall be measured from the future street line for a street on which a lot fronts, when such line is shown on the official map or is otherwise established.

Yard, Rear – A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a depth equal to the shortest distance between the rear line of the lot and the main building.

Yard, Side – A yard between the side line of the lot and the main building extending from the front yard to the rear yard and having a width equal to the shortest distance between said side line and the main building.


SECTION 28.        PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS

Any person violating any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be fined, upon conviction, not more than two thousand dollars ($200.00) ($2,000.00), and each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.

The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law and the power of injunction as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Section 211.012 and as may be amended, may be exercised in enforcing this ordinance whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed.

SECTION 29.        INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT

In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this ordinance shall govern.

SECTION 30.        PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS

                   UNDER EXISTING ORDINANCES

By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing zoning ordinance was hereby amended, shall be discharged or affected by such amendment; but the prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance has not been amended.

SECTION 31. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.

SECTION 32. SEVERABILITY

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable and, if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such unconstitutional section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.

SECTION 33. EFFECTIVE DATE

This ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage and publication of the caption, as the law in such cases provides.

PASSED AND APPROVED this ____ day of ___­­­­­­­­____________, 20__.

                                                                                                            _______________________

                                                                                                            Mayor

ATTEST:

_______________________

City Secretary

Search
RELATED PAGES
Economic Development
Community Demographics
Contact
Grants & Incentives
Local Site Selection Options
Retail Gap & Commerce Data
Seymour Community Development Corporation (SCDC)
Annexation Plan
Business Park
Doing Business in Texas
Seymour Zoning Information
Experience Seymour
Chamber of Commerce
Events
Departments
EXPERIENCE SEYMOUR
BUSINESS DIRECTORY
CONTACT US
ORDINANCES
ZONING
© 2020 City of Seymour, Texas, All Rights Reserved.