7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/536
City of Sansom Park
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 4
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 541-18
adopted 5/3/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sansom Park, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Sansom Park, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/536
City and town. Each means the City of Sansom Park, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of Sansom Park, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Sansom Park, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Tarrant, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/536
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
State law reference–“Preceding” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/536
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly
into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of
the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/536
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) A person convicted of an offense under title 7, subtitle C, Transportation Code (the Uniform Act
Regulating Traffic on Highways) for which another penalty is not provided shall be punished by a fine of not
less than one dollar ($1.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus such other penalties and costs as
may be provided by such subtitle C.
(d) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(e) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(f) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(g) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Acceptance of provisions of title 28, Revised Civil Statutes
The city hereby accepts the provisions of title 28, Revised Civil Statutes of 1925, relating to cities and towns,
and the city shall henceforward have all of the powers conferred by said title and shall be governed thereby.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/536
(Ordinance 11 adopted 6/11/53; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.002 Change in designation of municipality
(a) In accordance with the authority conferred by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 5.902, the
corporate designation of the municipality in Tarrant County, Texas, known as “City of Sansom Park Village”
shall be and is hereby changed to the “City of Sansom Park, Texas,” and the change of the city's name shall be
effective with respect to any and all actions undertaken by the city under the name of “City of Sansom Park,
Texas” prior to the date hereof as of the date such actions or undertakings occurred or happened. Furthermore,
all action taken by the city council under the name “City of Sansom Park, Texas” prior to the date hereof is
hereby ratified, confirmed and readopted, including, but not limited to, Ordinance No. 359 authorizing the
issuance of “City of Sansom Park, Texas, Tax Notes, Series 2000.”
(b) The designation of the city's name as herein provided shall not affect the city's corporate existence or
powers or any prior actions taken by the city under the name of either “Village of Sansom Park Village, Texas”
or “City of Sansom Park Village, Texas.”
(Ordinance 361 adopted 8/28/00)
Sec. 1.02.003 Publication of ordinances by title
The ordinances of the city shall not be published in full, but there shall be a descriptive caption or title stating in
summary the purpose of the ordinance, and the penalty for violation thereof, in strict compliance with section
52.011, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code. (Ordinance 233 adopted 1/8/87)
State law reference–Designation of official newspaper by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.004.
Sec. 1.02.004 Fiscal year
The fiscal year of the city shall run from October 1st of each year until September 30th of the following year.
(Ordinance 186 adopted 4/10/80)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to prescribe fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.042.
Sec. 1.02.005 Emergency purchases
(a) In the event that an emergency occurs requiring a purchase, and there is no time available to call a special
council meeting, a purchase may be made by the city if the following procedure is followed:
(1) The mayor (or, in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem) shall declare the purchase to be
made an emergency;
(2) The purchase must then be approved by at least three (3) members of the city council.
(b) If a purchase is made under the above and foregoing procedure, the mayor or the city secretary shall
present such purchase to the city council at its next regular meeting for council ratification.
(Ordinance 113 adopted 1/–/66)
Sec. 1.02.006 Purchases from or sales to person having affiliation or interest with city
(a) The city shall not purchase goods or services (other than personal services contracted for and provided
under the umbrella of city employment) from any person or entity having a direct or indirect affiliation or
interest with the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/536
(b) The city shall not sell city assets, other than water and sewer services, to any person or entity having a
direct or indirect affiliation or interest with the city, except at public auction.
(c) Individuals having a direct or indirect affiliation or interest with the city as of the date of the subject
transaction shall mean:
(1) Any employee of the city in any capacity;
(2) Any non-paid official of the city such as the mayor;
(3) A city council member;
(4) The fire chief and fire marshal;
(5) A zoning board member;
(6) Any volunteer directly representing the city;
(7) Any business associate of any individual having an affiliation or interest with the city.
(d) Entities having a direct or indirect affiliation or interest with the city as of the date of the subject
transaction shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Any company or business owned wholly or partially, directly or indirectly, by any individual
having an affiliation or interest with the city;
(2) Any entity owned directly or indirectly by any business associate of any individual having an
affiliation or interest with the city;
(3) Any employer of any individual having an affiliation or interest with the city.
(Ordinance 322 adopted 1/11/96)
Secs. 1.02.007–1.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Claims Against City*
Sec. 1.02.041 Notice requirements
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal
injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or, in the event the
injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such
death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days or within six (6) months for good cause shown from the date the
damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property
was at the time when the injury was received.
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/536
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle.
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the
claim is presented.
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according
to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part
thereof, and the names of doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was
submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the
damage or any part thereof.
(Ordinance 242, sec. 1, adopted 9/10/87)
Sec. 1.02.042 Refusal by council required prior to filing suit
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein
shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for
redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city
council refused. (Ordinance 242, sec. 2, adopted 9/10/87)
Sec. 1.02.043 Service of notices
All notices required by this division shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following
location: 5500 Buchanan, Ft. Worth, Texas, 76114, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually
received in the office of the person named above. (Ordinance 242, sec. 3, adopted 9/10/87)
Sec. 1.02.044 Waiver of requirements
Neither the mayor, a city council member, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority
to waive any of the provisions of this division. (Ordinance 242, sec. 4, adopted 9/10/87)
Sec. 1.02.045 Notice to be sworn
The written notice required under this division shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries
or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall
not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as
a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(Ordinance 242, sec. 5, adopted 9/10/87)
ARTICLE 1.03 ELECTIONS
Sec. 1.03.001 City council places and terms
(a) All members of the city council shall be elected at-large under a place system.
(b) The mayor and each member of the city council shall hold office for a two (2) year term.
Sec. 1.03.002 Annual elections
The regular election for city council members and mayor, whose terms are expiring, shall be held in accordance
with state law. Qualified voters shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for each place. The city council shall
give notice of the election in accordance with the provisions of state law.
State law reference–Notice of elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 4.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/536
Sec. 1.03.003 Regulation of election
All elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the state.
Sec. 1.03.004 Political activities of salaried officers, employees and candidates
(a) No salaried officer or employee of the city may campaign for or against any issue; influence the
nomination, election, or defeat of any candidate for mayor or councilmember; or campaign for or against the
recall of the mayor or councilmember. This provision shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of the right to
express opinions and to vote.
(b) No candidate for municipal office may solicit the support, the endorsement, or the financial contributions
of any city employee.
Sec. 1.03.005 Qualifications for candidacy
(a) Each member of the city council, including the mayor, shall be a qualified voter of the city, shall have
resided in the state continuously for twelve (12) months and in the territory from which the office is elected for
six (6) months and be at least eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the election. In addition, any person who
is convicted of a felony shall not be qualified to hold office on the city council.
(b) The city council shall be judge of the election and qualification, under state law, of its own members and
other elected officials of the city.
Sec. 1.03.006 Filing for office
Any qualifying person may have their name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for the office of
councilmember or mayor by filing an application as required by the state.
State law reference–Candidates for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 143.
Sec. 1.03.007 Official ballot
The name of all candidates for office, except such as may have died, withdrawn, or become ineligible, shall be
printed on the official ballot, as required by state law, without party designation in the order determined in a
drawing of lots conducted by the city secretary.
State law reference–Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 52.
Sec. 1.03.008 Oaths of office
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, take and subscribe to the oath
or oaths required by state law.
Sec. 1.03.009 Majority vote and runoff
The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for each place shall be declared elected. If no candidate
receives a majority of all votes cast for an office, the city council shall, upon declaring the official results of the
election, immediately order a runoff election for each office remaining to be filled. In the runoff election, the
ballot shall list, as determined by lot, the names of the two (2) candidates receiving, at the first election, the first
and second highest number of votes for a given office.
Sec. 1.03.010 Vacancies
In the event of a vacancy, or vacancies, for any cause in the office of mayor or councilmember, such vacancy or
vacancies, may be filled in the following manner:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/536
(1) A single vacancy may be filled by:
(A) Appointment by the city council, with the mayor having a vote only in the case of a tie.
(B) The city council may call a special election to fill the vacancy (LGC section 22.010).
(2) If two or more vacancies on the city council exist, the city council must call a special election
to fill the vacancies. (LGC section 22.010.)
(3) The person appointed to fill the vacancy serves until the next regular municipal election. (LGC
section 22.010(B).)
(Ordinance 483-14 adopted 11/20/14)
ARTICLE 1.04 MAYOR AND COUNCIL*
Sec. 1.04.001 Composition; councilmember positions; terms
(a) The city council elects, determines and ordains not to divide the city into wards, and elects, determines and
ordains that its city council shall be one of six members, composed of the mayor and five (5) city
councilmembers.
(b) The five city council positions shall be separately designated and identified as follows, to wit:
“Councilmember, Place 1,” and “Councilmember, Place 2,” and “Councilmember, Place 3,” and
“Councilmember, Place 4,” and “Councilmember, Place 5,” respectively.
(c) The council provides, determines and ordains that at the first annual city election to be held on April 6,
1954, the two persons elected as “Councilmember, Place 1,” and as “Councilmember, Place 2,” respectively,
shall each hold office for the long terms of two (2) years each, and that at such first election the three persons
elected as “Councilmember, Place 3,” and as “Councilmember, Place 4,” and as “Councilmember, Place 5,”
respectively, shall each hold office for the short terms of one (1) year each. But beginning with the second
annual city election to be held in April of 1955, at which election the Place 3, 4 and 5 city councilmember
offices are the only ones to be voted upon, and as to each following annual city election held thereafter, the
mayor and/or councilmember elected thereat shall each hold office for a term of two years (and until their
respective successors are duly elected and qualified).
(Ordinance 22, secs. 1–3, adopted 2/11/54)
Sec. 1.04.002 Time and place of meetings
There shall be a regularly scheduled city council meeting the first and third Thursdays of each month beginning
at 7:00 p.m., and the council meeting shall be held in the city hall. The city council by a majority vote may by
resolution move a regular meeting to another date where the regular meeting would otherwise coincide with a
local, state, or federal holiday. (Ordinance 328 adopted 10/10/96; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.003 Meetings generally
Petitions and remonstrances may be presented to the council in writing only. The city council shall hold stated
meetings at such times and places as they shall by resolution direct. The mayor, of his own motion, or on the
application of three city councilmembers, may call special meetings, by notice to each member of the council,
the secretary and the city attorney, served personally or left at their usual place of abode. The council shall
determine the rules of its proceedings and be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members, and
may compel the attendance of absent members and punish them for disorderly conduct. (Ordinance 156, sec. IV,
adopted 8/23/76)
Sec. 1.04.004 Duties of mayor
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/536
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of said corporation, and shall be active at all times in causing the
laws and ordinances of the city to be duly executed and put in force. He shall inspect the conduct of all
subordinate officers in the government thereof, and shall cause all negligence, carelessness and other violations
of duty to be prosecuted and punished. He shall have power, if in his judgment the good of the city may require
it, to summon meetings of the city council, and he shall communicate to that body such information and
recommend such measures as may tend to the improvement of the finances, police, health, security, cleanliness,
comfort, ornament and good government of the city. (Ordinance 156, sec. I, adopted 8/23/76)
Sec. 1.04.005 General powers of mayor; mayor as presiding officer
The mayor shall have power to administer oaths of office. He shall have authority in case of a riot or any
unlawful assemblage, or with a view to preserve peace and good order in the city, to order and enforce the
closing of any theater, ballroom, or other place of resort, or public room or building, and may order the arrest of
any person violating in his presence the laws of this state or any ordinance of the city. The mayor shall preside at
all meetings of the city council and shall have a casting vote in the event of a tie vote by the members of the city
council present and voting. (Ordinance 156, sec. II, adopted 8/23/76)
State law reference–Mayor as presiding officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.037.
Sec. 1.04.006 Power of council to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations
The city council or other governing body shall have power to pass, publish, amend or repeal all ordinances, rules
and police regulations, not contrary to the constitution of this state, for the good government, peace and order of
the city and the trade and commerce thereof, that may be necessary or proper to carry into effect the powers
vested by this code in the corporation, the city government or any department or office thereof, to enforce the
observance of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations, and to punish violations thereof. (Ordinance 156,
sec. V, adopted 8/23/76; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.007 Powers of council regarding administrative departments
(a) Departments created; control by council. There are hereby created and placed under the control of the city
council five administrative departments of the city government as follows:
(1) Department of police.
(2) Fire department.
(3) Garbage department.
(4) Street department.
(5) Waterworks department.
(b) Power to establish, discontinue and consolidate departments and offices. The city council shall have power
by ordinance to establish other departments and offices. The council may discontinue any department or office
established by ordinance and may prescribe, combine, distribute or abolish the functions and duties of
departments and offices, but no function or duty assigned by this article to a particular department or office shall
be abolished or assigned to any other department or office; provided that the council may, as it deems it
advisable, consolidate into one department not more than two of the departments hereby established. No
administrative department or office created by ordinance, and no consolidation as hereinbefore provided, shall
be established or discontinued until the recommendation of the council shall have first been heard.
(c) Salaries. The council shall fix all salaries.
(d) Appointment of directors; term; authority. A director for each of the above departments shall be elected by
the city council, and shall serve for a period of six months. Each director shall have power to prescribe rules and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/536
regulations, not inconsistent with this article or ordinance, for the conduct of his department and the preservation
of the records and property under his control. Subject to the control and supervision of the council in all matters,
the director of a department shall manage his department.
(e) Reports and recommendations to council. The directors of departments elected by the city council shall be
immediately responsible to the city council for the administration of their department, and their advice in writing
may be required by the city council on all matters affecting their departments. They shall prepare departmental
estimates, which shall be open to public inspection, and they shall make all their reports and recommendations
concerning their departments at stated intervals, or when required by the city council.
(f) Removal of directors. All such directors of departments shall be immediately responsible to the city
council and may be removed by them at any time. In case of removal after six months' service, if the director
removed so demands, a written statement shall be made by the city council as to the reason of his removal, and
the director shall, if he so demands, be given a public hearing by the city council before the order of removal is
made final. The statement of the council and any written reply by the director thereto shall be filed as a public
record in the office of the secretary of the council.
(g) Authority of directors to hire and discharge employees. The director of each department shall have the
right to hire or discharge any of the subordinate employees of his department subject to the approval of the city
council.
(h) Investigations by council. The council, the mayor, or any person or committee authorized by either or both
of them shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department or office of the city, and to make
investigations as to city affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the
production of books, papers and other evidence material to said inquiry. The council shall provide by ordinance
penalties for contempt in refusing to obey any such subpoenas or failure to produce books, papers and other
evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by ordinance.
(i) Suspension of employees. The director of each department shall have the exclusive right to suspend any of
the officers or employees who may be under his jurisdiction and control for incompetence, neglect of duty,
immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given by the proper authority or for any other just and
reasonable cause. If any officer or employee be suspended as herein provided, the director of said department
shall forthwith, in writing, certify the fact, together with the cause for the suspension, to the city council, who
shall, within five days from the receipt of such certificate, if demanded by the suspended officer or employee so
to do, proceed to inquire into the cause of the suspension and render judgment thereon, which judgment, if the
charge be sustained, may be suspension, reduction in rank, or dismissal, except as may be otherwise provided
herein.
(Ordinance 156, sec. V, adopted 8/23/76; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.05 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.05.001 Appointive offices
The city council elects, determines and ordains that the offices of treasurer, assessor and collector, secretary, city
attorney, marshal, and city engineer, and such other officers and agents as the council may from time to time
direct, shall be appointive and not elective, and that any and all such officers and/or agents shall be appointed by
the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The city council may from time to time fix the
powers and duties of all such officers and/or agents, and may from time to time confer such powers and duties of
any one or more of such officers upon other officers and/or agents of the city. (Ordinance 22, sec. 4, adopted
2/11/54)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/536
Sec. 1.05.002 Appointment and removal of officers
From time to time, as may be necessary, the mayor may recommend and the city council, by simple majority,
may approve the appointment of officers of the municipality as provided for by state law. These officers shall
serve until their resignation unless removed as provided below:
(1) The governing body of the city may remove a municipal officer for incompetency, corruption,
misconduct or malfeasance in office after providing such officer with due notice and an opportunity
to be heard.
(2) Additionally, if the governing body of the city should lack confidence in any municipal officer
appointed by them, the governing body may remove that officer at any time, provided that such will
be only effective if two-thirds (2/3) of the full council vote in favor of a resolution declaring such
lack of confidence.
(Ordinance 365 adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.003 Council not to interfere with appointments and removals; dealings with administrative
service
(a) Council and committees not to interfere with appointments, removals, etc. Neither the council nor any of
its committees or members shall dictate or attempt to dictate the appointment of any person to, or his removal
from, office or employment by the director of each department or any of his subordinates, or in any manner
interfere in the appointment of officers and employees in the departments of administrative service vested in the
director of any department. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members which deal with that
part of the administrative service for which the council responsible solely through such member [sic], and
neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the directors of
departments, either publicly or privately.
(b) Violation to constitute official misconduct. Willful violation of the foregoing provision of this section by
any member of the council shall constitute official misconduct, and shall authorize the council, by a vote of twothirds
of its entire membership, to expel such offending member from the council, and thereby create a vacancy
in the place held by such member.
(Ordinance 139, secs. V, VI, adopted 4/22/71)
Sec. 1.05.004 Suspension of employees
The director of each department shall have the exclusive right to suspend any of the officers or employees who
may be under his jurisdiction and control for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to
obey orders given by the proper authority or for any other just and reasonable cause. If any officer or employee
be suspended, as herein provided, the director of said department shall forthwith, in writing, certify the fact,
together with the cause for the suspension, to the mayor, who shall, within five days from the receipt of such
certificate, if demanded by the suspended officer or employee so to do, proceed to inquire into the cause of the
suspension and render judgment thereon, which judgment, if the charge be sustained, may be suspension,
reduction in rank, or dismissal, and such judgment shall be final, except as may be otherwise provided herein.
(Ordinance 139, sec. VII adopted 4/22/71)
Sec. 1.05.005 Campaigning on premises of city hall, near city hall, or on other city property
(a) It shall be unlawful for any city employee to campaign for any person or persons seeking public office
while in or upon the premises of the city hall or within a distance of 100 feet from the city hall or on any
property owned or maintained by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/536
(b) By the term “campaigning” is meant encouraging, aiding or assisting any candidate for public office by
word of mouth, distributing of literature, telephoning, or passing any written material for and on behalf of any
candidate.
(c) Any city employee violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject, at the discretion of the
city council, to immediate discharge.
(Ordinance 65 adopted 4/17/58)
Secs. 1.05.006–1.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. City Administrator
Sec. 1.05.041 Position created; appointment and removal
There is hereby created the position of city administrator of the government of the city. Such administrator shall
be selected and appointed by the city council. Such administrator shall hold his/her office at the pleasure of the
governing body and may be removed from office with two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the governing body or as
provided by law. (Ordinance 364, sec. 1, adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.042 Powers and duties
The city administrator shall be the chief appointed executive officer and shall be in charge of the government of
the city. Such administrator shall perform the duties herein enumerated but shall not be restricted to such duties
herein enumerated, but shall not be restricted to such duties [sic]. Such administrator shall perform all activities
and functions reasonably necessary to discharge his/her rights, duties, and powers herein granted. (Ordinance
364, sec. 2, adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.043 Administrative departments
(a) The city administrator shall create a department of administration of the city, and there shall be created and
placed under the control of the city administrator five administrative departments of the government of the city,
being:
(1) The department of police;
(2) The fire department;
(3) The department of municipal court;
(4) The street department; and
(5) The waterworks department.
(b) The administrator may discontinue any department or office established by ordinance and may prescribe,
combine, distribute or abolish the functions and duties of departments and offices, but no administrative
department or office created by ordinance or consolidation of [departments] as hereinbefore provided shall be
established or discontinued without approval of city council.
(Ordinance 364, sec. 3, adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.044 Selection, dismissal and suspension of personnel
The city administrator shall be in charge of selection and dismissal of personnel. In matters of selection of or
dismissal of department heads, i.e., city secretary, police chief and water superintendent, he shall first receive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/536
approval of the city council prior to the approval or dismissal of such department head. The city administrator
shall have the right to suspend any of the department heads or employees who may be under his/her direct
jurisdiction and control for incompetence, neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given
by the proper authority or for any other just and reasonable cause. If any department head or employee becomes
suspended as herein provided, the city administrator shall forthwith, in writing, certify the fact, together with the
cause of suspension, to the city council, who shall within five days from receipt of such certificate, if demanded
by the suspended department head or employee so to do, proceed to inquire into the cause of the suspension and
render judgment thereon, which judgment, if the charge be sustained, may be suspension, reduction in rank, or
dismissal, and such judgment shall be final except as may be otherwise provided herein. (Ordinance 364, sec. 4,
adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.045 Preparation and submission of budget
The city administrator shall perform and carry out all duties placed by the statutes and carry out all duties placed
by statutes and the Local Government Code of the state and ordinances of the city to prepare and submit an
annual budget at a time and in a manner in accordance with law. (Ordinance 364, sec. 5, adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.046 Annual report to council
The city administrator shall make an annual report to the city council reflecting upon the problems of the past,
with recommendations as to how to correct such problems in the future and recommendations for any
affirmative action as appears to be expedient and desirable. (Ordinance 364, sec. 6, adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.047 Duty to keep council informed
The city administrator shall keep the city council constantly informed of the financial condition of the city and
the needs of the city and the residents of the city. (Ordinance 364, sec. 7, adopted 9/21/00)
Sec. 1.05.048 Attendance at council meetings
The city administrator shall attend each and every meeting of the city council. (Ordinance 364, sec. 8, adopted
9/21/00)
Secs. 1.05.049–1.05.080 Reserved
Division 3. City Secretary*
Sec. 1.05.081 Duties
The city secretary shall attend every meeting of the city council, and keep accurate minutes of the proceedings
thereof in a book to be provided for that purpose, and engross and enroll all laws, resolutions and ordinances of
the city council, keep the corporate seal, take charge of and preserve and keep in order all the books, records,
papers, documents and files of the council, countersign all commissions issued to city officers and licenses
issued by the mayor, and keep a record or register thereof, and make out all notices required under any
regulation or ordinance of the city. He shall draw all the warrants on the treasurer and countersign the same and
keep an accurate account thereof in a book provided for the purpose. He shall be the general accountant of the
corporation, and shall keep in books regular accounts of the receipts and disbursements for the city, and
separately, under proper heads, each cause of receipt and disbursement, and also accounts with each person,
including officers, who have money transactions with the city, crediting accounts allowed by proper authority
and specifying the particular transaction to which such entries apply. He shall keep a register of bonds and bills
issued by the city, and all evidence of debt due and payable to it, noting the particulars thereof, and all facts
connected therewith, as they occur. He shall carefully keep all contracts made by the city council, and he shall
perform all such other duties as may be required of him by law, ordinance, resolution or order of the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/536
He shall receive for his services an annual salary payable at stated periods, and such additional fees as the city
council may allow. (Ordinance 156, sec. III, adopted 8/23/76)
ARTICLE 1.06 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.06.001–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Park and Recreation Board
Sec. 1.06.031 Established; composition
There is created and established for the city a park and recreation board, which shall be composed of five
members. The members shall be resident citizens of the city. (Ordinance 164, sec. I, adopted 10/27/77)
Sec. 1.06.032 Appointment and removal of members; compensation
The members of the park and recreation board shall be appointed by the council for two (2) year terms. All
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the original appointment.
Members of the board may be removed by the governing body for cause assigned in writing. The members of
the board shall serve without compensation. (Ordinance 164, sec. II, adopted 10/27/77)
Sec. 1.06.033 Term of members
The members of the board shall serve for two (2) years and their terms shall coincide with that of the mayor.
(Ordinance 164, sec. III, adopted 10/27/77)
Sec. 1.06.034 Officers
The park and recreation board shall annually select its own chairman. The board shall also select a vicechairman
and secretary from its own members. (Ordinance 164, sec. IV, adopted 10/27/77)
Sec. 1.06.035 Meetings and rules of procedure
The park and recreation board shall promulgate its own rules consistent with the ordinances of the city and laws
of the state. The board shall hold regular meetings, and such special meetings as it deems necessary. (Ordinance
164, sec. V, adopted 10/27/77)
Sec. 1.06.036 Duties
The park and recreation board shall act as an advisory body to the council in the procurement, development,
supervision and administration of city public recreational activities within or without the city. (Ordinance 164,
sec. VI, adopted 10/27/77)
Sec. 1.06.037 Coordination with director of parks and recreation
The city council shall appoint the director of parks and recreation. The board will coordinate all park and
recreation activities with the director. The director shall be directly accountable to the city secretary. (Ordinance
164, sec. VII, adopted 10/27/77)
Sec. 1.06.038 Preparation of budget estimates
The director and the board shall prepare budget estimates and submit same to the city secretary. (Ordinance 164,
sec. VIII, adopted 10/27/77)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/536
Secs. 1.06.039–1.06.070 Reserved
Division 3. Water Committee
Sec. 1.06.071 Established
There is hereby established a water committee for the purpose of serving the citizens of the city.
Sec. 1.06.072 Purpose
The city water committee is established for the purpose of serving the citizens of the city by assisting the city
water superintendent in establishing and maintaining a water quality program and assisting in developing longrange
plans for maintenance, protection, and improvement of the city water system.
Sec. 1.06.073 Composition; appointment of members
The committee shall be composed of five (5) members who shall be residents served by the city water system.
The committee shall be appointed by the members of the city council and confirmed by a majority vote of the
city council.
Sec. 1.06.074 Geographic division of city
The appointment of members shall be based upon a geographical division of the city, the city being divided into
five (5) geographic sections. Each council member is assigned a specific geographic section from which his
appointment will be drawn from the population within said geographic section. The geographic regions are
designated on the following map:
Sec. 1.06.075 Term of members
Water committee members will be appointed for a term of two years and the terms will run concurrent with the
term of the council member who made the appointment. Initial appointment shall be for the remaining term of
the council member appointing the member.
Sec. 1.06.076 Removal of members
Removal of a committee member shall be accomplished by a three-fourths majority vote of the city council.
Sec. 1.06.077 Officers
At the first meeting following city elections each year, the committee shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson,
and secretary. The chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the committee and shall have the duties
normally conferred by parliamentary procedures. The vice-chairperson shall act for the chairperson in cases of
absence. The secretary shall keep minutes of the meetings, records of the proceedings, correspondence, notices
and other duties as delegated by the water committee.
Sec. 1.06.078 Meetings and rules of procedure
The water committee shall have the authority to adopt rules concerning the procedures and conduct of its
meetings. The rules must include the following:
(1) Meeting times. Regular meetings are to be held at the city hall. At least one regular meeting
shall be held each month. Meetings will be open to the public and notice of the meeting's time, date,
and agenda must be posted at the city hall at least 72 hours prior to the meeting date.
(2) A majority of the membership of the water committee shall constitute a quorum.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/536
(3) The number of votes necessary to determine a question shall be a majority of those present, a
quorum being present.
(4) All decisions and recommendations made by the water committee shall be made at meetings
open to the public, and a vote taken at such meetings and duly recorded.
Sec. 1.06.079 Powers and duties; water quality program
(a) The water committee shall have the power and duty to assist the city water superintendent in the design,
development and maintenance of a water system quality program. The goal of this program shall be to insure
that customers of the water system be supplied the highest quality water service possible within the fiscal
restraints of the city.
(b) The water quality program shall include:
(1) A system for quantifying customer complaints. This system would provide a mechanism for
capturing, reviewing, and quantifying (counting) customer complaints with emphasis on providing
city management information on problem cause, geographical proximity, and problem resolution.
(2) A system of procedures documenting the correct and approved processes associated with the
various activities related to the treatment, storage, and distribution of city water.
(3) A system for reviewing the established procedures in an orderly manner to insure procedures
reflect the most current knowledge and techniques.
(c) The water committee shall also assist the water superintendent by working in conjunction with the
planning and zoning commission in establishing five (5), ten (10), and twenty (20) year plans detailing strategic
plans for city water supply service requirements and means to meet the requirements. The water superintendent,
in concert with the water committee, shall present and recommend courses of action to the city council.
Adoption of recommendations shall require a majority vote of the council members.
Sec. 1.06.080 Restrictions
The water committee is restricted by the following:
(1) Water committee members must not interfere in or with normal everyday operations of the
water department.
(2) Meetings with the water superintendent must be scheduled in advance.
(3) The committee will not incur expenses for the city without prior consent and approval of the
city council. This includes but is not limited to securing consultants or other engineering expertise.
(Ordinance 316 adopted 6/26/95)
ARTICLE 1.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.07.001 National Incident Management System adopted
The city council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. (Ordinance
463-13 adopted 2/21/13)
Secs. 1.07.002–1.07.030 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/536
Division 2. Emergency Management Program
Sec. 1.07.031 Operational organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may delegate authority for
execution [of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution] shall remain with the
director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 464-13, sec. 1, adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.032 Powers and duties of emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this division. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/536
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which
could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (chapter 418 of the Government
Code).
(Ordinance 464-13, sec. 2, adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.033 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this division. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this division and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (Ordinance 464-13, sec. 3,
adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.034 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in
the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county, and shall have the
authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the
appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a
county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. (Ordinance 464-
13, sec. 4, adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.035 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 464-13, sec. 5, adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.036 Liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health, and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/536
provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or
practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not
be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 464-
13, sec. 6, adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.037 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this division without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council
unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds
of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (Ordinance 464-13,
sec. 7, adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.038 Offenses: penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$1,000.00.
(Ordinance 464-13, sec. 8, adopted 2/21/13)
Sec. 1.07.039 Limitations
This division shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or
naval order, rule, or regulation. (Ordinance 464-13, sec. 10, adopted 2/21/13)
ARTICLE 1.08 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.08.001 Definition of municipal records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received
by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ordinance 284, sec. 1, adopted
10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that
creates or receives records.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/536
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations in an
emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and fulfillment of
obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records management. The application of the management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance,
retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the
efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management
of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical
and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.08.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.08.006 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 284, sec. 2, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.003 Municipal records declared public property
All municipal records defined in section 1.08.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the
city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position. any personal or property right to
such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 284, sec. 3, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management from creation to ultimate disposition,
consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management
practice. (Ordinance 284, sec. 4, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.005 Designation of records management officer
The office of city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer
for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the
director and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the official designation or of taking up the office,
as applicable. (Ordinance 284, sec. 5, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.006 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to
the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly
preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the
records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/536
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis
for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 284, sec. 6, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records
control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(8) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(9) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the
records of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program and the requirements of state law;
(10) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed
or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition;
(11) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (10); and
(12) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other
municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the
Local Government Records Act.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/536
(Ordinance 284, sec. 7, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.008 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 284, sec. 8, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.009 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records series created or received by the department
and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information
regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the city council.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing [by the] the
director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be
amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control
schedules to the director and librarian.
(Ordinance 284, sec. 9, adopted 10/24/91)
Sec. 1.08.010 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.08.009
shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management
plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city council.
(Ordinance 284, sec. 10, adopted 10/24/91)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/536
Sec. 1.08.011 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (Ordinance 284, sec. 11, adopted 10/24/91)
ARTICLE 1.09 SALE OF SURPLUS PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
Sec. 1.09.001 Sale at auction
All surplus property shall be sold at a public auction by an auctioneer that is licensed by the state. (Ordinance
260, sec. A, adopted 5/11/89)
Sec. 1.09.002 List of items to be sold
The city council shall approve the list of items to be sold by auctioneer. This list shall be provided to the
auctioneer not less than 15 working days prior to the sale date. (Ordinance 260, sec. B, adopted 5/11/89)
Sec. 1.09.003 Notice of sale
The list of items that are to be sold along with the time, date, location of sale, and any minimum acceptable price
shall be posted at the city hall in full public view not less than 10 working days nor more than 30 working days
prior to date of the sale. (Ordinance 260, sec. C, adopted 5/11/89)
Sec. 1.09.004 Minimum acceptable prices
The city council may reserve the right to set and establish minimum acceptable prices that the city is willing to
accept for the sale of specific items. Should the city council choose the option of setting a minimum bid on any
item, the item shall be uniquely identified, and the minimum price shall be supplied to the auctioneer prior to the
start of the sale. (Ordinance 260, sec. D, adopted 5/11/89)
Sec. 1.09.005 Definition of surplus property
For the purpose of this article, surplus property includes those items which are no longer necessary, are not
required, or whose ownership does not promote or improve the general well-being of the city, but does not
include items routinely discarded as waste. (Ordinance 260, sec. E, adopted 5/11/89)
Sec. 1.09.006 Trade-in items
Items that are disposed of by “trade-in” on new or used equipment are excluded from the terms of this article.
(Ordinance 260, sec. F, adopted 5/11/89)
Sec. 1.09.007 Records
The auctioneer shall provide the city a record of each item sold and the sale price of each item. The city shall
keep a record of each [item] of surplus or salvage property sold and the sale price of each item. The city shall
also keep a record of each item of surplus or salvage property destroyed. (Ordinance 260, sec. G, adopted
5/11/89)
Sec. 1.09.008 Disposition of unsold items
If the city undertakes to sell any item as surplus property or salvage property by auction under the terms of this
article and is unable to sell the item because no bids are made, the city council may order the property to be
destroyed or disposed of as worthless salvage. (Ordinance 260, sec. H, adopted 5/11/89)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/536
Sec. 1.09.009 Title to property
If a purchaser of surplus or salvage property at a sale held in accordance with this article complies in good faith
with the conditions of the sale and applicable rules of the city, the purchaser obtains good title to the property.
(Ordinance 260, sec. I, adopted 5/11/89)
ARTICLE 1.10 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.10.001–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Economic Development Corporation*
Sec. 1.10.031 Findings; purpose
It is hereby found, determined and declared:
(1) That the present and prospective right to gainful employment and general welfare of the people
of the city requires as a public purpose the promotion and development of new and expanded
business enterprises;
(2) That the existence, development, and expansion of business, commerce, and industry are
essential to the economic growth of the city and to the full employment, welfare, and prosperity of its
citizens;
(3) That the means and measures authorized by the state legislature and the assistance provided in
the one-fourth of one percent sales tax for economic development are in the public interest and serve
a public purpose in promoting the welfare of the citizens of the city economically by the securing and
retaining of business enterprises and the resulting maintenance of a higher level of employment,
economic activity, and stability;
(4) That the Industrial Foundation and the city have themselves invested substantial funds in
economic development projects and have experienced difficulty in undertaking such additional
projects by reason of the partial inadequacy of their own funds; and
(5) That the city is at a critical disadvantage in competing with other communities for the location
or expansion of such enterprises by virtue of the availability and prevalent use in other communities
of financing and other special incentives.
Therefore, the creation of an economic development corporation to promote and develop new and expended
business enterprises to provide and encourage employment and the public welfare is hereby declared to be in the
public interest and a public purpose.
(Ordinance 376, sec. 1, adopted 9/4/01)
Sec. 1.10.032 Creation
An economic development corporation is hereby created to carry out the public purposes of this division and the
Development Corporation Act of 1979 as amended. (Ordinance 376, sec. 2, adopted 9/4/01)
Sec. 1.10.033 Powers; organization; disbursement of funds
The powers and organization of the corporation are:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/536
(1) The economic development corporation has the powers and the limitations of a corporation
created under the Development Corporation Act of 1979, as amended.
(2) The board of directors of the corporation consists of five (5) directors who are appointed by the
city council and who serve at the pleasure of the city council. Three (3) directors constitute a quorum
and no action of the corporation shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of
three (3) or more of the directors. Each year at the first meeting in October the board of directors will
organize, appointing a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary, and treasurer. All meetings of the board of
directors will be held within the corporate limits of the city and all meetings will be conducted under
the provisions of the Open Meetings Act. The board of directors will make and alter bylaws, with the
approval of the city council, for the administration and regulation of the affairs of the corporation.
The board of directors is subject to the provisions of the Conflict of Interest Act.
(3) The corporation will develop a five (5) year economic development plan which will be updated
annually and will be used to develop the annual budget of the corporation. The annual budget of the
corporation will be submitted to the city for review and approval by the city council during the
annual budget process of the city. The corporation will be audited as part of the city annual audit.
(4) Upon receipt of the proceeds of the one-fourth of one percent sales and use tax for economic
development imposed by the voters of the city, the corporation will deposit the funds immediately in
a depository previously selected and secured as provided for under law for municipal funds. Tax
proceeds may be used to pay the principal of, interest on, and other costs relating to the corporation
bonds, but neither the bonds nor any instrument related to the bonds may give a bondholder a right to
demand payment from tax proceeds in excess of those collected from its one-fourth of one percent
sales and use tax for economic development.
(5) The tax funds and all other funds entrusted to the corporation will be used to further economic
development within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The corporation may contract with
other existing private corporations to carry out economic development programs consistent with the
intent of this division and the Economic Development Act as amended. No more than ten percent
(10%) of the corporate revenues may be spent on promotional purposes. The corporation may not
undertake a project the primary purpose of which is to provide transportation facilities, sewage or
solid waste disposal facilities, air or water pollution control facilities, facilities for furnishing water,
or recreational facilities for the general public. However, the corporation may provide those facilities
to benefit property acquired for a project having another primary purpose.
(6) The disbursement of corporate funds will be in accordance with state law except that any
limitations of purchasing and contracting in city ordinances requiring approval of the city council
shall apply to the corporation and shall require approval of the board of directors in place of the city
council.
(7) The city staff will act as special advisers to the corporation in their areas of expertise unless
other duties preclude their doing so.
(Ordinance 376, sec. 3, adopted 9/4/01; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.11 COMMUNITY CENTER
Sec. 1.11.001 Rules and regulations
The city council may from time to time create or amend the community center rules and regulations for the fair,
safe and efficient operation of the community center. The community center rules and regulations attached to
Ordinance 360 maintained on file in the offices of the city are hereby adopted and included by reference and are
to be effective immediately upon passage. (Ordinance 360, sec. I, adopted 7/20/00; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/536
Sec. 1.11.002 Coordinator
There is hereby created the office of community center coordinator, who is to oversee the operation of the
community center and the enforcement of these regulations. This person shall be appointed by the city council
and shall serve at their pleasure. This person may be any citizen of the city or any city employee. The
community center coordinator may also, with the concurrence of the mayor, call upon city employees to assist in
these duties as the community center coordinator shall see fit. (Ordinance 360, sec. II, adopted 7/20/00)
Sec. 1.11.003 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that such a violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant,
mortgagee or vendor in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land. (Ordinance 360, sec. III,
adopted 7/20/00)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abuse. To mistreat through intent to abuse or reckless neglect of any animal in a manner that causes or is likely
to cause stress or physical injury or as otherwise stated in this chapter.
Animal. Any living creature other than hominids. Unless indicated otherwise, the term shall include livestock,
fowl, reptiles, amphibians, and wildlife, as well as dogs, cats and other creatures commonly owned as pets. The
term shall exclude a fish and other small aquarium-maintained creatures, not herein prohibited or restricted,
where the owner only maintains no more than three aquariums having a total capacity of ninety gallons.
Animal control division, animal control authority, or animal control officer. The animal control division of the
city's police department, its animal control officers and/or peace officers.
Animal shelter or city kennel. A facility designated by the city council to be used for the impoundment of
animals taken up by the animal control officers or other similar facility that may be temporarily contracted or
designated by the chief of police for animal impoundment under the provisions of this act.
Animal welfare group. An association or nonprofit corporation who has as one of its purposes the providing for
the welfare and/or protection of animals of any kind.
Authority. The local rabies control authority as defined in this section.
Brand. A mark made on the skin of any animal which indicates the ownership of the animal, typically used with
livestock.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/536
Cat. The male and the female of any domesticated member of the feline species of animals.
Chief of police. The chief of police or the chief of police's designee responsible for the administration of this act.
Circus. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for the public at a fee or a part of a charity.
Commercial animal enterprise. Shall include but not be limited to enterprises such as kennels, pet shops, riding
stables, animal auctions, performing animal exhibitions, animal training services, grooming shops, petting zoos,
aviaries or any similar entrepreneurial relationship regarding animals.
Dangerous wild animal. Shall have the same meaning as defined in chapter 822, Texas Health and Safety Code,
subchapter E.
Day. A workday, including Saturday, and excluding Sunday and city holidays.
Distance between structures. Where a minimum setback or distance between any enclosure for an animal from a
residence is required, shall mean the most direct line distance between the two structures, unless otherwise
provided.
Dog. The male and the female of any domesticated member of the canine species of animal.
Domestic animal. Any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective breeding
and does not occur naturally in the wild, any animal which can be vaccinated against rabies with an approved
rabies vaccine, and any animal which has an established rabies quarantine observation period.
Estray. Has the same meaning as defined in chapter 142, Texas Agricultural Code, defining estray as stray
livestock, stray exotic livestock, and stray exotic fowl.
Exotic species. Any animal or reptile, fish, or bird, born or whose natural habitat is considered to be outside the
continental United States, including nonvenomous reptiles and fish.
Fish. Any of the cold-blooded animals that extract oxygen from water through the use of gills.
Fowl. Shall include all birds, e.g., chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, guineas, geese, ducks, peafowl and other
domestic feathered creatures and nondomestic feathered creatures, regardless of age or sex.
Governmental entity. An agency or political subdivision of the state or an agency or department of the federal
government.
Habitual offender or habitually. An owner who has received two or more final convictions of this chapter or the
owner of an animal who has been the subject of impoundment in the animal shelter three or more times during a
12-month period or any combination of convictions and impoundment totaling three incidents.
Harbor. To possess while in the act of keeping and caring for an animal, or of providing premises to which the
animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three days or longer.
Kennel. An establishment designed or used for the selling, breeding, or overnight boarding of animals where
more than three dogs and two cats or three cats and two dogs or a combination of five other animals are to be
boarded, sold, or bred.
Livestock. Shall include, regardless of age, sex or breed, horses and all equine species, including mules, donkeys
and jackasses; cows and all bovine species; sheep and all ovine species; llamas; goats and all caprine species;
and pigs and all swine species.
Local rabies control authority. The senior animal control officer (Animal Control Officer II, field supervisor), or
an officer he designates to act in his place when he is temporarily unable to act for any reason.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/536
Marine animal. Any animal, other than a mammal or bird, that lives in a marine environment.
Multi-pet owner. A person who keeps or harbors more than five cats or dogs or any combination of five cats and
dogs. Puppies and kittens under four months of age shall not be counted for purposes of this definition.
Neutered. Any animal, male or female, rendered incapable of breeding or being bred, i.e., castration in the male
and spaying or ovariectomy in the female.
Nonregisterable dangerous dog. Any dog which:
(1) When unprovoked, severely attacked or inflicted serious injury or death to a person, whether on
public or private property; or
(2) Has been deemed nonregisterable by the animal control officer and upheld or unchallenged by
any court of jurisdiction.
Owner or presumed owner. Any person who has purchased or who owns, keeps, maintains, harbors or has care,
custody or control of one or more animals. Ownership may be determined by identifying an adult resident of the
premises upon which the animal is kept, maintained, harbored or otherwise resides and such adult shall
constitute the owner of the animal upon such premises. Each actual resident of the premises shall be the owner
or presumed owner and charged with responsibility for the animals thereon maintained or harbored.
Performing animals. Any spectacle, display, act or event in which animals perform.
Person. An individual human, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other
partnership or other such company, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
association or corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.
Poison. A substance having an inherent harmful property which renders it, when taken into the system, capable
of destroying animal life.
Policy or policies. The policies and procedures adopted consistent with this act and applicable to the animal
control division of the city's police department.
Premises. A definite portion of a legal lot of real estate or land, together with any appurtenances or buildings.
Prohibited animals. Any animal prohibited by state or federal law and including any individual species and/or
subspecies of the following animals: antelope, lions, tigers, ocelots, bobcats, lynx, cougars, leopards, cheetahs,
jaguars, hyenas, bears, lesser pandas, ferrets born in natural habitats, binturong, ostriches, emus, elephants,
Vietnamese potbelly pigs, miniature pigs, apes or such other nondomestic species of animal not common to this
area.
Proper enclosure. A house or a building, or, in the case of a fence or structure/pen, the fence or structure/pen
must be at least four feet in height. The structure/pen must also have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten
feet. The fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children and must be
locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. The
enclosure shall be securely locked at all times and have secured sides to prevent a dangerous animal or
registered dangerous dog from escaping from the enclosure. The structure/pen shall provide protection from the
elements for the animal. The animal control officer may require a fence higher than four feet or require a secure
top and/or a secure bottom to the structure/pen if the need is demonstrated. Invisible fences or similar
technology shall not constitute “proper enclosure.”
Quarantine. A period of ten days used for observation of a domestic or pet animal to determine the health status
of that animal in relation to the rabies virus.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/536
Quarantine by owner. An animal owner who quarantines with the animal control officer's permission under the
following conditions:
(1) The animal must have a current rabies vaccination and be registered with animal control;
(2) The animal must be inside an enclosed structure, i.e., a house or garage, and must remain there
for ten days;
(3) If maintained outside, the animal must be behind a fence from which it cannot escape and on a
chain from which it cannot break loose or inside a covered pen or kennel from which it cannot
escape. The length of the chain must prevent the animal from making contact with the fence in which
it is kept;
(4) The animal must be kept away from other animals and people except those in the immediate
household;
(5) The animal may not be removed from the corporate city limits while under quarantine;
(6) The owner shall notify the animal control officer immediately if animal becomes sick or
displays any behavioral changes;
(7) The owner shall not subject the animal to any medical procedure without first notifying the
animal control officer. This includes any vaccination;
(8) The animal must be examined by the local rabies control authority or designee by the first day
of home quarantine and again on the final day of quarantine. Upon final examination, the authority
may declare the animal to be free of the rabies virus or under questionable circumstance defer such
examinations to a licensed veterinarian. In such instances, the owner shall be responsible for all
associated costs and when required produce proof of such veterinarian examinations;
(9) Owners who are deemed habitual offenders, as defined herein, shall not be allowed home
quarantine;
(10) The owner must allow animal control, with reasonable notice, to view and confirm the health
of the animal during the rabies quarantine period.
Rabies vaccination. The vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an anti-rabies vaccine approved
by the department of state health services and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state.
Registered dangerous dog. Any dog registered with the city in compliance with chapter 822, Texas Health and
Safety Code, subchapter D, and with the sections of this chapter addressing registered dangerous dogs.
Residence. Any place of human habitation at any time, day or night, including, but not limited to, any single- or
multi-family dwelling, church, school, convalescent center or nursing home.
Restrained. Any animal secured by a leash, rope or chain of some sort or confined through fencing or otherwise
within the property limits of its owner.
Restricted animals. Any individual species and/or subspecies defined herein as “prohibited” animals that have
been registered and permitted in compliance with the procedures set out in section 2.04.008 herein.
Running at large (animals at large).
(1) Off-premises:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/536
(A) Any animal, except pet cats, which is not restrained by means of a leash, chain, or other
physical apparatus of sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such animal while
off-premises;
(B) Any cat which is creating a nuisance off the owner's property.
(2) On-premises:
(A) Any animal, except pet cats, not confined to the premises of the owner by a substantial
fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom, or
secured on the premises by a chain or leash sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from
escaping from the premises and so arranged that the animal will remain upon the premises
when the leash is stretched to full length;
(B) An animal intruding upon the property of another person other than the owner's shall be
termed “at large”;
(C) Any animal within a vehicle in a manner that would prevent that animal's escape or
contact with other persons or animals shall not be deemed “at large.”
Serious injury. Bodily injury resulting from a severe attack or severe bite from an animal which produces severe
pain, trauma, loss of blood or tissue, and which requires medical treatment of wounds inflicted by the animal.
Severe attack. An attack in which the animal repeatedly bites or vigorously shakes its victim, and the victim, or a
person intervening, has extreme difficulty terminating the attack.
Severe bite. A puncture or laceration made by an animal's teeth which breaks the skin, resulting in a degree of
trauma which would cause most prudent and reasonable people to seek medical care for treatment to the wound,
without considerations of rabies prevention alone.
Stray animal (including estray). Any animal, of which there is no identifiable owner or harborer, which is found
to be at large within the corporate limits of the city.
Tag. A vaccination tag attached to a collar as required by this chapter or some other permanent identifying
device attached to a collar or to an animal.
Tattoo. A permanent mark which is made on the skin of an animal by puncturing the skin and inserting indelible
color, and which is used to show ownership.
Unprovoked attack. Means that the animal was not hit, kicked, teased, molested or struck by a person with an
object or part of a person's body, nor was any part of the animal's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person.
Vaccination. An injection of a rabies vaccine which is approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Veterinary Biologics Division, state veterinarian, and administered by a licensed veterinarian or at an approved
antirabies clinic.
Veterinarian. Any person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state board of veterinary medical
examiners, or who is exempt from such licensing.
Wild animal or wildlife. Any nondomestic creature (mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl) which is of a species
which is wild by nature, which can normally be found in a wild state, and which is not naturally tame or gentle,
or which, because of its size, vicious nature and other characteristics, constitutes a danger to human life or
property, including all animals identified herein as prohibited.
Workday. A day from Monday through Saturday, excluding city holidays, with each respective day's work hours
beginning at 8:00 a.m. and continuously operating until 8:00 p.m., defining the public's routine access to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/536
administrative fee(s) and impound release transactions authorized by this chapter.
Zoological park or zoo. Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more
species of animals, operated by a person or under the auspices of a governmental entity.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 1, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.002 Purpose
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a safe and healthy environment within the city for both
animals and people. While a person may own and keep animals within the city, the conduct of those animals and
the conditions that the animals are kept in should be safe and healthy and should not infringe on the surrounding
homes and their inhabitants. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 2, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.003 Enforcement
(a) Enforcement officers. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by animal control officers, police
officers, and such other persons as are designated by the city. Nothing herein is intended to or shall preempt any
statutory duty or authority of any federal, state, or local entity or official charged with animal control, estray,
control or impoundment, or other animal-related matters.
(b) Obstructing enforcement. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct, resist or oppose
any animal control officer or other person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter while such person
is apprehending an animal or performing any other duties or investigation. It shall be unlawful to take or attempt
to take any animal from any animal control officer or from any vehicle used by the officer to transport any
animal or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal shelter or other kennel or confinement area used
to impound an animal.
(c) Citations and warnings. In all instances of a violation of any provision of this chapter, whether the animal
is impounded or not, the owner or keeper of such animal may be cited by an officer who has the authority to
enforce this chapter for any violation of this chapter. The animal control division may also by policy establish a
conditional written warning procedure relating to registrations, displaying of tags, and general “at large”
violations. The receipt of such written warnings does not preclude the animal control division from citing the
recipient if the conditions of the written warning are not met in a timely fashion.
(d) Authority to kill or disable animals. In the enforcement of this chapter, animal control officers and police
officers shall have the authority to utilize firearms to kill or otherwise disable any animal to protect themselves,
to protect a third person or to protect another animal from attack or threat of imminent injury or to prevent such
animal from enduring further pain or suffering as a result of disease or injury. They shall also have the authority
to tranquilize or trap any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife consistent with humane policies adopted by the
animal control division.
(e) Culpability. Unless specifically provided in this chapter, an offense under this chapter shall not require a
culpable mental state. It is the intent of this chapter to impose strict liability for violation of the requirements of
this chapter.
(f) Administrative policies and operational procedures. To aid in the administration of this chapter, the animal
control division shall, by policy-making authority of the chief of police, adopt administrative policies and
operational procedures consistent with the purpose and intent of this act.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 3, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.004 Powers and duties of citizens regarding animals running at large
Any person who finds an animal which he does not own on property that he owns or exercises control over or on
public property may take control of said animal if it is running at large (as provided in section 2.02.002) and may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/536
deliver the animal to an animal control officer, the animal shelter, or an animal emergency medical facility. If the
animal is not delivered to an animal control officer, the animal shelter, or an animal emergency medical facility,
the person must report that he had taken control of the animal to an animal control officer or the animal shelter
within seventy-two (72) hours. If the animal is wearing a tag of any kind or has a tattoo, brand, or other
identifying mark, that information shall be included in the report to the animal control officer or animal shelter.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 4, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.005 Penalties; false reports
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall fail to comply therewith, or
with any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be
liable for a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who is deemed guilty of
violating section 2.04.002(d) of this chapter shall be liable for a fine no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who is deemed guilty of violating section 2.04.003(e) of
this chapter shall be liable for a fine no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in
addition to all the other remedies provided herein.
(b) A person commits an offense if, with intent to deceive, he knowingly makes a false report or statement,
either verbal or written, that is material to an investigation of an alleged violation of this chapter to an animal
control officer or other person authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter.
(c) A person commits an offense if he reports to a person authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter an
offense or incident within that person's concern knowing that the offense or incident did not occur.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 5, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.006 Prima facie evidence of responsibility for violation
In any prosecution charging a violation of this chapter governing the abuse, neglect or ownership of an animal or
failure to license an animal as herein required, proof that the particular property described in the complaint was
the premises upon which the animal resided or was harbored or maintained and a violation of any section of this
chapter occurred involving said animal, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at
the time of such complaint or at the time when the animal was in violation of this chapter, the registered owner
of such animal or the person with legal rights to reside on said property, shall constitute in evidence a prima
facie presumption that the registered owner of such animal or the person with legal rights to reside on said
property was the owner of the animal and the person who failed to comply with this chapter. (Ordinance 403-04,
sec. 6, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.007 Abatement of nuisances or unlawful conditions
Whenever any premises where animals are kept are in an unsanitary condition, or the facilities are not in keeping
with provisions of this chapter or any other regulations herein, the animal control division, by written notice on a
form provided by police department policy clearly stating the intent of this section, to the person responsible for
the condition of the premises, may order the abatement of the conditions which are not in accordance with this
chapter or other regulations, or conditions which constitute a nuisance. Failure to comply with such order shall,
in addition to any criminal or administrative proceedings, be grounds for and entitle the city to obtain relief by
injunction. Nothing herein precludes the city's use of any public health ordinance or law in lieu of nuisance
abatement or injunctive relief herein provided. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 7, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.008 Compliance with other regulations
The keeping of any animal in accordance with provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the
keeping of the same in violation of the zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city. (Ordinance 403-04,
sec. 8, adopted 9/10/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/536
Sec. 2.01.009 Payment of fees
The fee schedule in section 2.01.010 shall apply to all animals within the city limits. It shall not be construed
that the city be required to bear the costs of any animal that has an owner. The owner shall reimburse the city for
any actual expenses and shall be responsible for all fees set forth in section 2.01.010. The city may recover all
fees, costs and damages incurred as a result of the animal as restitution in a criminal proceeding under the
provisions of this chapter or the state statutes in addition to a fine being charged. In extraordinary circumstances,
certain fees related to redemption of impounded animals may be administratively waived for owners with
supervisory approval, or pay agreements reached between owners and animal control supervisor(s). Such
administrative actions shall be guided by animal control's adopted policies and procedures. (Ordinance 403-04,
sec. 9, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.010 Fee schedule
The rates and fees for animal control services shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to
his code. (Editorially supplied)
Sec. 2.01.011 Disposal of dead animals and fowl
It is unlawful for any person in the city to cause to be placed or place or allow to remain in or near his premises
or the premises of any other person, or in any of the streets or other public roadways, any dead animal, either
wild or domesticated, or any dead fowl, either wild or domesticated. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 41(f), adopted
9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.012 Animals held on complaint
If a complaint has been filed in the municipal court of the city against the owner of an impounded animal for a
violation of this chapter, the animal may be held on the order of the municipal judge, who may also direct the
owner to pay any penalties for violation of this chapter in addition to all impoundment fees. Surrender of an
animal by the owner thereof to the animal control officer does not relieve or render the owner immune from the
decision of the court nor from the fees and fines which may result from a violation of this chapter. (Ordinance
403-04, sec. 42, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.013 Releasing confined animal; interference with impoundment
(a) Removal of dog or cat confined by city. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or allow to escape
from any place of confinement any dog or cat which has been confined or ordered to be confined by the city,
without the consent of the animal control division.
(b) Releasing confined or tethered animal without permission. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly or intentionally enter upon the property of another person for which the person is not given specific
permission to enter for the purpose of releasing a confined, chained or tethered animal.
(c) Interference with impoundment. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or attempt to interfere with
the animal control officer or to interfere or attempt to interfere with any person acting for the city in the taking
up and impounding of animals in the city.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 43, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.01.014 Tampering with traps or equipment set out by animal control officer
No person shall remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment belonging to or set out by
the animal control officer. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 78, adopted 9/10/04)
ARTICLE 2.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR KEEPING ANIMALS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/536
Sec. 2.02.001 Identification for animals
Except as provided herein, all animals within the city shall be marked by some type of identifying license, tag,
band, tattoo or brand by which the animal's owner can be identified. Animals exempted from this requirement
are mice, rats, rabbits, guineas, hamsters, gerbils, ferrets, fowl and snakes. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 31, adopted
9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.002 Running at large
(a) Responsible party. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, harbors or otherwise has control
over any animal within the city to allow or permit such animal to run or be at large within the city.
(b) Cats. The prohibition against an animal running at large shall not apply to a domestic cat which has been
vaccinated as required by this chapter and which is wearing the required vaccination tags. The prohibition shall
apply to all other cats.
(c) Restraint required. An animal shall be considered to be at large if it is not under the control of its owner by
either a leash, chain, cord or other suitable material attached to a collar or harness, or not restrained on the
property of the owner by a leash, chain, cord or fence. An animal inside a vehicle parked in a public place or in
the open bed of a moving or parked vehicle in a public place shall be considered to be at large unless it is
restrained in such a manner that it cannot exit the vehicle of its own volition.
(d) Snakes. It shall be unlawful for any person to have a snake in any park or other public place unless it is
within some type of cage, pen or enclosure.
(e) Impoundment. The animal control officer for the city may impound any animal observed to be at large,
whether the animal is on public or private property, subject to the applicable provisions of the law. If the animal
control officer observes an animal on property which is owned by a person other than the owner of the animal,
and observes the animal return to property of its owner, the animal control officer may impound the animal or
issue a citation for the animal running at large. In the event the animal is on private property or property of the
animal's owner, the animal control officer, his/her agent, or a peace officer may enter the property, other than a
private dwelling, for the purpose of impoundment or issuance of a citation, or both, subject to the applicable
provisions of this chapter and law.
(f) Prima facie evidence. Proof that an animal was found at large in violation of this section, together with
proof that the defendant was the owner of such animal at the time, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
defendant allowed or permitted the animal to be at large.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 32, adopted 9/10/04)
State law reference–Restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.02.003 Confinement of female dogs and cats during estrus
(a) Secured enclosure required. Any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat) shall be confined
during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure and the area of enclosure shall be so
constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animals except for controlled breeding
permitted by the owner of the female.
(b) Chaining or tethering. Additionally, the female dog or cat shall not be chained or tethered, except in a
secured enclosure, and if chained or tethered within a secured enclosure, the female dog or cat may not be
chained or tethered in a manner that prevents her from defending herself or from avoiding a male.
(c) Removal of animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to immediately remove the animal in heat
to a veterinary hospital or the animal shelter. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/536
officer shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat will then be impounded as prescribed herein. All
expenses incurred as a result of this confinement shall be paid by the owner.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 33, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.004 Animal defecation on public or private property
(a) Prohibition. It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of an animal to intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly or with criminal negligence allow or permit such animal to defecate on any public property or
improved private property other than that of the owner of the animal. That the animal was at large at the time it
defecated on any property shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner or person in control of the animal
allowed or permitted the animal to so act.
(b) Exception. It is an exception to the application of this section that the owner or person in control of the
animal immediately removed and cleaned up such animal's feces from public or private property.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 34, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.005 Wild animals, wildlife and prohibited animals
(a) No person shall possess, keep or have care, custody or control of a prohibited animal, wild animal or
wildlife within the city except as provided herein.
(b) All persons shall be prohibited from selling, giving, transferring or importing into the city any wild animal.
(c) This section shall not apply to approved zoological parks or circuses. Nor shall this section apply to
primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, zoological parks owned or operated by a governmental
entity or any animal assisting physically handicapped persons.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the animal being kept was an infant or injured
animal which was not capable of surviving on its own and that such animal was kept for three days or less, or for
such reasonable time as was necessary before giving the animal to a licensed wildlife rehabilitator.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 35, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.006 Nuisance animals
(a) As used in this article, a nuisance animal shall be defined as any animal that commits any of the acts listed
herein:
(1) Molests or chases pedestrians, passersby or passing vehicles, including bicycles, or molests,
attacks or interferes with other animals or persons on public property or private property other than
the owner's;
(2) Makes unprovoked attacks on other animals of any kind or engages in conduct which
establishes such animal as a “dangerous animal”;
(3) Is repeatedly at large, specifically, three or more times per 12-month period (excluding
domestic cats);
(4) Damages, soils or defiles public property or private property, other than property belonging to
or under the control of the owner;
(5) Repeatedly defecates on property not belonging to or under the control of its owner, unless
such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner of the animal (including
domestic cats);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/536
(6) Barks, whines, howls, crows, cackles or makes any noise excessively and continuously, and
such noise disturbs a person of ordinary sensibilities;
(7) Produces odors or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy persons living in the vicinity; or
(8) Is unconfined when in heat.
(b) If the animal control officer determines that any animal is a nuisance as defined in this section, the animal
control officer shall issue an order clearly stating the nuisance animal behavior or condition(s) and requiring that
the owner take effective measures to abate such nuisance animal behavior or condition(s). The order, the form of
which shall be provided for by policy, shall be given to the owner by personal service or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The owner may file a written appeal to this order clearly stating the reasons for the appeal, to
the chief of police, within 10 days of service. If no written appeal is received by the chief of police within the
prescribed appeal period, the nuisance determination of the animal control officer is presumed to be valid. If the
animal control officer's determination is appealed, the chief of police or designee shall conduct a hearing to
determine the validity of the animal being determined a nuisance and/or abatement issues stated in the written
appeal. At the hearing, the formal rules of evidence do not apply. The chief shall make his/her decision on the
basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented. The chief may (i) sustain the determination of a nuisance
animal and abatement order as originally written, (ii) quash the determination of a nuisance animal and
abatement order, or (iii) sustain the determination of a nuisance animal but modify the abatement order. The
decision of the chief shall be rendered within 30 days from receipt of the appeal and the decision of the chief
shall be final.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of an animal determined a nuisance under this section to
permit continued or future nuisance behavior or condition(s). Nothing herein precludes the city from seeking
other remedies if owners fail to comply with the remedial requirements stated or the decision(s) rendered in the
appeal process.
(d) Persons residing within 600 feet of a person who harbors or keeps an animal that they believe to be a
nuisance may initiate a written, signed complaint, the form of which shall be provided for by policy, with the
animal control division. The animal control division shall investigate the merits of such complaints to determine
if the stated animal is a nuisance as defined in this section. If the animal is determined to be a nuisance animal,
the procedure set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall apply.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 36, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.007 Honeybees
No person shall construct, place or maintain any beehive within 300 feet of any residence other than that of the
owner except with the consent of the occupants of all such residences. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 37, adopted
9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.008 Pens and coops for animals other than livestock
(a) All fowl and rabbits shall be kept within a pen, coop or hutch. A fenced yard shall not qualify as a pen or
coop.
(b) Any person keeping or harboring any animal, other than livestock, shall locate any pen, coop, hutch or
other housing at least 50 feet from any residence, excluding the residence of the person keeping or harboring the
animals.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 38, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.009 Livestock pens and enclosures; staking or pasturing livestock in public place
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/536
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having care, custody or control over any livestock, except
the horses used by the city police department, to:
(1) Cause or permit any livestock to be pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, lane, alley,
park or other public place;
(2) Tie, stake or pasture or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of any animal upon any private
property within the city without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, or in such a
way as to permit any livestock to trespass upon any street or other public place or upon any private
property; or
(3) Permit any livestock to be or remain during the nighttime secured by a stake, or secured in any
manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to
restrain such livestock.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock within the city in a pen or other
enclosure situated at any point closer than 200 feet to any residence, excluding the residence of the person
keeping or harboring the livestock.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock within the city in a pen or other
enclosure which has less than 600 square feet of area for each livestock.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 39, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.010 Storage of feed
All feed provided for animals, other than hay, shall be kept in an enclosed building or container except when
being used to feed an animal. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 40, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.011 Keeping hogs prohibited
The keeping of hogs is prohibited. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 41(a), adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.02.012 Distance restrictions for keeping livestock and fowl
(a) Keeping animals near city water supply.
(1) It is unlawful and constitutes an offense for any person, whether for himself or as the agent or
servant of another or others, to keep or to participate in keeping any horse, cattle, sheep, goat, other
livestock and/or fowl in any pen or lot used to confine any such multiple animal operation within 500
feet of any water supply wells from which the city obtains its principal water supply as specified in
the official Texas Administrative Code published under authority of the secretary of state, title 31,
Natural Resources and Conservation, section 290.41(c)(1)(C), (D), (F).
(2) “Keeping” means the care and control of the livestock or fowl in question for a period of longer
than five days.
(b) Distance from private residence or establishment open to the public. It is unlawful and constitutes a
nuisance to keep any horse, cattle, sheep, goat, rabbit or other livestock, including fowl, at any place within the
city, when the place where the same are kept is within 200 feet of any private residence or dwelling place or
within 500 feet of any building or establishment open to the public, with the exception of park land, or if the
animal or fowl in question is kept in a manner and under conditions wherein by reason of the odors emanating
therefrom, the noise made by it or from any other cause pertaining to it or pertaining to the manner or to the
place at which it is kept is reasonably calculated to annoy, offend or disturb the reasonable sensibilities of
inhabitants of a private residence, or person(s) occupying or visiting an establishment open to the public. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/536
distance provisions do not apply to park land; however, other requirements of this section relating to the manner
in which animals are kept shall apply to such park land.
(c) Prima facie evidence of violation. Proof that one dozen or more of such fowl or animals as described in
subsection (b) above, or any combination thereof, are being kept at any one time at a place within the city that is
within 200 feet of the private residence of another, or within 500 feet of any building or establishment open to
the public, shall be sufficient to make out a prima facie case, and unless such prima facie case is overcome by
sufficient evidence, it shall warrant a conviction under the provisions of this section.
(d) Exceptions. The distance restrictions and livestock prohibitions of this chapter do not apply to property
zoned as Agricultural (A) according to the zoning ordinance of the city. The distance restrictions of this chapter
do not apply to property zoned as Residential Estate (RE) according to the zoning ordinance of the city or to
property properly zoned or used (as in continuing use) as veterinary clinics, or facilities or established kennels
that are for the purposes of care or boarding animals, or existing shipping pens utilized for temporary holding
before shipment or sale.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 41(b)–(e), adopted 9/10/04)
ARTICLE 2.03 ANIMAL PROTECTION*
Sec. 2.03.001 Animals in vehicles
(a) Leaving animal in parked vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any animal in any standing
or parked vehicle in such a way as to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence endanger
the animal's health, safety or welfare. An animal control officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable
force to remove the animal from the vehicle whenever it appears that the animal's health, safety or welfare is or
will be endangered if the owner of the vehicle cannot be located after reasonable attempts. The animal shall be
taken to the animal shelter or to a veterinarian if the animal is in distress. A written notice bearing the name of
the officer removing the animal, a telephone number where he can be contacted and the location where the
animal may be claimed by the owner shall be attached to the vehicle. Any person violating this section shall bear
the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment cost and disposal of
the animal, including the removal from a vehicle, in addition to any criminal penalty that may be imposed under
this section.
(b) Vehicle-related incidents resulting in animal being left unattended. In instances where occupants of motor
vehicles are involved in a traffic accident or other vehicle-related incidents which result in animals being left
uncontrolled or unattended, animal control or police officers of the city are authorized to take welfare custody of
such unattended animals. In the interest of the health, safety or welfare of such animals, officers are authorized
to transport such animals to the city's kennel facility, a veterinarian, a humane shelter, or an animal emergency
clinic. Information shall be provided to the animal's owner as to the animal's disposition. Animal owners shall
bear the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment costs or other
associated costs.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 61, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.002 Duty of motor vehicle operator to report accident involving animal
(a) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle within the city, strikes any animal shall report the
accident to the police department within a reasonable time if the animal stricken is on or near the roadway so
that it constitutes a potential traffic hazard. It shall be an affirmative defense to any violation under this section
that the incident occurred while the operator was responding to an emergency and that the incident was reported
as soon as possible.
(b) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report
such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/536
operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or the local humane society.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 62, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.003 Tethered animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, chain or fasten any animal in such a manner as to permit it to be
upon any public sidewalk or street or to leave it unattended while tethered, chained or fastened on public
property. It shall be unlawful to tether, chain or fasten an animal in such a manner as to cause it injury or pain or
not permit it to reach shelter, food and water. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 63, adopted 9/10/04)
State law reference–Unlawful restraint of dog, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 821.076 et seq.
Sec. 2.03.004 Sale or display of dyed animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, raffle, offer or give as a prize, premium or advertising
device or cause to be displayed in any store, shop, carnival or other public place an animal or fowl of any kind
that has been dyed or otherwise colored artificially. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 64, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.005 Giving animal as prize or inducement
(a) No person shall give away any live animal, reptile, fowl, livestock or wildlife as a prize for or as an
inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition; or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement;
or as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer is for the purpose of attracting trade.
This prohibition shall apply to carnivals, fairs and circuses.
(b) The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to fish or to animals given as prizes at a rodeo
contest or livestock show or as part of an FFA, 4-H or similar project.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 65, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.006 Trapping, shooting and hunting
(a) Trapping prohibited. It shall be unlawful to set, trigger, activate or otherwise use, or cause to be set,
triggered, activated or used, any steel-jawed, leg-hold trap, or for any person, other than animal control officers,
to set or otherwise use other trapping devices, including “live traps,” used for the capture of any animal.
Consistent with the provisions herein, the animal control division is authorized to utilize humane “live traps” and
may conduct trapping operations or provide or authorize such devices' use to property owners as may be needed
throughout the city. This subsection is not intended to prohibit the prudent use of traps on one's own property to
control rodents.
(b) Hunting prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot, intentionally injure or kill any wild
bird, animal, mammal or reptile within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hunt, shoot or kill, within the city, any domestic bird, animal, mammal, reptile or pet that is not owned by such
person. Except this subsection shall not be construed or interpreted to prohibit the destruction of poisonous
snakes or to prohibit the animal control division from utilizing certain firearms in emergency field conditions
where such actions are provided for by law or policy.
(c) Shooting domestic animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a domestic animal within the
corporate limits of the city. It shall be a defense to prosecution that the domestic animal shot was a vicious
animal and presenting an immediate threat to personal or public safety. Except this subsection shall not be
construed or interpreted to prohibit the animal control division from utilizing certain firearms in emergency field
conditions where such actions are provided for by law or policy.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 66, adopted 9/10/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/536
Sec. 2.03.007 Molesting animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner tease, annoy, disturb, molest or irritate an animal that is
confined to the owner's premises. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 67, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.008 Sanitary requirements for pens and enclosures; overcrowding
(a) The owners of any animal shall maintain and keep all pens, coops, kennels, fenced areas and enclosures of
any kind in a sanitary condition. This shall include the following:
(1) All animal wastes shall be disposed of promptly and all pens and enclosures shall be cleaned as
needed to prevent odors and not draw insects or other vermin or create a nuisance.
(2) The premises upon which animals are kept shall be clean and free from noxious and unpleasant
odors.
(3) Some standard spray or other chemicals shall be used at reasonable intervals to keep the
premises free of flies, mosquitoes, ticks, fleas and other vectors.
(b) Cages, pens or enclosures used to confine animals shall be of sufficient size to maintain all of the animals
within such pen or enclosure comfortably and in good health.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 68, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.009 Negligent care
(a) It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in his charge or custody, as
owner or otherwise, with proper food, water, shade, adequate shelter, veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering, and grooming when lack thereof would adversely affect the health of the animal, and with humane
care and treatment.
(b) To provide “adequate shelter” for a dog or cat kept outdoors, a person must provide a shelter accessible to
the dog or cat meeting the following standards:
(1) The shelter must provide protection from the weather, i.e., sun, wind, precipitation (in whatever
form), or other inclement weather conditions.
(2) If there are no artificial heat sources, the structure shall be small enough to allow the dog or cat
to warm the interior of the structure and maintain its body heat, but large enough to permit normal
postural adjustments, or standing.
(3) Plastic air shipping containers and/or pet carriers shall not be used as outdoor shelters.
(c) A written warning of violation requiring that the condition be corrected within a specified time period shall
be issued to a person before any notice to appear at the municipal court may be issued or before a complaint may
be filed with the municipal court.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 69, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.010 Animals in state of pain or suffering
(a) If any animal without a license tag or other identifying marker is found in a state of pain and suffering or
becomes so during confinement, the animal control division may dispose of the animal in any humane manner
without complying with the three-day (72-hour) waiting period as set out herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/536
(b) If the owner or keeper of an animal found in a state of pain or suffering refuses to assume responsibility to
care for the animal, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal in a humane manner.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 70, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.011 Sale of animals in public place
(a) Not in lieu of or withstanding any permit requirements imposed herein, if an animal is offered for sale in a
public place within the city, the person offering the animal for sale, the owner of the animal, the manager of the
property which is the public place on which the offer is being made, and the owner of the property which is the
public place on which the offer is being made shall be responsible for ensuring that the animal protections of this
article are complied with in regard to the animal offered for sale in a public place during the time the animal is in
the public place.
(b) The term “public place” as used herein shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access. It shall include, but is not limited to, shops, stores and flea markets.
(c) If an animal offered for sale in a public place is kept within a cage or pen of any type, such cage or pen
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The cage or pen must be large enough for the animal to stand on all of its legs and hold its head
in a natural position and not be in a crouched position. The cage or pen must also have enough room
for the animal to turn around or move without stepping on another animal, animal feces, or food or
water provided for the animal.
(2) The cage or pen must either have room for water and food or have water and food situated so
that the animal has access to it through the cage.
(3) The cage or pen must be situated so that air may circulate through it, so that any animal kept
within the cage or pen is not exposed to extreme heat. During cold or inclement weather, cages or
pens should be situated so that animals contained therein may stay warm and stay dry.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 71, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.012 Use of property for purpose of conducting animal fights; possession of fighting equipment
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence use,
or allow or permit to be used, property that he owns or has control over for the purpose of conducting animal
fights. For purposes of this section, “animal” shall mean a domesticated living creature and wild living creature
previously captured, other than a dog.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess animal fighting equipment within the city. As used herein,
the term “animal fighting equipment” means any equipment used for training, handling, housing, feeding or
transporting fighting animals. The term also includes animals being used, trained or bred for fighting or intended
to be used, trained, or bred for fighting.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 72, adopted 9/10/04)
State law references–Cruelty by causing livestock animals to fight, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09(a)(6); cruelty by causing
nonlivestock animals to fight, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092(b)(7); dog fighting, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.10; cockfighting,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.105.
Sec. 2.03.013 Slaughtering animals
Animals may be slaughtered for human or animal consumption within the city, provided it is done at a location
that is shielded from sensory perception of the general public, and provided it is done in a manner designed to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/536
cause the animal's death as quickly as possible without needless suffering. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 73, adopted
9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.014 Use of poisonous substances
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to administer poison to an animal belonging to another without legal
authority or the owner's effective consent. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any domestic animal or person.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or with criminal negligence injure another's animal by
leaving a poisonous substance of any kind in any place within the city.
(c) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to an exterminator using poisons as part of a pest
control program, nor shall it apply to persons using commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control
insects and wild rodents. For purposes of this section, the term “exterminator” shall mean an individual licensed
by the state structural pest control board, unless he or she is exempt from such licensing.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 74, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.015 Cruel treatment; causing or permitting animal fights
No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal
or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 75, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.016 Abandonment
No person shall abandon an animal in his/her custody. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 76, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.03.017 Health hazards or offensive conditions
Any person who shall harbor or keep animals on his/her premises, or in or about premises under his/her control,
and who allows such premises to become a hazard to the general health and welfare of the community, or who
shall allow such premises to give off obnoxious or offensive odors due to the activity or presence of such
animals, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 77, adopted 9/10/04)
ARTICLE 2.04 DANGEROUS ANIMALS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Purpose
It is the intention of this article to provide a means of dealing with an animal that is dangerous or, by its conduct,
has indicated that it may represent a danger in the future. In interpreting the definitions contained in this article
and in implementing its provisions, the animal control officer shall recognize the right of a person to use an
animal as a protector or as a guard; however, the animal control officer shall also take into consideration the
right of a neighborhood to be free from fear that an animal may leave the premises of its owner or keeper and
attack and injure a person or other domestic animal. It is also the intention of this article to provide public safety
regarding dangerous wild animals and other potentially dangerous nondomestic animals, as well as providing an
avenue for permitting the safe exhibition of certain animals for public entertainment. (Ordinance 403-04, sec.
101, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.002 Dangerous animals
(a) A dangerous animal shall be defined as an animal which:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/536
(1) Has inflicted injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property;
(2) Has killed or severely injured a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property;
(3) Is trained or harbored for fighting, which may be determined based on whether the animal
exhibits behavior and/or bears physical scars or injuries which indicate that the animal has been
trained or used for the purpose of fighting;
(4) Is a warm-blooded mammal which is known to carry or be susceptible to the rabies virus and
which cannot be effectively vaccinated against that virus with any vaccine approved by the
department of state health services (prohibited under section 2.04.006 of this chapter);
(5) Is a hybrid animal or any pet wildlife which has attacked a human or which is apprehended or
observed unrestrained; or
(6) Is a venomous or carnivorous fish or reptile or any fish or reptile that grows over six feet in
length (prohibited under section 2.04.006 of this chapter).
(b) If an animal acts or is defined as stated in subsection (a) of this section, the animal control officer shall
impound the animal immediately if it is at large; or, if it is in the possession of some person, the animal control
officer may issue a notice requiring immediate remedial or safeguard measures be taken or if necessary for
public safety that the animal be taken to a designated location for impoundment. The form of such notice shall
be provided for by policy. An animal which is impounded shall not be released until a final determination is
made on the disposition of the animal.
(c) If the animal control officer determines that any animal acts as, or is, defined in this section, the animal
control officer shall issue a notice to the owner clearly stating the animal's actions or that by definition the
animal is determined to be a dangerous animal; such notice may require remedial measures to be taken if
appropriate. The notice, the form of which shall be provided for by policy, shall be given to the owner by
personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the dangerous animal is of the types defined in
subsection (a)(4) or (a)(6) of this section, the possession of which is subject to an offense under section 2.04.006
(prohibited animals), enforcement shall be under that section under this chapter. The owner may file a written
appeal to this notice clearly stating the reason(s) for disputing the remedial action(s) or the determination of the
animal being deemed a dangerous animal. Such appeals shall be directed to the chief of police within 10 days of
service. If no written appeal is received by the chief of police within the prescribed appeal period, the dangerous
animal determination of the animal control officer is presumed to be valid. If the animal control officer's
determination is appealed, the chief of police or designee shall conduct a hearing to determine the validity of the
animal being determined a dangerous animal. At the hearing, the formal rules of evidence do not apply. The
chief shall make his/her decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented. The chief may (i)
sustain the determination of dangerous animal and/or sustain or modify remedial requirements, or (ii) unfound
the determination and declare the animal as non-dangerous. The decision of the chief shall be rendered within 30
days from receipt of the appeal, and the decision of the chief shall be final. If after the appeal hearing the animal
is deemed non-dangerous, the owner shall only pay the minimum “at large” impound fee and the animal
released. If not impounded “at large” the owner shall pay no impound fee(s).
(d) It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of an animal determined a dangerous animal under this
section to permit continued or future “at large” behavior or to disregard valid remedial requirements imposed or
safeguard requirements imposed under the processes described in this section. Any person who shall violate this
provision shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(e) If the owner of a dangerous animal cannot be determined after reasonable efforts to do so and after holding
the animal for 72 hours, the animal may be disposed of in a humane manner. If the owner of a dangerous animal
which has been impounded cannot be located for the delivery service of the notice required herein either in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/536
person or by mail, the animal may be disposed of in a humane manner after all reasonable effort has been made
to locate such owner.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 102, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.003 Potentially dangerous animals
(a) If the animal control officer believes that an animal has exhibited behavior indicating that it represents a
potential danger, the animal control officer may initiate an investigation to determine whether or not the animal
is potentially dangerous.
(b) An animal may be defined as “potentially dangerous” if it has engaged in the following conduct:
(1) When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or
private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
(2) Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to
otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals.
(c) If an animal acts or is defined as stated in subsection (b) of this section, the animal control officer shall
impound the animal immediately if it is at large; or, if it is in the possession of some person, the animal control
authority shall determine the ownership and owner address of such animal.
(d) Written notice and appeal of this determination of potentially dangerous animal and any remedial
provisions prescribed shall follow the same processes set out in section 2.04.002(c) for dangerous animals. Only
“at large” potentially dangerous animals shall be impounded with the appropriate fee paid for the animal's
release; no extended impound period awaiting final disposition shall be required.
(e) It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of an animal determined a potentially dangerous animal
under this section to permit continued or future “at large” behavior. Any person who shall violate this provision
shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 103, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.004 Exceptions to determination that animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous
(a) No animal may be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous:
(1) If the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time:
(A) Was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner
of the animal;
(B) Was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has in the past been observed or
reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal and the animal was not at large at
the time of the offense; or
(C) Was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
(2) If the dog was protecting or defending a person while in that person's control from an
unjustified attack or assault; or
(3) If the dog was injured and responding to pain.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to animals under the control of a governmental law
enforcement, correctional, or military agency.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/536
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to a dog whose conduct has brought it within the coverage of
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code chapter 822, to the extent that said chapter preempts local regulation of the
dog's conduct.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 104, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.005 Exhibition of certain animals prohibited
No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, on his premises any wild or dangerous animal for display or for
exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to a zoo
or circus, as defined in section 2.01.001. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 122, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.006 Prohibited animals generally
No person may possess a prohibited animal within the city limits. Such prohibited animals shall include, but are
not limited to, all animals prohibited by state or federal law, and shall include, but are not limited to, the
following animals or any hybrid of these animals or such other class of animals as may be determined to be
dangerous by the animal control officer or any other dangerous animal which may be added in the future to the
list as a high risk animal in the Texas Rabies Control Act, as amended:
(1) Class Mammalia: Family Canidae (such as wolves, coyotes and foxes) except domesticated
dogs and hybrids involving same; Family Mustelidae (such as weasels, martins, fishers, skunks,
wolverines, mink and badgers) except ferrets; Family Procyonidae (such as raccoons); Family
Ursidae (such as bears); and Order Chiroptera (such as bats).
(2) Poisonous reptiles, cobras and their allies (Elapidae, Hydrophiidae); vipers and their allies
(Crotiladae, Viperidae); Boonslang and Kirtland's tree snakes; Gila monsters (Helodermatidae); and
crocodiles, alligators and their allies (order Loricata) and nonvenomous reptiles over six feet in
length.
(3) Brown recluse (Loxosceles) and black widow (Lactrodectus) spiders.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 123, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.007 Prohibited dangerous wild animals and other nondomestic animals
The animals specified in this section as dangerous wild animals shall be deemed as contraband and no person
may possess any individual species and/or subspecies of the following dangerous wild animals: Order Carnivora,
Family Felidae (such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars, ocelots, lynx, bobcats, cheetahs, and
jaguars), hyenas, bears, lesser pandas, ferrets from natural habitats, and Order Primata (such as monkeys,
chimpanzees, and apes). No person may possess any individual species of the following animals: Antelope,
binturong, miniature pigs, elephants, Vietnamese potbelly pigs, or such other nondomestic species of animal not
common to this area. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 124, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.008 Permit and certificates of registration for circus and zoo operations
(a) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 2.04.005, 2.04.006, and 2.04.007, special
certificates of registration of dangerous wild animals and other nondomestic animals noted in such
sections may be issued in conjunction with the issuance process of permitting circus or nonaccredited
zoo operations within the city. The issuance of such permits shall provide an exception to
said sections and classify such animals as “restricted” and subject to the terms set out in the
application and agreement processes provided herein. The application for a certificate and permit
shall be made to the animal control authority on a form provided for by department policy. Such form
shall contain a formal “agreement” between the city and the applicant relating to routine permitting
criteria and, specifically, general business practices as these relate to the type of permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/536
(circus or zoo), hours of operation, and covenants to observe approved safety and escape prevention
procedures. Approved permits and related certificates of registration shall be issued under the
authority of the chief of police. Applications shall be investigated for reputation for historical
compliance with such or similar laws in this jurisdiction and others, and the applicant shall provide
the following information and documentation:
(A) A health certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that the animal is free from
symptoms of infectious disease or is under treatment. A new health certificate is required each
time the permit is renewed. A copy will remain with the animal control officer;
(B) Copies of applicable state or federal permits or licenses as required by either of those
entities for the keeping of the particular animal in question. These copies will be retained by the
animal control officer;
(C) Information relating to the owner, including emergency telephone numbers and telephone
numbers for their veterinarian in case of emergencies;
(D) Present proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility in the amount of
$100,000.00 to cover the damages resulting from an escape and/or attack by any one individual
animal listed in sections 2.04.006 and 2.04.007 to be registered and permitted;
(E) Agreement to allow reasonable access for inspection by the animal officer; and
(F) Enter into an agreement with the city that safety and escape prevention be maintained on
a 24-hour basis, the failure of which shall be grounds for permit revocation, and documentation
of compliance with all other applicable city ordinances, including but not limited to building
and planning and zoning.
(2) The negligent escape of any animal subject to permitting under this article shall be prima facie
evidence of a breach of the safety and escape prevention covenants required herein.
(3) Failure to provide required information or documentation, or an unsatisfactory investigative
finding, shall be grounds for denial of the permit. An appeal of denial of a permit shall be made in
writing within 10 days of the notice of denial to the city administrator. The city administrator may
review the issues leading to the denial or conduct an administrative hearing and decide the issue; in
either [case], the decision of the city administrator is final.
(b) Before a certificate(s) and permit is issued, the animal control officer shall inspect the facility where the
animal(s) is/are to be kept, which must meet the following criteria:
(1) Each enclosure must provide adequate exercise area and sleeping quarters;
(2) Proper temperature control and ventilation for the particular species must be provided in both
areas;
(3) Each enclosure must be kept locked and designed so that no one can enter or place appendages
in the enclosure;
(4) Each enclosure must be constructed so as to prevent the animal from escaping;
(5) Each enclosure must be kept in good repair to prevent both escape and injury to the animal;
(6) Each enclosure must have a water container which is secured so as to prevent its being
overturned; and
(7) Each enclosure must be cleaned daily.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/536
(c) The animal control officer may, when deemed necessary, employ the services of a licensed veterinarian to
assist in this application process and the applicant shall be responsible for the reasonable costs associated with
such service in addition to any permit fees required under this act.
(d) Each animal must be provided with continuous clean water and must be fed a diet approved by a licensed
veterinarian.
(e) Any animal which has bitten or scratched someone must be immediately surrendered to the animal control
officer for euthanasia and testing by the department of state health services. A live test approved by the
department of state health services may be substituted for euthanasia.
(f) The fee for the circus/zoo registration and permit shall be according to the schedule established in section
2.01.010, and the permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and shall not be transferable. Major
modifications or additions to such facilities' animal containment areas shall require a reinspection and/or repermitting
of the circus or zoo. In such instances, the original application fee shall be collected.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 125, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.009 Violations relating to prohibited animals; penalties
(a) It shall be a violation of section 2.04.005 of this article if a person keeps or permits to be kept on his
premises any wild or dangerous animal for display or exhibition purposes, and each day of noncompliance shall
constitute a separate offense.
(b) It shall be a violation of this article if a person possesses an animal prohibited under section 2.04.006, and
each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) It shall be a violation of this article if a person possesses an animal prohibited under section 2.04.007, and
each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any criminal penalty, if a person possesses
an animal classified in section 2.04.007 as a “dangerous wild animal” in violation of this article, that person is
liable for a civil penalty of not less than $200.00 and not more than $2,000.00 for each dangerous wild animal in
violation and for each day the violation continues. The city attorney may bring suit to collect said penalty and
costs allowed by statute and such penalty shall be retained by the city.
(d) It shall be a violation of this article to operate a circus or zoo without a valid permit issued pursuant to this
article, and each day of operation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any criminal penalty, if the
circus or zoo at the time of the violation is in possession of any “dangerous wild animal,” the liability for the
civil penalty detailed in subsection (c) herein may be imposed for each dangerous wild animal possessed.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 126, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.010 Exemptions
(a) This article does not apply to:
(1) Zoological parks accredited by the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums.
(2) Federally licensed research institutions.
(3) Any government agency or its employee who uses the animals for an agency related to
education, propagation, or behavior programs.
(4) Anyone holding a valid rehabilitation permit from the state parks and wildlife department, but
only for animals which are in rehabilitation and scheduled to be released to the wild.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/536
(5) A research facility as defined by Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2132) and licensed by
the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture.
(6) A dangerous wild animal in the custody and control of a circus company or other similar entity
not based in this city and the animal is “in transit.”
(7) An animal subject to this article in the temporary custody and control of a television or motion
picture production company during production activities.
(8) Any federal, state, or local governmental entity acting in an official capacity and engaging in
zoological activities.
(b) Other than the provisions of sections 2.04.002 and 2.04.003 and the prohibitive provisions of sections
2.04.006 and 2.04.007, this article does not apply to an animal that is an FFA or 4-H project and that is and
remains in good standing and on an official list of such authorized projects filed with the city by the authorized
sponsor of such FFA or 4-H program; provided that such exemption shall be withdrawn upon the sponsor of the
applicable FFA or 4-H program notifying the mayor that such animal is not being maintained and cared for in
compliance with the standards of such FFA or 4-H program, or is otherwise no longer an authorized FFA or 4-H
project.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 127, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.011 Guard dogs
(a) All dogs which are trained and kept solely for the protection of persons and property, residential,
commercial or personal, shall be registered with the animal control authority in the same manner and fee as
domestic dogs kept for pets; however, a statement of the dog's intended use as a guard dog must be declared. The
utilization of a guard dog shall require that the area or premises in which such dog is confined be conspicuously
posted with warning signs at all entrances bearing letters not less than two inches high, stating “Guard Dog On
Premises.”
(b) The area of premises may be subject to inspection by the animal control officer to determine that the
animal in question is maintained and secured at all times in such a manner so as to prevent its coming in contact
with the public and that the proper “public” notice signs are posted.
(c) This section does not apply to dogs used by federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement agencies
or correctional institutions.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 128, adopted 9/10/04)
State law reference–Licensing and duties of guard dog companies, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1702.109 et seq.
Secs. 2.04.012–2.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Nonregisterable Dangerous Dogs
Sec. 2.04.041 Prohibited; impoundment or destruction
No person shall own or harbor a nonregisterable dangerous dog within the city. Such an animal may be
impounded as a public nuisance. If impoundment of such nonregisterable dangerous dog is being attempted
away from the premises of the owner and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the animal may be
destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer. If an attempt is made to impound a nonregisterable dangerous
dog from the premises of the owner or harborer and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the owner or
harborer will be given 24 hours' notice that, if the animal is not surrendered to the animal control officer for
impoundment within said 24-hour period, then the animal will be destroyed wherever it is found. After this
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/536
notice, the nonregisterable dangerous dog may be destroyed during an attempt to impound, if impoundment
cannot be made with safety, wherever the impoundment is attempted. Notice under this chapter may be verbal or
in writing on a form provided for by policy. A written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the
nonregisterable dangerous dog is harbored will be considered valid notice under this chapter. (Ordinance 403-04,
sec. 105, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.042 Criteria for determination
A dog is determined to be a nonregisterable dangerous dog if:
(1) A dog is automatically determined to be nonregisterable if it commits acts as set forth under the
definition of nonregisterable dangerous dog in section 2.01.001;
(2) The animal control officer may find and determine a dog to be nonregisterable if:
(A) Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals, made under
oath before an individual authorized by law to take sworn statements or made at the animal
shelter before the animal control officer, setting forth an act described in section 2.01.001 and
referenced above in subsection (1), and setting forth:
(i) The nature and the date of the act described in section 2.01.001;
(ii) The location of the event;
(iii) The name and address of the owner of the animal in question; and
(iv) The description of the animal in question;
(B) The animal control officer investigates the complaint and may determine that an animal
is nonregisterable under this chapter and/or state law;
(3) The dog has been registered as, or finally determined or declared to be, a dangerous dog, either
in [this city] or in another city or county in Texas, or has made an unprovoked attack on another
person outside the dog's enclosure, or causes injury to such person or a person assisting or
intervening on behalf of such person; or
(4) The owner of a dog determined to be a registerable dangerous dog under this chapter, or any
previous or other ordinance of this city or any other city or state law, cannot or will not comply with
the requirements set out in this chapter for the keeping of a registerable dangerous dog.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 106, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.043 Notice of determination
(a) Within five working days of determining an animal nonregisterable, the animal control officer will notify,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a nonregisterable
animal. In the event that certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be delivered, the animal control officer
may then give notice by ordinary mail to the last known address of the owner. For the purposes of this section,
written notice may be delivered by the animal control officer in person to the owner/harborer of the dog in
question.
(b) If the animal is determined to be nonregisterable under this chapter, the owner may appeal to the municipal
court within 15 days of notification. Failure to appeal the determination of a nonregisterable dangerous dog shall
result in the animal control officer's determination as becoming final.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 107, adopted 9/10/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/536
Sec. 2.04.044 Status of dog pending appeal
Pending any appeal to municipal court, the animal must be confined at the animal shelter or licensed veterinary
facility, and the cost of such confinement shall be borne by the owner. If the dog in question is not in the
possession of the animal shelter at the time of the declaration, the owner must surrender the dog to the animal
control officer when ordered to do so. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the dog, the animal control
officer shall take the dog into his possession from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the dog may
be found within the city limits. If the dog cannot be taken into custody by the animal control officer, it may be
taken into custody under a search warrant pursuant to article 18.01, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; the
grounds for issuance shall conform to subsection (8) of article 18.02 of the same code and [the warrant shall be]
issued by the municipal judge. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 108, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.045 Defenses to determination
It is a defense to the determination that a dog is a nonregisterable dangerous dog, dangerous dog or should be
destroyed and to the prosecution of the owner of that dog:
(1) If the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a
willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal and was older
than eight years of age at the time of the attack;
(2) If the person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been
reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal and is older than eight years of age
at the time of the attack;
(3) If the person was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
(4) If the dog was protecting or defending a person while in that person's control from an
unjustified attack or assault; or
(5) If the dog was injured and responding to pain.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 109, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.046 Disposition
(a) If the municipal court upholds the determination by the animal control officer, the court shall, subject to
any rights of appeal, order the dog to be euthanized in a safe and humane manner.
(b) In the event the municipal court reverses that determination, the dog in question shall be returned to or
released to its owner provided the owner reimburses the city for any veterinary medical treatment administered
to the dog while in the custody of the animal control officer.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 110, adopted 9/10/04)
Secs. 2.04.047–2.04.070 Reserved
Division 3. Registerable Dangerous Dogs
Sec. 2.04.071 Definition
This designation shall refer to a dog determined dangerous under this chapter and in compliance with state law
and that meets any of the following criteria:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/536
(1) Any dog which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks
or any public or private property in an apparent attitude of attack such that the person reasonably
believes that the animal will cause physical injury to the person;
(2) Any dog that commits an unprovoked act in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog
was being kept and which enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the
enclosure on its own and the act causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and
cause bodily injury to any person; or
(3) Any animal that has killed or seriously injured a domestic animal without provocation while off
the owner's property.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 111, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.072 Criteria for determination
A dog is determined to be a registerable dangerous dog if it meets the requirements set out in foregoing section,
and:
(1) The owner of the dog in question knows of such an attack as defined in this chapter; or
(2) The owner is notified by the animal control officer that the dog in question is a registerable
dangerous dog. The animal control officer may find and determine a dog to be a registerable
dangerous dog if:
(A) Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals made under
oath before an individual authorized by law to take sworn statements, setting forth an act
described in foregoing section of this chapter and setting forth as follows:
(i) The nature and the date of the act described in foregoing section;
(ii) The location of the event;
(iii) The name and address of the owner of the animal in question; and
(iv) The description of the animal in question.
(B) The animal control officer has been notified by another agency that the dog has been
determined to be dangerous under the state law.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 112, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.073 Notice of determination
(a) Within five working days of determining a dog to be a registered dangerous dog, if written notification
cannot be given personally to the owner of the dog, the animal control officer will notify, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a registerable dangerous dog. In the
event that certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be delivered, the animal control officer may then give
notice by ordinary mail.
(b) If the dog is determined to be registerable under this chapter, the notice shall inform the owner of the dog
that he/she may appeal the determination to municipal court no later than 15 days after the date the owner is
notified of the determination. Failure to appeal the determination of registerable dangerous dog within the 15-
day period shall result in the animal control officer's determination becoming final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/536
(c) Upon determination by the animal control officer that the dog is dangerous, the owners shall be required to
secure the animal immediately within an enclosure that meets the requirements of this chapter. If the owner fails
to do so, the animal control officer shall impound the dog until such enclosure is provided.
(d) The animal control officer shall immediately notify, in writing, adjacent and contiguous property owners
of such determination.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 113, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.074 Status of dog pending appeal
Pending the outcome of the appeal, the animal must be confined at a licensed veterinary clinic or at the animal
shelter, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the dog in question. If the dog in question is not in the
possession of the animal shelter or a veterinary clinic at the time of the determination, the owner must surrender
the dog to the animal control officer when ordered to do so. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the dog,
the animal control officer shall have the right to take the dog into its possession from the premises of the owner
or elsewhere, wherever the dog may be found within the city limits. If the dog cannot be taken into custody by
the animal control officer, it may be taken into custody under a search warrant for contraband issued by the
municipal judge. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 114, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.075 Defenses to determination
The defenses identified in section 2.04.045 shall serve as a defenses to the determination of a dog as a
registerable dangerous dog and to the prosecution of the owner of that dog. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 115,
adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.076 Disposition
(a) If the municipal court upholds the determination by the animal control officer, the owner shall, no later
than ten days after the hearing, comply with the provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered
dangerous dog in the city and the dog shall be returned to the owner provided all costs involved in the
impoundment, holding and medical treatment of the dog are paid.
(b) In the event the municipal court reverses that determination, the dog in question shall be returned to or
released to its owner provided the owner has paid all veterinary medical costs administered to such dog while in
the custody of the animal control officer.
(c) The municipal court may order make [sic] any reasonable orders for the dog consistent with this chapter
and chapter 822 of the Health and Safety Code.
(d) If the animal control officer has information or belief or has determined that a court of competent
jurisdiction has ever made or upheld a determination or declaration that a dog is dangerous, or if the animal
control officer has determined that a declaration or determination of dangerous dog became final for failure to
appeal or any other reason, under previous or other ordinances of this city or other cities or state law, the animal
control officer shall notify the person owning or keeping such dog in writing that the owner shall, no later than
ten days after the date of the notice, comply with the provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered
dangerous dog in the city.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 116, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.077 Requirements for registration and possession
(a) The owner must register the dog with the animal control officer and pay the fees as required by state law
not later than 30 days after the owner is notified that the dog is dangerous. The registration shall not be
transferable and shall expire one year from date of issuance. The animal control officer shall provide to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/536
owner of the registered dangerous dog a tag which must be placed on the dog's collar and worn at all times. The
owner must comply with the following to register the dog:
(1) Present proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility in the amount of at least
$100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog;
(2) Present proof of current rabies vaccination of the registerable dangerous dog;
(3) Present proof that the dog has been altered so as to prevent reproduction;
(4) Provide a proper enclosure as defined in this chapter, and that proper enclosure must be
inspected and approved by the animal control officer;
(5) Post a sign on his/her premises warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. This sign
shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. In addition, the owner
shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning, understandable by small children, of the
presence of a dangerous dog; and
(6) Further identification may be required and designated by the order of the city.
(b) When the registered dangerous dog is taken outside the approved proper enclosure, the animal must be
securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration but
shall prevent it from biting a person or other animal, and the dog must be restrained by a substantial chain or
cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of 1,000 pounds and not to exceed six feet in length.
(c) Prior to selling or moving the registered dangerous dog either inside or outside the city limits, the owner
must notify the animal control officer of his/her intentions. In the event the dog is moved permanently outside
the city limits, the owner must comply with the state law in notifying the animal control division in control of
the area into which the dog has been moved.
(d) Anyone bringing a dog into the city limits that has been declared dangerous by another animal control
authority must notify the animal control officer of the new address where the dog will be kept, and upon
presentation of the dog's prior registration tag that has not expired shall pay a fee set by the city council, and the
animal control officer shall issue a new tag to be placed on the dog's collar. This owner must also comply with
all requirements set out in this chapter.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 117, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.078 Attacks by registered dangerous dog
The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer of any attacks the dog makes on people or
animals. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 118, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.079 Appeal from order of municipal court
Any appeal of the decision or order of the municipal court shall be made within ten days in the same manner as
appeal from civil cases originating in the justice of the peace courts of this state. The municipal court shall order
the appellant to post a supersedeas bond payable to the city in an amount not less than $10,000.00. The form of
the bond shall be as prescribed in the laws pertaining to civil appeals originating in the justice of the peace
courts in this state. The appellant shall be responsible for the cost of appeal. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 119,
adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.080 Defenses to prosecution
It is a defense to prosecution that the person possessing a dangerous dog is:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/536
(1) A veterinarian, peace officer, or employee of the city, and the harboring of the dog was in the
performance of his/her duties;
(2) An employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law
enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes: or
(3) A dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company, while in the performance of his/her
duties, under the Private Security Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1702.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 120, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.04.081 Penalties
(a) It shall be a violation of this article if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and the dog
makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's proper enclosure and causes bodily injury to the
other person, whether or not the dog was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the dog escaped
without fault of the owner.
(b) It shall be a violation of this article if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and that dog
kills or wounds a domestic animal while outside the dog's proper enclosure, whether or not the dog was on a
leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the dog escaped without fault of the owner.
(c) It shall be a violation of this article if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and that dog
attacks a person who gains access to the proper enclosure due to negligence on the part of the owner or the
owner's agent. This negligence shall include a failure to comply with the notification of ownership of dangerous
dog through posting of warning signs in accordance with this article.
(d) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this article is liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. The city attorney may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect
the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the city.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 121, adopted 9/10/04)
ARTICLE 2.05 IMPOUNDMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.05.001 Impoundment authorized; payment of fees
(a) Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or law of the state or those safekeeping or humane
situations provided in this act shall be taken into custody by an animal control officer or other designated official
and impounded under this chapter.
(b) Owners of impounded pets are required to pay all fees related to the impoundment as set in section
2.01.010.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 141, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.002 Tampering with animal shelter or impoundment vehicle
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city without proper authority to break into, open, pull down the
enclosure of or make any opening into the animal shelter or any enclosure belonging to or used by the city to
impound or keep animals. It shall also be unlawful for any person to turn out or release, or cause to be turned out
or released, or aid or abet the turning out or release, of any animal from the animal shelter, from an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/536
impoundment vehicle or from any enclosure used by the city for the impoundment of animals. (Ordinance 403-
04, sec. 142, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.003 Redemption of impounded animal
(a) Except as may be provided elsewhere in this article, the owner of any animal impounded in accordance
with this article may reclaim, on any workday, such animal upon showing satisfactory proof of ownership and
paying all impoundment fees and any other expenses incurred by the city or its agent in keeping the animal or
attempting to locate the owner of the animal. If the owner does not pay such fees, or some alternate fee
satisfaction as provided for in section 2.01.009 of this article, the animal may be sold or otherwise disposed of
by the city or its agent.
(b) If a dog or cat has been impounded on two prior occasions, the dog or cat must be spayed or neutered
before being released to the owner if impounded on a third occasion. The owner of the dog or cat will be
responsible for arranging for the spay or neuter surgery. The dog or cat will be transported to the veterinarian by
an animal control officer or an employee or agent of the animal shelter. The cost to spay or neuter the dog or cat
shall be paid by the owner, along with the impoundment fees, either to the animal shelter or to the veterinarian,
in advance of transporting the animal for the surgery. After the surgery is performed, the veterinarian may
release the dog or cat to the owner.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 143, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.004 Disposition of dogs and cats
(a) Dogs and cats with no identification. All dogs and cats impounded by the animal control officer, or
brought to the animal shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that animal, shall be held for a
minimum of 72 hours during which time period the owner may present proof of ownership at the shelter. After
paying all applicable fees, that owner may reclaim the dog/cat. In the event that the dog/cat is not claimed after
72 hours in the shelter, the dog/cat shall become the property of the city.
(b) Dogs and cats with identification. Unless earlier claimed by the owner, all dogs and cats impounded by the
animal control officer, or brought to the animal shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that
animal, that are wearing traceable identification, or where an owner is known, shall be held in the shelter for a
minimum of seven complete days from the time the animal enters the facility, during which time the animal
control officer will notify the owner, when known, of the impoundment. Unless the owner has notified the
animal control officer in writing of his/her intentions to claim the dog/cat after that date, listing a date by which
time that owner will reclaim the dog/cat and satisfy all applicable fees and this arrangement has been approved
by the animal control supervisor, the animal shall become the property of the city on the eighth day.
(c) Animals surrendered by owner/harborer. All animals surrendered by the owner/harborer to the animal
control officer shall become the property of the city immediately upon completion of the owner/harborer
surrender form.
(d) Animals other than dogs, cats or estrays. All animals other than dogs, cats, estrays or animals holding
current restricted animal permits that are impounded by the animal control officer or brought to the animal
shelter by a person other than the owner/harborer shall become the property of the city unless such ownership is
prohibited by state or federal law.
(e) Disposition of animals. Any animal that cannot be adopted or transferred to a proper and appropriate
agency shall be euthanized by an injection of substances approved for euthanasia by the American Veterinary
Medical Association and/or the Texas Veterinary Medical Association to be administered in compliance with
policy and the laws of the state. All animals listed as endangered or protected shall be transferred to the proper
authority at the earliest possible date.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 144, adopted 9/10/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/536
Sec. 2.05.005 Adoption of animals
(a) All animals which are adopted from the animal shelter shall be surgically altered to prevent reproduction in
that animal. If the animal has not been altered before it leaves the animal shelter, the person adopting the animal
shall sign an adoption contract stating that he/she will have the animal surgically altered and the date by which
the surgery must be performed (generally dogs and cats should be altered after reaching 6 months of age).
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the person adopting to provide proof of altering to the animal control
officer.
(c) Failure to comply with this section or failure to comply with the terms of the adoption contract shall give
the animal control officer the right to recover the adopted animal in question and revoke the owner's adoption
contract. Such failure shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
(d) The adoption fee shall be set herein at seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and may be increased or decreased as
needed by policy, to render and keep neutral the cost of surgically altering, medicating, vaccinating and
preparing the animal for adoption. In lieu of such adoption fees, an agreement may be reached with approved
veterinarians for direct payments of surgery and associated costs. The person adopting the animal shall be
provided a list of fees related to the adoption prior to the agreement being signed.
(e) This section's requirements of altering and adoption fee shall not apply where cooperative agreements
between the animal control division and an animal welfare group are made for the placement with such groups
of animals subject to adoption. Likewise, this section's requirements shall not apply to animal transfers made
under cooperative agreements between the animal control division and other governmental entities.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 145, adopted 9/10/04)
State law reference–Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 828.
Secs. 2.05.006–2.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Livestock and Fowl*
Sec. 2.05.031 Allowing livestock, fowl or pigeons to be at large
(a) It is unlawful for any owner or person in control of any horse, mule, jack, jennet, cattle, hog, goat or sheep
(estray) to permit any such animal to run at large on land not his own or under his control, or on any street, alley
or other public place in the city.
(b) It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of any chicken or other fowl to permit the same to run at
large on any land not his own or under his control, or on any street, alley or other public place in the city.
(c) It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for the owner or any person in charge or control of any pigeons in
the city, or the owner or any person in charge or control of any outbuilding or barn in the city upon which
pigeons nest, to allow such pigeons to run or fly at large in the city.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 146, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.032 Impoundment procedures; records
The animal control authority, upon receipt of a report or upon discovery of an estray within the city, shall, as
soon as possible, notify the sheriff of the county and report the presence of the animal and the location where the
animal can be found. If circumstance permits, the animal control officer shall refer the matter in its entirety to
the sheriff. If circumstance does not permit or the sheriff seeks the assistance of the animal control authority, the
animal control officer may cause the impoundment of any and all estray and other livestock that may be found in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/536
and upon any street or alley or upon any unenclosed lot in the city, or otherwise to be found at large, and confine
such estray or other livestock for safekeeping. Upon impounding, the animal control officer shall prepare a file
to be located in the animal control division offices. Each entry shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the person who notified the animal control officer of the estray or
other livestock;
(2) The date, time and location of the estray or other livestock when found;
(3) The location of the estray or other livestock until disposition; and
(4) A description of the animal, including its breed, color, sex, age, size, all markings of any kind
and other identifying characteristics.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 147, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.033 Advertisement of impounded animal
When an estray or other livestock has been impounded by the animal control authority, the animal control officer
shall make a diligent search of the register of recorded brands in the county for the owner of the estray or other
livestock. If the search does not reveal the owner, the animal control officer shall advertise the impoundment of
the estray in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least twice during the next 15 days following
impoundment and post a notice of the impoundment of the estray or other livestock on the public notice board of
city hall. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 148, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.034 Recovery of animal by owner
The owner of an estray or other livestock may recover possession of the animal at any time before the animal is
sold under the terms of this chapter if:
(1) The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit of ownership of the estray
or other livestock containing at least the following information:
(A) The name and address of the owner;
(B) The date the owner discovered that the animal was missing;
(C) The property from which the animal strayed;
(D) A description of the animal including its breed, color, sex, size, all markings of any kind
and any other identifying characteristics;
(2) The animal control officer has approved the affidavit; and
(3) The owner has paid all handling fees to those entitled to receive them.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 149, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.035 Sale of impounded animal
If the ownership of an estray or other livestock is not determined within 14 days following the final
advertisement required by this chapter, ownership of the estray or other livestock rests with the city and the
animal control officer shall then cause the estray or other livestock to be sold at a public auction. If there are not
any bidders, ownership is forfeited to the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/536
(1) Title shall be deemed vested in the animal control officer for purposes of passing a good title,
free and clear of all claims, to the purchaser at the sale.
(2) The disposition of the proceeds derived from the sale at public auction will be as follows:
(A) Pay all handling fees to those entitled to receive them;
(B) Execute a report of sale of impounded stock;
(C) The net proceeds remaining from the sale of the estray or other livestock after the
handling fees have been paid shall be delivered by the animal control officer to the city
secretary. Such net proceeds shall subject to claim by the original owner of the estray or other
livestock as provided herein;
(D) If the bids are too low, the animal control officer shall have the right to refuse all bids
and arrange for another public auction or sealed bidding procedure.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 150, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.036 Recovery of proceeds of sale by owner
(a) Within 12 months after the sale of an estray or other livestock under the provisions of this chapter, the
original owner of the estray may recover the net proceeds of the sale that were delivered to the city secretary if:
(1) The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit of ownership; and
(2) The animal control officer has accepted the affidavit of ownership.
(b) After the expiration of 12 months from the sale of an estray or other livestock as provided by this chapter,
the sale proceeds shall escheat to the city. If an animal was forfeited to the city due to no bidders at auction, then
city is not to be liable to the owner for any proceeds of sale, since no proceeds were received.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 151, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.037 Use of impounded animal
During the period of time an estray or other livestock is held by one who impounded the estray or other
livestock, it may not be used by any person for any purpose. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 152, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.05.038 Death or escape of impounded animal
If the estray or other livestock dies or escapes while held by the person who impounded it, the person shall
report the death or escape to the animal control officer. The report shall be filed in the record regarding the
impoundment. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 153, adopted 9/10/04)
ARTICLE 2.06 RABIES CONTROL AND LICENSING*
Sec. 2.06.001 Vaccination of dogs and cats required; vaccination certificate and tag
(a) All dogs or cats four months of age or older within the city shall be vaccinated against rabies. Such
vaccinations shall be repeated at the intervals prescribed by rule of the department of state health services or its
successor.
(b) A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall issue to the owner of such dog or cat a
vaccination certificate on a form approved by the department of state health services. The veterinarian shall also
issue a metal tag with the veterinarian's address and the year of the vaccination stamped thereon. Upon
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/536
vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a
certificate of vaccination. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy of the certificate and one copy shall be
filed with the owner. Such certificate shall contain the following information.
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat;
(2) The date of vaccination;
(3) The type of rabies vaccine used;
(4) The year and number of the rabies tag; and
(5) The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat.
(c) Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination, the owner of the dog or cat
shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated animal a metal tag, serially numbered to
correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, keep, possess, harbor or allow to remain upon
premises under his control any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated as required herein. Any person
establishing residence within the city shall comply with this chapter within ten days of establishing such
residency.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 161, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.002 Vaccination of impounded animals
(a) After impoundment, all animals which are required to be vaccinated by this article which are redeemed by
an owner from the animal shelter must be vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the requirements of this
article, or the owner thereof must present a veterinarian's certificate showing a current vaccination.
(b) In order for an animal not vaccinated in accordance with the requirements of this article to be released,
such owner must sign a statement giving the name of the owner and the address where the animal is to be
immediately taken and confined and stating that the owner will have the animal vaccinated in accordance with
the requirements of this article. Within seven days of the release of the animal, a certificate of vaccination shall
be presented to the animal shelter. Failure to present the vaccination certificate to the animal shelter within the
stated time shall be grounds for the immediate return of the animal to the animal shelter, and such animal may be
destroyed immediately or otherwise disposed of. Such failure shall also constitute a misdemeanor punishable as
set out in section 2.01.005, except that the minimum fine shall be $200.00.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 162, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.003 Dismissal of offense upon proof of vaccination
The failure of a dog or cat to wear a vaccination tag on a collar shall be prima facie evidence of the failure to
vaccinate the animal as required by this article. To prove that a dog or cat was vaccinated at the time of the
offense, the owner of the dog or cat must present a copy of the vaccination certificate issued by the veterinarian
that shows the date the vaccination was administered. The offense shall be dismissed upon verification that the
animal alleged in the offense was vaccinated on the date of the offense with the payment of a $20.00
administrative fee. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 163, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.004 License required; issuance; tag; identification of livestock
(a) License required; issuance. All animals four months of age or older which are kept, harbored or
maintained within the corporate limits of the city shall be licensed. Licenses shall be provided by the animal
control officer or his agent upon payment of the required fee for each animal. Before a city license will be issued
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/536
for a cat or dog, the owner must present a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that such cat or dog
has been vaccinated for rabies within the preceding 12 months. The owner shall state his/her name and address,
and the breed, color and sex of the animal to be licensed. Such license shall be valid for one year from date of
issuance. Any owner previously found to be a habitual offender and having previously had their licensed
revoked under section 2.06.005 may be deemed not eligible for current licensure. Appeals of such ineligibility
shall be those procedures set out under section 2.06.005 for revocations.
(b) Tag and collar. Upon payment of the license fee, where applicable, the city shall issue to the owner a
license certificate and metal tag having stamped thereon the number corresponding with the number of the
certificate. Such tag shall at all times be securely attached to a collar or harness around the neck of the animal. In
case a tag is lost, a duplicate will be issued by the animal control officer or his agent upon presentation of the
receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the calendar year. Tags shall not be transferable from one
animal to another, and no refunds shall be made.
(c) Livestock. All livestock shall be tagged or tattooed, and the tag or tattoo will be the identifying tag
required to be worn and will be shown on the license.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 164, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.005 Revocation of license
(a) The chief of police may revoke any license after a hearing where an affirmative finding on any one or
more of the following facts issues:
(1) That impoundment of the animal by the city more than two times during a 12-month period has
occurred;
(2) That more than two final convictions of a person for violating this chapter, when such
convictions relate to the animal being considered for revocation of its license certificate, have been
entered into the official court docket;
(3) Any combination of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section totaling three incidents; or
(4) Upon a determination that the animal is a nonregisterable dangerous animal, as defined herein.
(b) A notice of revocation hearing setting the hearing date no sooner than 10 days from the service or certified
mailing shall be served in person to the owner or such notice deemed served when made by certified letter,
return receipt requested, and addressed to the last known mailing address of the animal's owner and deposited in
the U.S. mail.
(c) Upon revoking the license of any animal, the animal control officer shall notify the owner of the animal of
such action in writing. Written notification shall be deemed made when [served by] a certified letter, return
receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the animal's owner and deposited in the U.S.
mail.
(d) Upon the expiration of ten days after written notification of revocation is deposited in the U.S. mail, as
provided above, no animal winch has had its license revoked shall be kept, maintained or harbored within the
city limits, and each 24-hour period shall constitute a separate violation.
(e) Upon revocation of a license, the owner of the animal with the revoked license shall notify the animal
control officer of the location to which the animal is being removed.
(f) Appeals of revocation hearing findings must be filed with the city administrator within ten days of
receiving notice of the action. Such notices shall be written without want of form but must include the statement
“Notice of Appeal of Decision of the Chief of Police in Revocation Hearing,” contain a statement of the
reason(s) for the appeal, and be signed by the animal owner making the appeal. The city administrator or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/536
designee shall hear the appeal. At the hearing, the formal rules of evidence do not apply. The hearing officer
shall make his/her decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented. The hearing officer may
affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the chief; however, a decision must be rendered within 60 days after the
appeal. The decision of the hearing officer is final.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 165, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.006 Counterfeiting or destruction of tag, certificate or license
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly counterfeit a rabies vaccination tag or
certificate or a license.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly destroy a rabies vaccination tag or
certificate.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 166, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.007 Reporting of rabid animals or rabies exposure
(a) It shall be the duty of all animal owners, veterinarians, physicians or any other person to report to the
animal control officer all cases of rabies with which he comes in contact or to which his attention has been
directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of a case of rabies.
(b) Any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an individual or to another animal by an
animal which the person suspects is rabid shall report that incident to the animal control officer within 24 hours.
(c) Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for any animal bite/scratch
that occurred within the city shall within 12 hours report such treatment to the animal control officer giving the
name, age, sex and precise location of the bitten/scratched person or persons and such other information as the
officer or agency may require.
(d) Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or other
domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the incident to the animal control officer stating precisely
where such animal may be found.
(e) If a known suspected rabid animal bites or scratches a domestic animal, such incident shall also be
reported immediately to the animal control officer.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 167, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.008 Reporting of bites and scratches; submission of animal to quarantine
(a) Report of victim. Any person who is bitten or scratched by an animal shall report that fact to the animal
control officer within 24 hours. If the person bitten or scratched is a minor under the age of 17, the parent or
guardian of such minor, if he has knowledge of the incident, shall report that fact to the animal control officer
within 24 hours.
(b) Report of owner. A person who owns, keeps, harbors or allows an animal to remain on premises under his
control and who has knowledge of a bite shall report to the animal control officer within 24 hours any incident
where such animal bit or scratched any person.
(c) Custody of animal. The animal committing the act shall be submitted to the animal control officer for
quarantine. When the local rabies control authority goes to the premises where the animal that bit or scratched
any person is being kept, the animal control officer may take immediate custody of the animal. Where suitable
arrangements are made, the local rabies control authority may permit the animal to be transferred to another
location for the remainder of the quarantine period. This duty to submit the animal to quarantine shall apply to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/536
any person who owns, keeps, harbors, has possession of or allows an animal to remain on premises under his
control. If convicted of violating this section, a minimum fine of $100.00 shall be imposed by the municipal
court.
(d) Observation of animal. Any owned dog or cat having bitten or scratched a person shall be observed for a
period of ten days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the
investigating officer or responsible agency in compliance with state law. If the dog or cat is not confined on the
owner's premises for owner's quarantine, confinement shall be by impoundment in the animal shelter, or at a
veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at the owner's expense.
(e) Stray dogs and cats and animals whose owner cannot be located. Stray dogs and cats, or those animals
whose owners cannot be located, shall be confined in the animal shelter for a period of 96 hours and if
unclaimed may be destroyed and the brain of such animal immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for
rabies examination at the victim's expense.
(f) Surrender of animal. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any
person shall on demand produce the dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this chapter.
(g) Home quarantine. Home quarantine may be allowed only in those incidents where permitted by state law
and agreed to by the animal control officer. Refusal to produce such dog or cat constitutes a violation of this
section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation.
(h) Wild, exotic or dangerous animals. Any wild, exotic or dangerous animal that is considered high risk by
state law or regulation and which has bitten or scratched a person shall be caught and humanely killed and the
brain submitted for rabies examination. Those wild animals which are classified as low risk animals shall be
handled as dictated by state law.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 168, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.009 Contents of required reports
When an individual is placed under a duty to report an incident in which an animal has bitten or scratched some
person or some animal or to report an animal known or suspected to be rabid, that report to the animal control
officer shall include, if the person making the report knows, the following information:
(1) The location where the bite or scratch occurred.
(2) The location where the animal which committed the act or which is known or suspected to have
rabies or have been exposed to rabies can be located.
(3) The name and address of any person who was bitten or scratched.
(4) The name and address of the person who owns, keeps, harbors or has control over the premises
where the animal committing the act normally can be found.
(5) The names and addresses of the persons who own, keep or harbor any other animal exposed to
rabies can be found [sic].
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 169, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.010 Quarantine period; claiming animal released from quarantine
(a) When an animal is required to be placed in quarantine, the animal shall be submitted for quarantine at the
animal shelter. Only with the prior approval of the local rabies control authority may the animal be held in
quarantine at any other location.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/536
(b) Any animal quarantined shall be held for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. The animal shall
not be released from quarantine until such release has been approved by the local rabies control authority.
(c) Upon release of an animal from quarantine, if the ownership of the animal is known, such owner has 48
hours to claim the animal. If the ownership of the animal is unknown, the animal may be disposed of as provided
in this article without waiting for an additional 72 hours.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 170, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.011 Submission of head for rabies diagnosis
(a) If the animal biting or scratching a person is a wild animal, the animal shall be humanely destroyed in such
a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The head shall then be submitted to a laboratory certified by the
department of state health services for rabies diagnosis.
(b) If an animal being quarantined becomes ill, it may be humanely destroyed in such a manner that the head
is not mutilated. The head shall then be submitted to a laboratory certified by the department of state health
services for rabies diagnosis. The head of each animal dying while in quarantine shall also be submitted for
rabies diagnosis.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 171, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.012 Payment of cost of quarantine or rabies diagnosis
(a) If, at the end of the required quarantine period, a quarantined animal is found to be free of rabies, the local
rabies control authority shall order the release of the animal to the owner if the rabies vaccination provisions of
this article have been complied with and any impoundment fees have been paid by such owner.
(b) If a head is submitted to the department of state health services for rabies diagnosis, the cost of removing
the head and shipping it shall be paid by the owner of the animal.
(c) The local rabies control authority may order that all impoundment fees for the quarantine be paid by the
person bitten or scratched if:
(1) The animal has a rabies vaccination certificate;
(2) The animal was on property under the control of the animal's owner when the bite or scratch
occurred; and
(3) The bite or scratch occurred when the animal was acting to defend its owner or the property, or
after provocation.
(d) If the animal is a wild animal, the local rabies control authority may order that all fees be paid by the
person who was bitten or scratched.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 172, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.013 Enforcement
For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this article and to enforce its provisions, any peace officer
or animal control officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which an animal is kept or harbored and
to demand the exhibition by the owner of such animal of the license for such animal in accordance with the
provisions of this article, to include random city-wide canvassing and checks for compliance with this article.
The owner of any animal is required to produce the license and vaccination information for each animal in his
ownership upon demand by an animal control officer or peace officer. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 173, adopted
9/10/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/536
ARTICLE 2.07 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ENTERPRISES AND MULTIPLE ANIMAL OWNERSHIP
Sec. 2.07.001 Permit required
(a) Permits shall be required for all commercial animal enterprises and multi-animal owners. Commercial
animal enterprises shall include but not be limited to enterprises such as kennels, pet shops, riding stables,
animal auctions, performing animal exhibitions, animal training services, grooming shops, petting zoos, aviaries
or any similar entrepreneurial relationships regarding animals. Five or more animals maintained on any one lot
shall be considered a multi-animal owner. No person shall maintain, harbor or care for more than five animals of
any species without having obtained a multi-animal owner permit, excluding fish.
(b) All such permits shall be considered commercial except multi-animal owner. Multi-animal owner permits
shall be considered as relative only to private multiple animal ownership, with no relationship to any commercial
animal enterprise. Multiple animal ownership permits shall not be required for residences with common
household pets having “litters” which remain at such residences for a period of time not exceeding three months.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 181, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.07.002 Term of permit; denial; correction of violations
(a) Permits shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. The permit fee shall be according to the schedule
established in section 2.01.010.
(b) The animal control officer, upon an inspection finding inconsistent with the permit inspection
requirements of this article, may deny the issuance of such permit and prescribe corrections for the applicant to
meet the requirements of this article. Applicants shall be given a reasonable amount of time to make such
corrections and submit to a reinspection for compliance. Applicants contesting original denial or subsequent
inspection denial shall have a right to appeal. Appeal of such denial of permit shall be in writing to the chief of
police within 10 days from the receipt of the denial notification. If no written appeal is received within the
prescribed period, the denial is final. [In] Instances of a timely appeal, the chief of police shall conduct a hearing
to determine the validity of the denial. At such hearings the formal rules of evidence do not apply, and the chief
shall make determinations based on a preponderance of evidence presented. The chief shall render a decision
within 30 days from receipt of the appeal, and the decision of the chief shall be subject to appeal to the city
administrator, in writing, within 5 days of the ruling being delivered. The city administrator may elect to hear the
appeal by review or a de novo informal preponderance of evidence hearing. The city administrator's decision is
final.
(c) [If] The animal control officer, as a part of random inspections of permitted facilities or upon complaint of
noncompliance, finds inconsistencies in permitted facilities' adequately maintaining the requirements set out in
section 2.07.003 of this article, the officer may prescribe corrections for compliance. Such corrections shall be
made in a reasonable time by the permit holder followed by a reinspection for compliance. Any permitted
facility refusing corrections or failing after reinspection shall be temporarily suspended, pending a hearing to
consider revocation of the permit. Such a hearing shall be conducted by the chief of police within 10 days of the
suspension. Proper notice of such a hearing shall be sent, in person or via certified mail (return receipt
requested), to the permit holder. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to such hearings, and the chief shall
make decisions based on a preponderance of evidence presented. The chief may order a inspection/reinspection
by a different officer, or make a personal inspection/ reinspection of the permitted premises, in addition to other
evidence that may be heard. The chief's decision will be rendered within 10 days of the hearing, and the chief
may (i) uphold the suspension and formally revoke the permit, or (ii) vacate the suspension and reinstate the
permit to valid status. A default judgment may be entered if the permit holder fails to appear for the hearing after
receiving proper notice. A permit holder subject to permit revocation may appeal the chief's ruling to the city
administrator, in writing, within 5 days of the ruling being delivered. The city administrator may elect to hear the
appeal by review or a de novo informal preponderance of evidence hearing. The city administrator's decision is
final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/536
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 182, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.07.003 Facility requirements
Upon inspection of the premises by the animal control officer, the permit shall be issued if the following
conditions are met:
(1) The facility must be adequate for the number and type of animals to be kept.
(A) The facility must be of sufficient size as to allow animals to move about freely. This shall
apply to each animal kept. Size of the facility shall be in proportion to the size of the individual
animal's height and weight.
(B) Adequate food and water must be provided so that each and all animals kept shall be
maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration.
(C) The premises shall be kept in a sanitary condition and reasonably free of animal waste,
parasites, insects and flies that could be harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of
the general public.
(2) The animals and the facility must be kept free of odor or stench which is offensive to a person
of ordinary sensibilities.
(3) The animals must be maintained in a manner which does not pose a danger to the health of the
animals themselves or to adjacent animals.
(4) The animals must not cause noise which is offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary
sensibilities on adjoining, adjacent or neighboring premises.
(5) The applicant or holder of the permit shall not have been issued citations for violation of this
chapter on two separate occasions, or animals covered by or to be covered by the permit have not
been impounded on two separate occasions.
(6) The chief of police shall adopt standard operational procedures for the animal control division
consistent with this article in providing guidelines and standards for the inspection of such facilities
for permitting and for the periodic monitoring of such facilities. Such permitted facilities may be
randomly inspected for compliance with the basic requirements stated herein at any reasonable time
for a multiple animal owner permitted residence or during regular business hours for a commercial
animal enterprise permitted facility. Refusal to allow such inspections shall be grounds for permit
revocation.
(Ordinance 403-04, sec. 183, adopted 9/10/04)
Sec. 2.07.004 Revocation or suspension of permit
Any commercial animal enterprise or multi-pet owner permit may be revoked if the owner's facility is found to
be in violation of this chapter or any zoning law, health law or any other applicable ordinance of the city or of
the state, or the facility is maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of mind
of persons residing in the immediate vicinity. (Ordinance 403-04, sec. 184, adopted 9/10/04)
CHAPTER 3
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/536
BUILDING REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Payment of professional fees for review of land use related permits
(a) Payment of professional fees. All reasonable costs incurred by the city for professional review of concept
plans, zoning applications, site plans, planned developments, plat applications, consent requests and other land
use related permits shall be borne by the applicant and payable to the city prior to final approval of the plat as
the case maybe. Such professional fees shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, civil engineering, traffic
engineering, expenses for related legal fees, land planning and financial analysis in order that the application can
be properly evaluated to achieve compliance with the city's comprehensive plan, thoroughfare plan, facilities
plan, comprehensive zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city regulations.
(b) Deposit required. In accordance with subsection (a) above, the city secretary shall require a deposit in the
amount provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code for such services at the time the initial
development application is filed. The actual costs will be determined prior to final approval and either an
additional sum will be due from the applicant or a reimbursement made if the actual cost is less than the deposit.
The applicant shall be provided with documentation detailing actual costs of development review.
(c) Refusal of permits. The city administrator, or his or her designee, may refuse to issue any building permits
to the applicant or their successors or assigns, if such fees are not paid.
(Ordinance 474-2014 adopted 4/3/14)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.02.001 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for all other violations of this article. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
Secs. 3.02.002–3.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 3.02.051 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Building Code (IBC), as amended and published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary and is
fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Building Code, 2006 edition, a copy of which
shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-14 as
exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
Secs. 3.02.052–3.02.100 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/536
Division 3. Residential Code*
Sec. 3.02.101 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Residential Code (IRC), as amended and published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city
secretary and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Residential Code, 2006 edition, a copy of
which shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-14
as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
Secs. 3.02.102–3.02.150 Reserved
Division 4. Mechanical Code†
Sec. 3.02.151 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC), as amended and published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city
secretary and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, a copy of
which shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-14
as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
Secs. 3.02.152–3.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 3.02.201 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Plumbing Code (IPC), as amended and published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary and is
fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, a copy of
which shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-14
as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
Secs. 3.02.202–3.02.250 Reserved
Division 6. Electrical Code†
Sec. 3.02.251 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2008 edition of the National Electrical Code (NEC), as amended and published by the National Fire
Protection Association, is adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary and is
fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the National Electrical Code, 2008 edition, a copy of which
shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-14 as
exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/536
Secs. 3.02.252–3.02.300 Reserved
Division 7. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 3.02.301 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), as amended and published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city
secretary and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, a
copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance
484-14 as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
Secs. 3.02.302–3.02.350 Reserved
Division 8. Fuel Gas Code
Sec. 3.02.351 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), as amended and published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city
secretary and is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, a copy of which
shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-14 as
exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
Secs. 3.02.352–3.02.400 Reserved
Division 9. Existing Building Code
Sec. 3.02.401 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Existing Building Code (IEBC), as published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary and is
fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition, a copy
of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-
14 as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
ARTICLE 3.03 ADMINISTRATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.03.001–3.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permits and Inspections; Building Official
Sec. 3.03.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, certain words and terms are herewith defined as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/536
Alteration. Any change, addition or modification in construction or character or grade of occupancy.
Person. Shall be constructed to impart the singular and plural as the case demands, and shall include
corporations, companies, societies, and associations, and any agent or representative thereof.
Structure. Any building constructed or installed by man (including, but without limitation, a fence, post, pole,
house, bridge, driveway or passageway, transmission line; barn, shed, tree, tank, advertising sign, advertising
billboard, space or equipment or facilities.
Sec. 3.03.032 Office of building official created; qualifications
There is hereby created the office of building official, and such office is being charged with the duty of enforcing
the provisions of this code.
Sec. 3.03.033 Duties of building official
(a) Code enforcement. It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce all the conditions of this code.
(b) Personal inspection. It shall be the duty of said building official, upon being served with a notice requiring
him to visit and inspect any building upon or in which any work is being done, under any of the provisions of
this code, to do so.
Sec. 3.03.034 Authority of building official
(a) Immediate decisions. Where a situation requires an immediate decision, that of the building official shall
be final and conclusive.
(b) Special cases. The building official shall have full power to exercise his own judgment in a reasonable and
proper manner and rule accordingly on all special cases in regard to any of the matters and things in this code
and specifically covered thereby.
ARTICLE 3.04 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.04.001 Purpose and scope
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative
with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the building code, article 214 of the Local Government
Code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings, as defined herein, which from any cause endanger the
life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants and may be required
to be repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured.
(b) Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings which are hereinafter defined as dangerous
or substandard buildings whether now in existence or whether they may hereafter become dangerous.
Sec. 3.04.002 Definitions
Building. Any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign, shed, garage, house, tent or other structure whatsoever and
the enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be deemed to exclude other types of structures to which
the sense and meaning of the provisions hereof in context reasonably have application.
Building board of appeals (sometimes referred to as “the board”). The city council.
Building code. The building code promulgated by the International Code Conference, as adopted by the city.
Fire code. The International Fire Code promulgated by the code conference, adopted by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/536
Sec. 3.04.003 Enforcement
(a) General.
(1) Administration. The building official is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. The
building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this article and to adopt and enforce
rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article.
(2) Inspections. The building official and the fire marshal or their designees are authorized to make
such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article.
(3) Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
article, or when the building official or his designee has a reasonable cause to believe that there exists
in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this article which
makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or his designee
may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by
this article, provided, that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to
the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official or
his designee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or
control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall
have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(b) Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the building official to be dangerous or substandard as defined by this article are declared to
be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition, removal or securing in accordance with
the procedures specified in this article.
(c) Unlawful to violate article. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, or
use, occupy or maintain any building or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this article.
(d) Inspection authorized. All buildings within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which
a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.
Sec. 3.04.004 Substandard buildings; declared
For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all of
the conditions or defects hereinafter described, shall be deemed to be a substandard building:
(1) Any building that is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare;
(2) Any building that, regardless of its structural condition; is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or
other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used
by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or, could be entered or used by
children;
(3) Any building that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or
use of the building in the manner described by subsection (2) of this section;
(4) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient
width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/536
panic;
(5) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so
warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in
case of fire or panic;
(6) Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion thereof, due to all dead and live
loads, is more than one and one half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;
(7) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind flood or by any
other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it
was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;
(8) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become
detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons of damage property;
(9) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses
permitted in the building code for such buildings;
(10) Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that
walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is
required in the case of similar new construction;
(11) Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, because of:
(A) Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
(B) Faulty construction;
(C) The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building;
(D) The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
(E) Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse;
(12) Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the
purpose for which it is being used;
(13) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third
of the base;
(14) Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three percent or more
damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty or more percent damage or
deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings;
(15) Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood or other causes,
or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
(A) An attractive nuisance to children; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/536
(B) A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons;
(16) Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any
specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building provided by the building regulations
of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or
jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;
(17) Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws
and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than fifty percent, or in any
supporting part, member or portion less than sixty-six percent of the:
(A) Strength;
(B) Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or
(18) Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly
constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location;
(19) Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary,
unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness, or disease for
reasons including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or
lodginghouse.
(B) Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of
guests in a hotel.
(C) Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
(D) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
(E) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or
lodginghouse.
(F) Lack of adequate heating facilities.
(G) Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment.
(H) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this code.
(I) Room and space dimensions less than required by this code or the building code.
(J) Lack of required electrical lighting.
(K) Dampness of habitable rooms.
(L) Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
(M) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
(N) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
(O) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/536
(20) Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration,
damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard;
(21) Whenever any building is in such a condition as to make a public nuisance known to the
common law or in equity jurisprudence;
(22) Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the
building;
(23) Whenever any building is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public;
(24) Any building constructed and is still existing in violation of any provision of the building code
or fire code of the city to the extent that the life, health or safety of the public or any occupant is
endangered.
Sec. 3.04.005 Determination by building official
When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined
that the building is substandard, the building official may take any or all of the following actions, as he or she
deems appropriate:
(1) Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard and must be repaired or
demolished;
(2) Issue citation(s) for violation(s) of this article;
(3) Secure the building if permitted by section 3.04.012; or
(4) Recommend to the board that abatement proceedings be commenced pursuant to section
3.04.006.
Sec. 3.04.006 Public hearing for abatement of substandard buildings
(a) Commencement of proceedings. When the building official has found and determined that a building is a
substandard building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, relocation
of occupants, removal, demolition or securing of the building.
(b) Public hearing to be held. Except when the city council finds that a building is likely to immediately
endanger persons or property, a public hearing before the board shall be held to determine whether a building
complies with the standards set out in section 3.04.004 if the city council determines that the building constitutes
an immediate danger, the procedures set forth in section 3.04.012(b) shall be followed.
(c) Notice. Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the hearing is set, the building official shall issue
a notice of the public hearing directed to the record owner of the building, and to all mortgagees and lien
holders. The city shall use best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lien holder or
mortgagee of the building through the records of the county clerk in the county in which the building is located
and through any other source available to the city. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the record owner;
(2) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/536
(3) A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard or dangerous,
with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous or
substandard under the provisions of section 3.04.004;
(4) A statement that the owner, lien holder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing
proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will
take to reasonably perform the work;
(5) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing; and
(6) A statement that if the building is found to be in violation of this article, the board may order
that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time.
(d) Additional notice of public hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the city may file a copy of the notice
mailed pursuant to this section in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property
is located. If such notice is not filed of record, each identified mortgagee and lien holder must be notified of any
abatement order issued by the board at the public hearing, prior to any remedial action by the city.
(e) Burden of proof. At the public hearing, the owner, lien holder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
(f) Conduct of public hearing. At the public hearing, the owner of the building, and all other interested persons
may make their appearance and be heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the board. The
chairman of the board, or in his absence, any officer designated by rules adopted by the board to preside at
meetings, shall preside and shall determine all questions of order. The hearing may be adjourned from day to day
or continued upon a majority vote of the board.
Sec. 3.04.007 Order of building board of appeals
(a) Findings of the board. If the board, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing
that the building is in violation of standards set out in section 3.04.004, the board may order that the building be
repaired, vacated, removed or demolished, secured, or the occupants relocated, by the owner, mortgagee or lien
holder within a reasonable time as provided herein.
(b) Time allowed to complete work.
(1) The order must require the owner, lien holder or mortgagee of the building to within thirty
days:
(A) Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or
(B) Repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner or lien holder establishes at the
hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty days.
(2) If the board allows, the owner, lien holder or mortgagee more than thirty days to repair, remove
or demolish the building, the board shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and shall require the owner, lien holder or mortgagee to secure the property
in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by
the board.
(3) The board may not allow the owner, lien holder or mortgagee more than ninety days to repair,
remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless
the owner, lien holder or mortgagee:
(A) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/536
(B) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably completed within ninety
days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(4) If the board allows the owner, lien holder or mortgagee more than ninety days to complete any
part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board shall require the
owner, lien holder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official to
demonstrate that the owner, lien holder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules
established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner,
lien holder or mortgagee appear before the board or the building official to demonstrate compliance
with the time schedules.
(c) Contents of order. The order of the board must contain at minimum:
(1) An identification which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A description of the ordered actions; including a statement that the owner may repair, if
feasible, or demolish or remove at his option;
(4) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the
cost to the property; and
(5) If the board has determined that the building will endanger persons or property, or if the
building is a dwelling with ten or fewer dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the
building and charge the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within the time
allowed.
Sec. 3.04.008 Notice of order of building board of appeals
(a) Order shall be mailed. After the public hearing, the building official shall promptly mail, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each identified lien holder
and mortgagee of the building.
(b) Order shall be filed with city secretary. Within ten days after the date that the order is issued by the board,
the building official shall file a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary.
(c) Order shall be published. Within ten days after the date the order is issued by the board, the building
official shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice containing:
(1) The street address or legal description of the property;
(2) The date the hearing was held;
(3) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(4) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
Sec. 3.04.009 Enforcement of the order of building board of appeals
(a) If order not complied with, city may take action. If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed
or demolished within the time specified by the order, the city may vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the
building or relocate the occupants at its own expense, provided however:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/536
(1) The city may not act to remove or demolish a building until after the board has found:
(A) That such defects or conditions exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety
of the public or the occupants of the building are endangered; and
(B) The building is infeasible of repair; or
(C) There is no reasonable probability that the building will be repaired within a reasonable
period of time if additional time is given.
(2) The city may only repair a building as provided herein to the extent necessary to correct the
conditions which render the building dangerous, and may not act to repair a building unless:
(A) The board has made a determination that the building is likely to endanger person or
property; and
(B) The building is a residential dwelling with ten or fewer dwelling units.
(b) Posting of notice to vacate building. If the order requires vacation or if compliance is not had with the
order within the time specified therein, the building official is authorized to require that the building be vacated.
Notice to vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the occupant of the building and it
shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
______________________________
Building Official City of Sansom Park
(c) Remedial action by city. Any repair or demolition work, or securing of the building shall be accomplished
and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale of
such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and cleaning of the lot,
shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
(d) Failure to obey order. Any person to whom an order pursuant to section 3.04.007 is directed who fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in
municipal court in addition to any other remedies available to the city provided herein.
(e) Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in
the building which has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured under the provisions of
this article, or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this
article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an
interest or estate in such building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or
demolishing, removing or securing any such building pursuant to the provision of this article, or in performing
any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article.
(f) Permit required. Any work of closure, repair, removal or demolition by the property owner or any lien
holder or mortgagee or their agents must be performed pursuant to valid unexpired permits issued by the city.
All permits issued pursuant to an order of the board shall expire upon expiration of the time for compliance set
forth in the order.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/536
Sec. 3.04.010 Performance of work by the city
(a) Procedure. When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing is to be performed by the city
pursuant to the provisions of any order of the city council or the board, the work may be accomplished by city
personnel or by private contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be removed from any
premises and the lot cleaned if removal or demolition is ordered. The building or building materials may be sold
if removal or demolition is ordered, and the proceeds shall be used to offset other costs of the work.
(b) Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and shall constitute a special assessment and a
lien against such property to secure payment thereof, together with ten percent interest on such amount from the
date on which the work is performed.
(c) Repair to minimum standards only. The city may repair the building at its own expense and assess the
expenses on the land on which the building stands or is attached to only to the extent necessary to bring the
building into compliance with minimum standards.
Sec. 3.04.011 Recovery of cost of securing, repair, removal or demolition
(a) Itemized account and notice of lien. The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses
incurred by the city in the securing, repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this article. Upon
completion of the work, the building official shall prepare and file with the city secretary a sworn account and
notice of lien containing the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable
effort;
(2) A legal description of the real property on which the building is or was located;
(3) The type of work performed; and
(4) The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the work and the balance due.
(b) Notice filed in county records. The city secretary shall file the notice of lien along with a copy of the order
of abatement issued by the board in the deed records of the county in which the premises are located.
(c) Personal obligation of property owner. The expenses incurred by the city as set forth in the sworn account
of the building official shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the
property. The city attorney may bring an action in any court of proper jurisdiction against the owner or property
to recover the costs incurred by the city.
(d) Lien shall be valid and privileged. Upon filing of the notice of lien in the deed records of the county, the
lien shall be valid against the property so assessed. The lien shall be privileged and subordinate only to tax liens,
existing special assessment liens, and shall be paramount to all other liens. The lien shall continue until the
assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been paid.
(e) Assessment must be paid. No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed
on any such property until the assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city.
(f) Release of lien. After the expenses incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the building
official, have been fully paid with interest of ten percent per annum from the date the work was performed, the
building official shall execute a release of lien which shall be filed in the deed records of the county.
Sec. 3.04.012 Additional authority to secure certain substandard buildings prior to public hearing and
secure, demolish, repair or remove certain dangerous buildings
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/536
(a) Securing of unoccupied, substandard building. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the
city may secure a building if the building official determines:
(1) That the building violates the minimum standards set forth in section 3.04.004.
(2) That the building is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have the right of
possession to the building.
(b) If building creates immediate danger. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if the city
council finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger persons or property the city council may:
(1) Order the owner of the building, the owner's agent, or the owner or occupant of the property on
which the structure is located to repair, remove, or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of
the structure, within a specified time; or
(2) Repair, remove, or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of the structure, at the expense
of the municipality, on behalf of the owner of the structure or the owner of the property on which the
structure is located, and assess the repair, removal, or demolition expenses on the property on which
the structure was located.
(c) Notice of action. Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured pursuant to this section, or
action is ordered pursuant to section 3.04.005 or the building is repaired, removed or demolished pursuant to
section 3.04.005, the building official shall give notice to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post
office address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the building is located; if personal service cannot be obtained and
the owner's post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; and
(5) In addition to the above, depositing notice in the United States mail to all lien holders and
mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable search of instruments on file in the office of
the county clerk.
(d) Notice. The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building, or that the
city has taken or will take the action ordered pursuant to section 3.04.005;
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
city's securing, removing, demolishing or repairing of the building.
(e) Hearing. The city council shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or
written information about any matter relating to the city's securing, repairing, removing or demolishing of the
building, if, within thirty days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to section 3.04.005 the owner files
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/536
with the city a written request for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within twenty days after the date
the request is filed.
(f) Lien. If the city incurs expenses under this section, such expenses incurred shall be a personal obligation of
the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered as provided by
section 3.04.010.
(g) Violation. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order issued pursuant to this section.
Sec. 3.04.013 Civil penalty
(a) Civil penalty authorized. In addition to any other enforcement authority provided for by law, the board
may, by order, at an administrative hearing assess a civil penalty against a property owner as provided for herein
for failure to comply with an order issued by the board pursuant to section 3.04.007.
(b) Showing required. The civil penalty may be assessed if it is shown at the administrative hearing that:
(1) The property owner was notified of the contents of the order issued pursuant to section
3.04.007; and
(2) The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or failed to take an action
necessary for compliance with the order.
(c) Amount of penalty. The civil penalty may be assessed in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in this code.
(d) Notice of administrative bearing. Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the administrative
hearing is set, the property owner shall be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail/return receipt requested.
The notice shall contain:
(1) A copy of the order issued by the board to section 3.04.007;
(2) A statement that the building official has determined that the property owner committed an act
in violation of that order, or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with that order;
(3) A statement that at the administrative hearing the board may assess a civil penalty in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in this code; and
(4) Notice of the time and place of the hearing.
(e) Copy of order filed with district clerk. After the civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file with
the district clerk of the county in which the property is located, a certified copy of the order assessing the civil
penalty stating the amount and duration of the penalty.
(f) Enforcement. The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a suit brought by the city in a court of
competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this
subsection is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any suit.
Sec. 3.04.014 Authority not limited
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of
the city to summarily order the demolition of any building or structure where it is apparent that the immediate
demolition of such building or structure is necessary to the protection of life, property or general welfare of the
people in the city.
ARTICLE 3.05 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/536
Sec. 3.05.001 Purpose
(a) The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the city by
establishing an inspection program for minimum standards applicable to residential rental units as set out in this
article.
(b) This article is remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this article be liberally
construed to effect its purpose. All residential rental structures within the city on the effective date of this article,
or constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.05.002 Definitions
Owner-occupied. Occupied by a person and his or her immediate family, his or her spouse, and children, said
person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion, or title of real property, including, but not
limited to:
(1) The holder of fee simple title;
(2) The holder of a life estate;
(3) The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of 5 years or more;
(4) The buyer in a contract for deed; and
(5) The mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real property;
but not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than 5 years.
Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Renter. A person claiming, or in whom is vested, a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than 5
(five) years.
Residential rental unit. A structure, including a single-family home, that is rented or leased for a initial term of
less than 5 (five) years and that is not solely owner-occupied, and includes all units in a multi-unit dwelling of
which one or more units are owner-occupied.
Sec. 3.05.003 Enforcement official
The housing official established in this article shall act as the city building official for purposes of inspections
for certificates of occupancy.
Sec. 3.05.004 Inspections
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of the city ordinances of this city concerning building
standards exist, the city building official is authorized, at a reasonable time, to inspect:
(1) The exterior of a residential rental unit and premises which contain no structure; and
(2) The interior of a residential rental unit, if the permission of the owner, occupant, or person in
control is given.
(b) The city building official is authorized to inspect, at a reasonable time, the records of a person who
operates a structure to determine if the structure is a residential rental unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/536
(c) The city building official shall have the power to obtain search warrants allowing the inspection of any
specified premises to determine the presence of a health hazard or unsafe building condition, including but not
limited to any structural, property, or utility hazard, or a violation of any health or building regulation, statute or
ordinance.
Sec. 3.05.005 Certificate of occupancy required; issuance
(a) No owner shall operate a residential rental unit without a certificate of occupancy. Application for the
certificate of occupancy must be renewed upon transfer of the leasehold to a new renter on a form prescribed by
the city building official.
(b) No person shall occupy a residential rental unit without a certificate of occupancy.
(c) The city building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy to an applicant if the residential rental unit
complies with the standards of this article and, if a newly built structure, with the building code as adopted by
the city.
Sec. 3.05.006 Fees
(a) Fees for the operation of residential rental units shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code.
(b) For purposes of computing fees required by subsection (a), all units of a residential rental unit will be
considered.
ARTICLE 3.06 MOVING OR WRECKING BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.06.001 Permit required
(a) Moving building. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move or cause to be
moved a house or building from one location to another within the city or to move a house or building from
without [outside] the city to a location within the city or to move a house or building within the city to a point
outside the city without first securing a permit therefor as hereafter provided.
(b) Wrecking or dismantling building. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
wreck or dismantle any house or building without securing a permit therefor as hereafter provided.
Sec. 3.06.002 Bond or deposit
(a) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to move or wreck/dismantle a house or building, as provided in
section 3.06.001 of this article, shall deposit, with the city, the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon
condition and with the express agreement that the city is to retain said deposit until a final inspection has been
conducted and verified that all trash, rubbish, etc. has been cleared and any damages to any property has been
corrected.
(b) It shall be conditioned that the principal will pay to the city, or any other person or persons damaged
thereby, all such damages as may accrue to it or them by reason of moving such structure along the streets
permitted or damages from wrecking/dismantling any structure.
Sec. 3.06.003 Permit fees
(a) Moving building. Permit fee shall be as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(b) Wrecking or dismantling building. Permit fee shall be as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A
to this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/536
ARTICLE 3.07 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.07.001 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods
(a) Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has, in the Flood Control and Insurance Act, Texas
Water Code, section 16.315, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city does ordain as follows.
(b) Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which
cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(c) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(d) Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following
methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/536
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.07.002 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent annual chance
(100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO,
V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zone A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year, also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/536
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the
boundaries of the flood, and mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been
designated as zones A, M, and/or E.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See “flood elevation study.”
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/536
Floodway. See “regulatory floodway” [sic].
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 69.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/536
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See “area of special flood hazard.”
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/536
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas:
Sec. 3.07.003 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the city.
(b) Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas and Incorporated Areas,” dated September 25, 2009, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated September 25, 2009, and any revisions thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
(c) Establishment of development permit; application review fee. A floodplain development permit shall be
required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. The floodplain development permit will
require an application review fee of $250.00. Upon an approved floodplain development permit the fee will be
established based on the construction amount of the project as set by annual building permit fees.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/536
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 3.07.004 Administration
(a) Designation of floodplain administrator. The mayor or his designee is hereby appointed the floodplain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR
(Emergency Management and Assistance, National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is
the state water development board (TWDB), and also the state commission on environmental quality
(TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.07.003(b),
the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of section 3.07.005.
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and
the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/536
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.07.005(b)(2);
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this
section.
(2) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be
based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(d) Variance procedures.
(1) The city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
(2) The city council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this article.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision
in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/536
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this section have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the city council
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
and objectives of this article (section 3.07.001(c)).
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
(C) Any applicant to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood
elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements
and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in subsections (d)(1) through (9) of this section are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 3.07.005 Flood hazard reduction standards; penalty
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/536
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided
as set forth in section 3.07.003(b), section 3.07.004(b)(8), or subsection (c)(3) of this section, the following
provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base
flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section
3.07.004(c)(1)(A), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/536
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FIRM
shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of
this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park
or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of
a flood be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes being placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(c) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 3.07.001(b), (c), and (d) of this article.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall meet the floodplain development permit requirements of sections
3.07.003(c) and 3.07.004(c) and the provisions of this section.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is
greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
3.07.003(b) or section 3.07.004(b)(8) of this article.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A
areas, within 100 feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA,
as indicated on the community's FIRM.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/536
(5) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(6) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Penalty. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered
without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than $2,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
ARTICLE 3.08 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.08.001 Purpose
Pursuant to the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) rules and regulations specifically stated
under 30 Texas Administrative Code section 290.449(h), it is the responsibility of the water purveyor to ensure
that an adequate cross-connection control program is in effect.
Sec. 3.08.002 Definitions
Backpressure. Occurs when contaminated water is under enough pressure to flow backward into the water
supply.
Backsiphonage. Occurs when the public water system loses its water pressure due to water line flushing and
main breaks or firefighting and a vacuum is created.
Cross connection. A physical connection between a potable water supply and any other source of water of
unknown or unsafe quality.
Double check valve (DC). A backflow preventer designed to control cross connections between potable water
lines and substances that are objectionable but not a health hazard.
Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A backflow preventer designed to give maximum protection
against backflow caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage from a cross connection where contamination
hazard exists.
Sec. 3.08.003 Responsibility for costs
The cost of complying with these regulations shall be the responsibility of the property owners and their lessees.
These costs include but are not limited to purchasing, installation, testing and repair of the assembly. These costs
shall also include point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies. Any cost incurred by the city to enforce this
article is the responsibility of the property owners and their lessees.
Sec. 3.08.004 Responsibility for compliance
It is the responsibility of all property owners and lessees to abide by all the conditions of this article. If changes
are made to a premises plumbing system, the property owner shall notify the plumbing inspector.
Sec. 3.08.005 Backflow prevention assembly requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/536
(a) A certified plumbing inspector employed by or under contract with the city shall determine the type and
location of backflow assembly to be installed within the city's water service area.
(b) At a minimum, a backflow prevention assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances:
(1) When the nature and extent of any activity at the premises, or the materials used in connection
with any activity at the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.
(2) When the premises has one or more cross connections.
(3) When internal cross connections are present that are not correctable.
(4) When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether
cross connections exist.
(5) When the premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or
reestablished.
(6) When entry to the premises is unduly restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot
be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross connections do not exist.
(7) When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.
(8) When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by an inspector to
be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations.
(9) When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the city hall.
(10) When a fire sprinkler system using nonpotable piping material is connected to the city's water
system.
(11) In all new nonresidential construction there shall be installed an approved backflow assembly
at the service connection. The type of the assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard
as determined by an inspector.
(12) When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is
not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the
most hazardous use of the building.
(13) If the premises are required to have backflow prevention assemblies, but water cannot be
turned off during the testing of such assemblies, the premises shall be equipped with dual backflow
prevention assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed.
(14) If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this article, a
premises isolation assembly shall be required.
(15) If an inspector determines that additions or rearrangements have been made to the plumbing
system without the proper permits as required by the plumbing code, premises isolation shall be
required.
(c) Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection shall
have a backflow assembly on each service connection. The assembly shall be commensurate with the degree of
potential hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of buildings on the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/536
(d) A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of any premises and knowingly fails to
install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies on said premises as required by this section.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or manages any premises and backflow from the
premises enters the public water supply system.
Sec. 3.08.006 Testing of backflow prevention assemblies
(a) A licensed tester that is registered with the city will inspect and test all assemblies in each of the following
circumstances:
(1) Immediately after installation;
(2) Whenever the assembly is moved;
(3) A minimum of once a year for all double check assemblies and pressure vacuum breakers;
(4) Any premises that have RP assemblies as point-of-use protection without high hazard premises
isolation protection must be tested every six months;
(5) Any premises that have an RP assembly as premises isolation without high hazard point-of-use
protection must be tested every six months; and
(6) Immediately after repair.
(b) Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the inspector deems necessary.
(c) All assembly testing shall be performed by a certified and registered backflow prevention assembly tester
in accordance with the TCEQ regulations. The testing forms can be obtained from the city inspection department
prior to testing.
(d) It is the responsibility of the property owner and the person in control of the premises to have all
assemblies tested.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of any premises and knowingly fails or
refuses to have the backflow prevention assemblies installed on said premises inspected or tested as required by
this section.
(f) The city shall not be liable for damage to an assembly that occurs during testing when such damage results
from metal fatigue or deteriorated metal, or when such damage occurs under standard testing procedures.
Sec. 3.08.007 Maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies
(a) A person who owns, operates, or manages premises in which required backflow prevention assemblies are
installed shall maintain such assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. All
maintenance and repair of assemblies shall be done in accordance with all applicable regulations of the
commission and this article.
(b) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner that allows them to be tested by the
plumbing inspector.
(c) A person commits as offense if the person knowingly fails to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in
compliance with this section.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly fails to comply with a repair order issued by the
plumbing inspector.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/536
Sec. 3.08.008 Pressure loss
Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the
city. The department may give reasonable assistance to a property owner regarding information on adequate
sizing of assemblies and proper plumbing practices to provide for required pressure and flows for fire protection.
Sec. 3.08.009 Mobile units
(a) A person who owns or operates any vehicle that uses water from the city public water supply shall obtain
permission from the water superintendent. The water superintendent may require a fixed air gap or backflow
assembly on the vehicle or piping.
(b) A fee based on the present water rates will be charged for the amount of water purchased.
Sec. 3.08.010 Certification and responsibilities of backflow assembly testers
(a) All backflow assembly testers operating within the city shall be certified in accordance with all applicable
regulations of the TCEQ.
(b) All backflow assembly testers must register in person at city hall and pay an annual registration fee as
provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(c) In addition to the registration fee, the tester will be required to pay a minimum plumbing permit fee as
provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(d) Any other tests performed by the assembly tester within a period of one year, providing he/she has paid the
appropriate registration fee, he/she will only have to pay the plumbing permit fee prior to performing the actual
test of the backflow assembly.
(e) At the time of registration, each tester certified as a backflow assembly tester shall furnish evidence that
he/she is insured and bonded to perform services on private property and has all licenses required by the state.
(f) A person commits as offense if the person knowingly operates as an assembly tester within the city without
first registering with the city.
(g) Upon completion of the test on the backflow assembly the tester must provide the city with test results to
be kept on file in the city hall.
(h) Upon recertifying, a tester shall renew his/her registration with the city hall.
(i) A registered backflow prevention assembly tester shall:
(1) File the serial number of each of his/her test kits with the certified plumbing inspector.
(2) Annually have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated to maintain a 2%
accuracy factor.
(3) Perform competent and accurate certifications of each backflow prevention assembly tested.
(4) Not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly.
(j) The city may revoke a registration if the city inspector determines that the tester:
(1) Has made false, incomplete, or inaccurate assembly testing reports.
(2) Has used inaccurate gauges.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/536
(3) Has used improper testing procedures.
(4) Has expired insurance.
(5) Is not in compliance with safety regulations.
(6) Has failed to register the serial numbers of his/her test kits or failed to calibrate gauges
annually.
(7) Has violated any other provision of this section.
(k) A person commits an offense if the person operates as a backflow prevention assembly tester within the
city without a valid registration with the city.
State law reference–Licensing and registration of persons who perform duties relating to public water supplies, V.T.C.A., Health and
Safety Code sec. 341.034 and V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 37.
Sec. 3.08.011 Access to premises
(a) Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall during the hours of 8:00 a.m.
through 5:00 p.m. permit the inspector to enter their premises and buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes
and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used to determine compliance with this article.
(b) If any water user refuses access to premises during said times for inspection by an inspector, the water user
shall install a reduced pressure principle assembly at the service connection to that premises.
(c) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected shall be
promptly removed by the water user at the written or verbal request of the inspector and shall not be replaced.
The costs of cleaning such access shall be borne by the user.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly fails to install a reduced pressure principle assembly
in accordance with this section after receiving notice from the city to do so.
Sec. 3.08.012 Emergency suspension of water service
(a) The city staff may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any premises when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened backflow which:
(1) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or
welfare of persons; or
(2) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the city's public water supply.
(b) As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the water superintendent shall notify the owner or
person in charge of the premises of the suspension in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and
shall order such person to correct the cross connection which allowed the backflow to occur. When time permits,
the water superintendent should also notify the owner or person in charge prior to suspending water service.
(c) If the person fails to comply with an order issued under subsection (b), the city administrative authority
may take such steps as the administrative staff deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the public
water supply.
(d) The city shall not reinstate suspended services until the person presents proof, satisfactory to the
administrative authority, that the backflow has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/536
(e) A person whose service has been suspended may appeal such enforcement action to the city council in
writing, within 10 days of notice of the suspension.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to premises suspended pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the administrative authority.
(g) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise
of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violation.
Sec. 3.08.013 Nonemergency termination of water supply
(a) The city may terminate the city-provided water supply of any water user who violates the following
conditions:
(1) Refusing the city inspector reasonable access to the water user's premises for the purpose of
inspection.
(2) Hindering or denying the inspector access to backflow prevention assemblies.
(3) Failing to install a reduced pressure principle assembly as required.
(4) Failing to install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article.
(5) Failing to install, maintain and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with
the plumbing code.
(b) The administrative authority will notify a water user of the proposed termination of its water supply. The
water user may petition the city council for a reconsideration and hearing.
(c) Exercise of this enforcement option by the city shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the water user.
(d) The administrative authority shall not reinstate suspended services until:
(1) The person presents proof, satisfactory to the plumbing inspector, that the backflow has been
eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
(2) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to premises terminated pursuant to this
section without the prior approval of the city.
Sec. 3.08.014 Declaration of nuisance
Backflow entering or threatening to enter the public water supply from any premises is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(Ordinance 486-14 adopted 1/15/15)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/536
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 4.01.001 Business permits
(a) Required; application. The owner or operator of each business or commercial venture doing business
within the corporate limits of the city is hereby required to procure a permit to operate from the city secretary. A
permit may be procured by making application in writing on a form designated by the city council. Such
application shall give the following information:
(1) The name of the business or commercial venture;
(2) The type of business or commercial venture to be conducted on the premises;
(3) The location or address of the business or commercial venture;
(4) The name of the owner or owners;
(5) The address of the owner or owners;
(6) The signature of the applicant.
(b) Existing permits. All persons engaged in a business or commercial venture within the corporate limits of
the city at the time of the passage of this section shall be permitted to operate under their existing permit,
however, at the time of renewal shall be required to comply with the provisions of this section.
(c) Conformance with application. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate any business or
commercial venture of a type not specified on the application.
(d) Approval by city officials. No permit shall be issued unless the premises have been inspected and
approved by the building inspector, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, and fire marshal, and the
application endorsed by each inspector and the chief of police.
(Ordinance 216 adopted 2/14/85)
(e) Suspension. In the interests of public health and safety, the building inspector, the chief of police, the fire
marshal or their officers or deputies may suspend the permit of any business or commercial venture within the
corporate limits of the city if there occurs on the premises covered by the permit any violation of the provisions
of this section or any violation of the fire or building codes, or any occurrence which creates an immediate threat
to the health, safety and well-being of the person or persons occupying said premises. (Ordinance 275, sec. I,
adopted 7/26/90)
(f) Reinstatement after suspension. In the event a permit has been suspended for cause as specified in
subsection (e) of this section, the permit shall not be reinstated until the applicant appears before the city council
either in person or by attorney and requests the reinstatement of the permit, and the city council is satisfied that
the situation which caused the suspension no longer exists.
(g) Permit to be obtained prior to commencing business. Any person, firm or corporation wishing to open a
business or commercial venture within the corporate limits of the city shall make application for and receive a
permit prior to the time that the actual operation of the business or commercial venture is commenced.
(h) Fee; expiration date. A fee set by the city council shall be collected for each new permit or permit renewal
issued. Said fees shall be set or changed by resolution, and shall not require an amendment to this section. The
expiration dates of said permits shall also be set by resolution.
(Ordinance 216 adopted 2/14/85)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/536
(i) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be found
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $20.00 nor more than $2,000.00,
and each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. (Ordinance 275, sec. II, adopted 7/26/90)
ARTICLE 4.02 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Sale of beer near church, hospital or school
It shall be unlawful for any person whose principal business is the sale of beer to sell beer where the place of
business of any such dealer is within three hundred feet of any church, public hospital, school or other
educational institution. The measurements of the distance between such businesses and public schools is to be
from the nearest property line of the public school to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the
place of business, along street lines and in direct line across intersections. For such businesses where minors are
prohibited from entering the premises under Section 109.53 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code, the measurement
of the distance between the premises and a public school is to be along the property lines of the street fronts and
from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. (Ordinance 36, sec. 4, adopted 9/18/55;
Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Secs. 4.02.002–4.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. License or Permit
Sec. 4.02.031 Fee
(a) The city shall levy and collect a fee of one-half (1/2) of the state fee for each license, except a temporary
or agent's beer license, issued by state alcoholic beverage commission for premises located within the city.
(b) The city shall levy and collect a fee of one-half (1/2) of the state fee for each permit issued for alcoholic
beverage permittees within the city limits, except the following:
(1) Agent's airline beverage, passenger train beverage, industrial carrier's, private carrier's, private
club registration, local cartage, storage, and temporary wine and beer retailer's permits;
(2) A wine and beer retailer's permit issued for a dining, buffet, or club car; and
(3) A mixed beverage permit during the three-year period following the issuance of the permit.
(Ordinance 314 adopted 3/23/95)
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee
authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
Sec. 4.02.032 Issuance
Upon the payment of the applicable tax or fee herein prescribed to the city assessor and collector and exhibition
to him of a permit duly issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such tax or fee, the city assessor and
collector shall, in the name of the city, issue and deliver to such applicant or person a permit to engage in the
business in the city of the character described in and authorized by the permit from the state held by such
applicant or person. The permit so issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/536
upon the premises described in the permit from the state, and shall remain in force only so long as such permit
from the state remains in force. (Ordinance 36, sec. 3, adopted 9/18/55)
Sec. 4.02.033 Failure to pay fee or obtain permit
Any person who shall fail to pay any tax or fee prescribed by this article and secure a permit before engaging in
any business for which the payment of any such fee and securing of any such permit is required by the terms of
this article, or who shall engage in any such business without holding an unrevoked or unexpired permit from
the city authorizing the same, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished
as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 36, sec. 5, adopted 9/18/55)
ARTICLE 4.03 ITINERANT VENDORS*
Sec. 4.03.001 Purpose
This article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the state and of the city for the public
safety, comfort, convenience, and protection of the city and the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions of this
article shall be constructed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
Sec. 4.03.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Charitable purpose. The solicitation of money or property, for the benefit of a charity, philanthropy, or nonprofit
organization or for the poor, underprivileged, needy, crippled, or handicapped persons; the teaching of patriotism
or assistance to veterans or veteran's organizations; or for existing educational institutions or for the
establishment or endowment of educational institutions.
Consumer. An individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal, family,
or household purposes.
Peddler, solicitor, or person. Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, trust, society,
religious sect, organization, league, or other entity and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or similar
representative.
Religious organization. An organization that is dedicated to the support of a church, religious society, or any
other religious sect, group, or order.
Right-of-way. The area between the edge of the street pavement and the adjacent owner's property line.
Solicitation. Conduct whereby a person or their agent, member, or representative, solicits property, financial aid,
money, or any article representing monetary value; or sells or offers to sell a product, article, service,
publication, ticket, advertisement, or subscription. Solicitation shall include persons engaged in the delivery of
handbills or circulars door-to-door for the solicitation of money, products, services, or other items of pecuniary
value.
Street. The portion of the street that is paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, and all areas dedicated to
public use for public right-of-way purposes, which includes streets, bar ditches, medians, alleys, and public
sidewalks.
Traffic island. A barrier within a street or roadway to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating
or directing streams of vehicular traffic.
Sec. 4.03.003 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/536
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every
day such violation shall continue be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Allegation and evidence of a
culpable mental state is not required for proof of any offense defined by this article.
Sec. 4.03.004 Permits
(a) Permit required.
(1) It shall be unlawful, within any residentially zoned area, for any person to peddle, sell, solicit,
canvass, or take orders for any services, wares, merchandise, or goods, or any article of value,
including, but not limited to, plants, flowers, paintings, novelties, painting house numbers on streets,
firewood, books, magazines, photographs, or any articles for future delivery, within the city or from
door-to-door without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city.
(2) Each person engaged in peddling or soliciting or selling must have a permit issued under the
terms of this section, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced
nor assigned nor transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shall
render the permit void.
(3) Each permit shall expire as of the date noted thereon, which date shall be in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
(4) A permit shall not be issued to any person under 14 years of age.
(5) Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, regardless of whether the person making
the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale.
(b) Permit application. Each application for a permit required by this section shall set out the following:
(1) Legal name of the applicant, with his/her permanent residence;
(2) Name and address of the firm or persons he/she represents;
(3) The names of any cities where the applicant has worked within the previous 90 days;
(4) Whether the applicant, or any solicitor listed in the application, has ever been convicted of or
arrested for a felony;
(5) State driver's license number or a state-issued identification card number of applicant;
(6) The kind, type and character of goods or services he proposes to offer for sale, including the
name brand, manufacturer and distributor of goods and commodities and the name, publisher and
distributor of all books, magazines or periodicals to be offered for sale;
(7) Any other information required by the city.
(c) Permit attachments. In addition, there shall be attached to each application for a permit, the following:
(1) Two recent passport standard photos of the applicant's face.
(2) A copy of a state driver's license number or a state-issued identification card.
(3) A certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager,
assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works,
sells or solicits stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/536
(4) In the event that the applicant is an individual who is not canvassing, selling or soliciting for
any firm or company, letters of recommendation from two citizens of the applicant's permanent
residence shall be submitted.
(d) Application fee. The application fee shall be $25.00.
(e) Investigation of applicant. It shall be the duty of the city secretary, or his/her authorized designee, to
investigate each applicant, and all other persons listed on the application, to the extent allowed by law, before
issuance of a permit, which investigation may include, but is not necessarily limited to, personal interviews with
named individuals, criminal history checks, verification of references and information contained within the
application.
(f) Issuance of permit. It shall be the duty of the city secretary or his/her authorized designee to issue or refuse
to issue such permit not earlier than three days nor later than one week from the time the application is received.
All the permits shall expire within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. The city secretary or his/her
authorized designee may refuse to grant a permit if he discovers, in the course of his investigation, that the
applicant, or any solicitor, has committed fraud, has misrepresented, has been convicted of a felony or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has failed to furnish a complete application including all required
attachments.
(g) Permit renewal. Each permit may be renewed once for an additional 90-day term. A renewal permit may
be issued by submitting a completed renewal application to the city for review at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the end of the original term. No renewal is available for any solicitor added during the renewal process. The
renewal permit is subject to the same terms and conditions as the original application. The city shall have ten
(10) days to approve or deny the application for renewal. The renewal permit shall expire within ninety (90)
days from the end of the original term. At the end of the 180-day time period, the permit expires and a new
permit must be reapplied for under the same terms and conditions as the original application and subject to the
same fees.
(h) Permit to be displayed. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the city without displaying
the required permit on his person, in plain view, while engaged in such soliciting or selling.
(i) Identify solicitor. Every solicitor or peddler or seller shall identify himself as a salesman upon approaching
a citizen in a public place or at a private dwelling and explain his purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation
or orders of the demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any combination of purposes thereof.
(j) Responsibility for acts of solicitors. The recipient of a permit or named applicant shall be responsible for
the acts of his/her authorized representatives or solicitors listed in permit application in connection with
solicitation activities. In this regard, the recipient of the permit shall actively supervise all persons listed in the
permit application, which supervision shall include but not be limited to remaining within the corporate city
limits during all solicitation activity and responding promptly (within ten minutes) to calls by city
representatives relative to the solicitation activity which may include responding to an on-site complaint from a
citizen.
(k) Revocation of permit.
(1) If, after the permit required by this section has been issued, the city secretary, or his authorized
designee, finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, or the permit
has been reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person or the applicant has led someone to
believe the permit is an endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the city, or in the event
of fraud or misrepresentation by the permit holder, or in the event of conviction of the permit holder
of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or in the event the permit holder has failed
to furnish the items required by this article, such permit may be revoked by the city secretary or his
authorized designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/536
(2) If a police officer has probable cause to believe that a solicitor has engaged in prohibited
conduct as defined by this article, the officer may revoke the permit of the permit holder.
(l) Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. Should an applicant be denied a permit, or have a permit
revoked, he/she may appeal that action to the city council by submitting a letter to the city secretary within ten
(10) days to complain of that action. A hearing of the denial will then be scheduled by the city secretary within
ten days of filing the appeal. The city council will render a decision on the appeal within ten days of such
hearing. A decision of the city council shall be final and binding.
(m) Exemptions.
(1) The following persons engaged in the activities set out in section 4.03.005(a)–(c) below in the
city shall notify, in writing, the city secretary or his/her authorized designee, by furnishing proof that
he/she is actually engaged in such activity in the city, namely:
(A) Public utility companies or others operating under a franchise granted by the city;
(B) Insurance salesmen, real estate salesmen and others licensed by the state which are
subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law;
(C) Children under the age of 14 may participate in such activities to the extent they are
actively supervised by a parent or guardian.
(2) Religious, political, or nonprofit organizations and their representatives are exempt from the
registration and permit requirements of this article. A donation received from the distribution of
handbills or pamphlets does not affect this exemption.
Sec. 4.03.005 Prohibited location, activities, and conduct
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for
any item or service in the following places in the city:
(1) On any municipal or state-owned right-of-way; or
(2) Any residence which shall exhibit in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the
residence containing the words “No Solicitors.” The letters shall be not less than two-thirds of an
inch in height and should be displayed on a weather proof card not less than three inches by four
inches in size.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct or hinder the free flow of traffic in the lawful use of
the street or free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk. No solicitations, sales, or distribution
of merchandise, products, or service shall be offered or made to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopped
in traffic on a public street or alley.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in solicitation to:
(1) Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation;
(2) Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
(3) Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he
does not wish to give anything to or buy anything from that solicitor;
(4) Represent the issuance of any permit or registration under this article as an endorsement or
recommendation of the solicitation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/536
(5) Go on property upon which the owner of the property or the person controlling the property has
posted signs prohibiting solicitation; posted “No Trespassing Signs” or open a closed gate to enter the
property;
(6) Remain on property after the property owner, or the property owner's designee, representative
or agent, has instructed the solicitor to leave.
(d) No solicitor, or person working on his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry, blow a horn or whistle, or
use any sound device, including any sound amplifying system, upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or
other public places of the city, or otherwise be in violation of the city's noise ordinance.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to use children 14 years of age or younger for solicitation activities,
unless otherwise expressly permitted herein, unless such children are actively supervised by a parent, guardian
or other adult person at least 18 years of age who is registered as provided herein. For purposes of this section,
actively supervised means that the adult person shall be within 100 feet of all children 14 years of age or
younger for whom the adult person is responsible at all times when the children are engaged in solicitation
activities.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 4.04 POSTING AND DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS
Sec. 4.04.001 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in any sum not to
exceed $500.00, and each day's violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 142, sec. 4,
adopted 9/23/71; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 4.04.002 Permission required for posting or display
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to distribute, post, fasten, erect or display, or cause to be
distributed, posted, fastened, erected or displayed, any political, commercial or other type of handbill, sign,
poster, or advertisement on any structure, tree, pole, curb or elsewhere within the right-of-way of any public
street or upon any public property within the city, without the express permission of the city council, or upon any
private property, real, personal or otherwise, within the city without the express permission of the owner thereof.
(Ordinance 142, sec. 1, adopted 9/23/71; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.04.003 Violations
When any handbill, sign, poster or advertisement shall be found distributed, posted, fastened, erected or
displayed in violation of section 4.04.002 of this article, same shall be prima facie evidence that such unlawful
distribution, posting, fastening, erecting or displaying was caused by the person, firm, or corporation advertised
thereby only if such person, firm or corporation advertised thereby fails or refuses to move same after having
been notified that such handbill, sign, poster or advertisement is in violation of section 4.04.002 hereof, and each
day that such handbill, sign, poster or advertisement shall remain so posted, fastened, erected or displayed shall
constitute a separate violation of this article. (Ordinance 142, sec. 2, adopted 9/23/71; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.04.004 Conditions for issuance of permit
Said application shall be reviewed according to the following:
(1) The application referred to in section 4.04.002 of this article shall be filed with the city
secretary no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the city council meeting at which it is to be
reviewed by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/536
(2) The posting and/or distribution of the above-stated materials shall not be violative of any penal
law of the state or the United States; however, the decision of the city council shall not be absolutely
determinative of the legality of said posting and/or distribution and the city shall not be held liable
therefor.
(3) The posting and/or distribution shall not be injurious to the public health according to generally
accepted health standards as established in the community.
(4) The posting and/or distribution shall not be injurious to the safety of the public so as to induce
a reasonably prudent person to believe that an unsafe condition exists upon the streets, alleyways,
private property to which the public at large has access, public property, all other private property,
and any other areas where such posting and/or distribution might take place.
(5) The posting and/or distribution shall not create a nuisance, obstruction, or litter in the streets or
other public or private property.
(6) Said posting and/or distribution shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
unless compelling reason is shown by the applicant why said time period should be increased.
(7) The city council shall have the discretion, within the guidelines set forth herein, to decrease
said time should it deem such decrease to be necessary.
(8) If said handbill, sign, poster, or advertisement is to be posted, fastened, erected, or displayed, it
shall be allowed to remain in public view only for a reasonable period of time and said poster or other
display shall contain a designated date or deadline, [and] said reasonable time shall be presumed to
be no longer than seven (7) days following said date or deadline.
(Ordinance adopted 6/26/86, sec. 1)
Sec. 4.04.005 Permit fee
The fee for the application covered by this article shall be the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00), which shall cover
the costs of copying, processing, reviewing, and the action taken upon the application, with said application fee
to be payable at the time of application. (Ordinance adopted 6/26/86, sec. 2)
Sec. 4.04.006 Rights of owners of private property
The provisions of this article shall in no way affect the rights of owners of private property to regulate the
activity contemplated herein upon his/her private property so long as said regulation is in compliance with the
municipal laws of the city and the laws of the state and of the United States. (Ordinance adopted 6/26/86, sec. 3)
ARTICLE 4.05 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 4.05.001 Definitions
Garage sale. The sale of tangible personal property or used or unwanted household items that is held in the
garage, driveway or yard of the seller's residence. The term garage sale includes the terms yard sale, estate sale,
occasional sale, and similar terms.
Sec. 4.05.002 Residential property
No permit shall be issued by the city to conduct a garage sale on property zoned commercial or being used as a
commercial business.
Sec. 4.05.003 Permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/536
A permit shall be required and obtained prior to conducting a garage sale. The permit may be issued to the
owner or tenant of the residence.
Sec. 4.05.004 Right to deny permit
If any person is cited for violation of this article, two or more times during any calendar year, the city may refuse
to issue that individual a permit to hold a garage sale any time during the subsequent calendar year.
Sec. 4.05.005 Number and duration of sales
The number of garage sales on a property shall not exceed four (4) during any calendar year period from January
1st to December 31st and not to exceed one per calendar month. The duration of each sale shall not exceed three
(3) consecutive calendar days. Garage sale items shall not be allowed to be left out between each garage sale.
Sec. 4.05.006 Conditions of sale
Tangible personal property shall be sold only on the premises of the owner or tenant where the sale is conducted.
Said owner or tenant must be the legal owner of such tangible personal property at the time of such sale. The
items for sale shall be confined to the garage, porch, patio or yard on the premises of the residence. No new
merchandise, (i.e. merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale), shall be sold at a garage sale.
Sec. 4.05.007 Sales affected by rain or inclement weather
If a property owner or tenant has purchased a garage sale permit, and the majority of the scheduled dates for the
sale are affected by rain or other inclement weather, as determined by city staff, a rain-out permit may be issued
at no cost, provided the property owner or tenant returns the original permit. The new permit must be issued
within thirty (30) days of the date of the original permit. If the permit was issued for two (2) or three (3) days
and the rain or inclement weather affects only one (1) day during the permit period, a rain-out permit shall not be
issued.
Sec. 4.05.008 Multiple garage sales
In the event of multiple garage sales in one community, ( i.e. a subdivision), each property owner participating in
the event will be required to obtain a permit.
Sec. 4.05.009 Signs
(a) On-premises signs. Only one sign shall be allowed. The sign shall be posted on the property conducting
the sale in a location visible from the street.
(b) Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs shall not be permitted.
(c) Sign locations.
(1) Sign shall not be placed on utility poles, street sign poles, or other fixed objects in the city or
state rights-of-way.
(2) Sign shall not be placed within a street median or visibility triangle.
(d) Removal of sign. Sign shall not be posted more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the beginning of the
sale. The sign advertising a garage sale shall be removed by the permittee not later than twenty-four (24) hours
following the expiration of the permit.
Sec. 4.05.010 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/536
Any person, firm, association or persons, company, corporations or their agents or employees violating or failing
to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than one dollar
($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and each day any violation of noncompliance continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other
remedies provided by state law, and the power on injunction as provided by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code
54.012 and as may be amended, may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there has been a
complaint filed.
(Ordinance 484-14 adopted 11/20/14)
ARTICLE 4.06 AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.06.001 Purpose
This article as herein established has been written for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community and in the furtherance of conserving the value of property and
establishing a community desirable to reside therein. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. I, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.002 Definitions
As pertaining to this article, the following definitions will have their specific meaning as follows:
Amusement center. Any business establishment in which at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the public floor
area is devoted to coin-operated machines used for recreation and amusement purposes, or pool or billiard
tables.
Coin-operated machine used for recreation or amusement purposes. Every machine or device of any kind or
character which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens, or checks and which dispenses or is used or
is capable of being used or operated for amusement, pleasure, skill or recreation. This term expressly includes
pinball, football, coin-operated pool tables, and other coin-operated machines which dispense or afford skill or
pleasure. This term expressly excludes coin-operated music machines, pay toilets, pay telephones, coin-operated
rides for children, and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend merchandise, commodities,
confections or music. This term shall also include machines operated by currency or legal tender.
Owner. Any person, firm, company, association or corporation owning any coin-operated machine used for
recreation, or pool or billiard tables from which he/she derives a profit, save and except religious, charitable and
educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state.
Pool or billiard table. Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion, with or without pockets, upon which balls are
propelled by a stick or cue, and where the player thereon does not or is not required to make a coin deposit
causing an electrical connection of any nature or kind before such game may be actually commenced.
Recreation or amusement machine. Any pool or billiard table or any coin-operated machine used for amusement
purposes, any of which tables or machines are operated for profit.
(Ordinance 366-A, sec. II, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.003 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article for which no other penalty is set forth shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per incident or per day in
which such condition exists. Each day that such violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant, mortgagee or vender in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/536
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or another person, firm or corporation
directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. XVII, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.004 Inspections of premises
The city administrator shall appoint or designate an authorized representative to make periodic inspections of
premises licensed under this article to determine compliance with the building provisions, the maintenance of
toilets and other sanitary facilities and compliance with the health, plumbing, sanitary and other applicable code
provisions and any other ordinance of the city. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. IX, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.005 Visibility of machines to public; machines to be attended
(a) The recreation or amusement machines which are operated for profit within a place of business shall not be
left unattended.
(b) Within each place of business in which recreation or amusement machines are operated for a profit, the
machines will be so situated so that the machines will be in full, open, public view.
(c) The term “full, open, public view,” as used in this article, shall mean that the machines are clearly and
plainly visible from the exterior of the front of the building. The front of a building, as used here, is that side of
the structure where the main entrance is located or that side of a structure which fronts a street. Provided,
however, if the playing of the recreation or amusement machines is in a recreation center where the majority of
the public is engaged in an activity other than the playing of the machines, the machines shall be in full, open,
public view if the recreation and amusement machines are clearly and plainly visible from the areas of the
building where the other activities are being performed.
(Ordinance 366-A, sec. IV, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.006 Partitions obstructing view
It shall be unlawful to erect or construct in any business establishment in which recreation and amusement
machines are operated for a profit, any partition obstructing the full, open, public view of any part of the
premises in which recreation or amusement machines are displayed and operated for profit; provided, however,
that toilets or other sanitary facilities shall be enclosed and adequately ventilated in accordance with the health,
plumbing, sanitary, and other applicable regulations of the city. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. V, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.007 Hours of operation
No person may engage in the operation for profit of any recreation or amusement machines within the city
between the hours of two a.m. (2:00) and seven a.m. (7:00), Monday through Thursday, and between the hours
of two a.m. (2:00) to seven a.m. (7:00) on Friday and Saturday. Such recreation or amusement machines may be
operated on Sundays only between the hours of one p.m. (1:00) and two a.m. (2:00). (Ordinance 366-A, sec. VI,
adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.008 Minors on premises during school hours
No person who has the control of any business establishment wherein is kept, used or operated for profit any
recreation or amusement machines shall permit or allow any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to play
thereon or to operate any such machine during school hours. It shall be the duty of any person who is the
proprietor or keeper of such business establishment to post conspicuously in his/her place of business in the
vicinity of the machine's location within the place of business the following sign: “Minors Under the Age of 18
Years Not Allowed Here During School Hours.” (Ordinance 366-A, sec. VII, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.009 Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/536
The sale of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises licensed under this article is prohibited. No person so
licensed shall knowingly permit the sale, use or consumption of any kind of alcoholic beverages in or upon the
premises for which a license has been issued. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. XIII, adopted 12/21/00)
Secs. 4.06.010–4.06.040 Reserved
Division 2. Occupation Tax on Amusement Machines*
Sec. 4.06.041 Levied; due date; receipt and tags
(a) There is levied an annual occupation tax equal to one-quarter (1/4) of the amount levied by the state on
coin-operated machines used for recreation or amusement purposes, or pool or billiard tables. The occupation
tax shall be levied upon the owner of such coin-operated machines, or pool or billiard tables, save and except
religious, charitable and educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state, and the tax levied
herein shall be paid to the city secretary, who shall issue an occupation tax receipt and, for each machine on
which the occupation tax is paid, an occupation tax tag. The occupation tax shall be due and payable on January
1 of each year. Such occupation tax receipt and tax tag shall specify the year for which the tax receipt and tax tag
are valid. Such occupation tax receipt shall specify the number of recreation or amusement machines, pool or
billiard tables for which it is issued and the address of the legal owner. The occupation tax [tag] shall be affixed
to each machine, pool or billiard table on which the occupation tax is paid.
(b) In the event the owner of any of the recreation or amusement machines wishes to substitute a different
machine for one within the city on which the occupation tax has been paid, the owner will remove the tax tag
from the machine to be replaced and place it upon the substitute machine. Provided, however, that the machine
that is replaced by the substitute machine shall not be operated for profit within the city again until an
occupation tax tag is affixed to it. In the event the tax tag is mutilated, the owner will turn in the mutilated
occupation tax tag to the city secretary's office and receive a new tag. There shall be a charge as provided for in
the fee schedule found in appendix A to his code for the new tag.
(Ordinance 366-A, sec. III, adopted 12/21/00; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.042 Sealing of machines on which tax has not been paid
The police department is authorized to seal any recreation or amusement machine, or pool or billiard table, on
which the occupation tax has not been paid. The police department is authorized to charge a fee as provided for
in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code for the release of any recreation or amusement machine, or
pool or billiard table, that is sealed as provided above for nonpayment of the occupation tax. Whoever shall
break the seal affixed in the name of the city or display or remove from the location any recreation or
amusement machine, or pool or billiard table, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor under the laws of the
state. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. VIII, adopted 12/21/00)
Secs. 4.06.043–4.06.070 Reserved
Division 3. Amusement Center License
Sec. 4.06.071 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity that owns an amusement center, save and except religious,
charitable or educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state, to operate such business within the
city without first having obtained an appropriate license from the city secretary. Application for license shall be
made with the city secretary initially and on or before January 1 of each succeeding year. Whoever shall violate
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor under this code. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. X, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.072 Fee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/536
There is levied an annual license fee on each person or business entity that owns an amusement center within the
city. The city secretary is authorized to collect this annual license fee, which shall be due and payable on January
1 of each year. The annual license fee for such a general business shall be as provided for in the fee schedule
found in appendix A to this code. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. XI, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.073 Location restrictions
Because of the rapid proliferation of such businesses in the city and the observed congestion, late hours,
potential for being an attractive nuisance to minors and the questioned legality of such activities, the city council
hereby finds that a further proliferation and concentration of such businesses constitutes a nuisance to the health,
safety and welfare of the city. Accordingly, subsequent to the passage of this article, no license will be issued for
any such establishment unless such is at least one thousand feet (1,000') in a direct line from any of its public
entrances to the nearest property line of a church, residence, school or another business entity operating under a
license issued under this article. Any businesses existing as of the time of the passage of this article shall be
permitted to continue; however, if they should cease operations, or violate any of the provisions of this article or
any other applicable city, state or federal law, their license shall be subject to revocation and such may not be
renewed unless they meet all provisions of any applicable law, including the above spacing requirements.
(Ordinance 366-A, sec. XII, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.074 Term; transfer
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be for one (1) year and shall be nontransferable. (Ordinance 366-
A, sec. XIV, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.075 Display
A license issued pursuant to this article shall at all times be displayed in some conspicuous place within the
licensed place of business. (Ordinance 366-A, sec. XV, adopted 12/21/00)
Sec. 4.06.076 Revocation
(a) The city council is authorized and empowered to revoke the license of any person licensed under this
article, after giving such licensee ten (10) days' notice of a hearing and after conducting such hearing for the
purpose of determining whether such license should be revoked.
(b) The power of revocation shall be exercised upon the following grounds only:
(1) For the violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) For knowingly permitting the sale, use or consumption of any alcoholic beverage in or upon the
licensed premises.
(3) For violation of the prescribed hours of operation provided in this article.
(4) For knowingly permitting the presence on the premises of a person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
(5) For knowingly permitting disorderly conduct or immoral practices on the premises.
(6) For knowingly permitting the violation of the laws of the state or of this article or any other
ordinance of the city.
(7) For failure to provide a minimum lighting of thirty (30) footcandles at every point thirty inches
(30") above the floor in the parlor.
(8) For failure to comply with the regulations of this article relating to minors.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/536
(Ordinance 366-A, sec. XVI, adopted 12/21/00)
ARTICLE 4.07 BINGO GAMES*
Sec. 4.07.001 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and fined not in excess of $500.00. (Ordinance 232, sec. 7, adopted 12/11/86; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 4.07.002 Games for charitable purposes authorized
The conducting of bingo games for charitable purposes is, by this article, legalized and declared to be a legal
practice. (Ordinance 232, sec. 1, adopted 12/11/86)
Sec. 4.07.003 Special use permit
No bingo games shall be operated upon premises within the city without a special use permit specifically for
bingo games granted by the planning and zoning commission. The procedure and fees for issuance shall comply
with the zoning ordinance and other ordinances governing special use permits. The city council shall not act
upon any bingo special use permit application until it has been recommended by the planning and zoning
commission. If an application is approved by the planning and zoning commission, it shall not be issued until
approved by the city council. (Ordinance 232, sec. 2, adopted 12/11/86)
Sec. 4.07.004 Existing operations
All nonconforming bingo operations presently being actively operated shall comply with all of the terms of this
article before commencing operation and shall be considered legal nonconforming uses. (Ordinance 232, sec. 3,
adopted 12/11/86)
Sec. 4.07.005 Registration of nonconforming uses
All nonconforming bingo operations shall be registered by the planning and zoning commission thirty (30) days
after the approval of this article. Each operation shall be notified by registered mail of the registration
requirement. (Ordinance 232, sec. 4, adopted 12/11/86)
Sec. 4.07.006 Gross receipts tax
A one percent (1%) gross receipts tax is hereby imposed upon the conduct of bingo games within this
municipality. The tax shall be paid to the city secretary by the person or organization conducting each operation
pursuant to the terms of the state statute governing bingo (Bingo Enabling Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch.
2001). Reporting procedures shall be governed by such statute. (Ordinance 232, sec. 5, adopted 12/11/86)
ARTICLE 4.08 OIL AND GAS WELLS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.08.001 Scope
This article as herein established has been written for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the community and in the furtherance of conserving the value of property and
establishing a community desirable to reside therein. (Ordinance 426, sec. I, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.002 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/536
As pertaining to this article, the following words shall have meanings respectively ascribed to them. Generally,
all technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have
that meaning customarily attributed to them by the oil and gas industry.
Drill or drilling. Digging or boring a new well or redrilling an existing well to a deeper depth for the purpose of
exploring for, developing or producing oil, gas or hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any
other fluid or substances into the earth.
Drilling unit. One contiguous body or block of land composed of one or more tracts complying with the spacing
regulations promulgated by the state railroad commission or its successor.
Fire zone. Any area within the corporate limits of the city designated as a fire zone by a provision of this article
or in any ordinance duly passed and approved by the city council.
Permittee. The person to whom the city issues a permit to drill and operate a well under the provisions of this
article, and his or its administrators, executors, heirs, successors and assigns.
Well. Any holes, bore or bores which is, or are, drilled, bored, dug, sunk or put down to any depth, strata, sand or
formation for the purpose of exploring for or ascertaining the existence of any oil, gas or liquid hydrocarbon or
for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquid hydrocarbon, or for the purpose of injecting
gas or any fluid or substances into the earth.
(Ordinance 426, sec. II, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.003 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a fine of not more
than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant,
mortgagee or vendor in possession, assignee of rents, executor, trustee, or lessee, agent or another person, firm
or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXXXI,
adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.004 Conflicts with zoning ordinance
In the event of any conflicts between this article which governs city-wide drilling permits and the zoning
ordinance in effect now or in the future in this city, then this article shall govern. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXXXIII,
adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.005 Liability of city
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability
by reason of orders issued, or not issued, or work done, or not done, in compliance with the terms of this article.
(Ordinance 426, sec. III, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.006 State certification and city permit required; permit fee
Every person, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity desiring to drill and/or operate any gas or oil
well of any kind in the city limits must obtain the proper permit from the city administrator before proceeding.
To obtain said permit, the person, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity shall submit to the city
administrator proof of valid state certification and compliance with the rules and regulations as promulgated by
the state railroad commission or its successor. In addition, a permit fee as provided for in the fee schedule found
in appendix A to this code shall be required before any such permit may be issued. (Ordinance 426, sec. IV,
adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.007 Violation of state or federal regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/536
Any violation of the state laws or any rules, regulations or requirement of any state or federal regulatory body
having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining or
abandoning an oil or gas well, or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, fire protection, blow-out
protection, safety protection or convenience of persons or property shall also be a violation of this article and
shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions hereof. (Ordinance 426, sec. V, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.008 Sanitary maintenance of wells
The premises of each well shall be kept clean and sanitary, free from rubbish of every character, to the
satisfaction of the city health officer, at all times during drilling operations or reworking operations are being
conducted and as long thereafter as oil or gas is being produced from the well or fluids or other substances are
being injected into any disposal well. (Ordinance 426, sec. VI, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.009 Watchman
At all times from the start of erection of a derrick, a mast, or a gin pole until any well is completed as a producer
and enclosed with a fence or until the well is abandoned and plugged, the permittee shall keep a watchman on
duty on the premises. (Ordinance 426, sec. VII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.010 Reworking
Any operator desiring to rework a well shall give the city council written notice of this intent prior to the
commencement of reworking operations; provided, however, in the event of an emergency an operator may
proceed with such reworking without notice. (Ordinance 426, sec. VIII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.011 Location generally
No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer
than five hundred feet (500') to any residence, building or structure without the applicant for a permit having
first secured the written permission of the owner or owners thereof, except that the city council may permit a
well where the applicant secures written permission from seventy percent (70%) of the owners of all residences
or business structures within five hundred feet (500') of the location of any well if the council determines that the
well will not endanger the safety, health or welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ordinance 426, sec. IX, adopted
9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.012 Location in or near street, alley or public water supply well
(a) It shall be unlawful to drill any well and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location
which is within fifty feet (50') of the boundary line of any of the streets, alleys, public ways and water wells of
the city. No street, alley or public way shall be blocked, encumbered or closed in any drilling or production
operation, except on a temporary basis and then only by special permit issued by the city council.
(b) Every oil or gas well drilled within fifteen hundred feet (1500') of the site of any existing or designated
Sand formation; and similar casing shall be set and cemented on wells located at greater distances from such
water wells when requested by the city council [sic]. Such requirement may be waived by the city council for
good cause shown after due hearing, but if not waived by the city council may be enforced by injunction or any
other available remedy. No drilling permit shall ever be issued to any person for the drilling or operation of any
well when such person is in default hereunder, and any such permit inadvertently issued shall be deemed wholly
void from the beginning future municipal water well of the city shall have casing set and cemented down to the
first impervious stratum below the Trinity [sic].
(Ordinance 426, sec. X, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.013 Abandonment and plugging
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/536
Whenever a well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a
cement plug in the casing from the base of the Wilcox formation to the specifications as set forth by the state
railroad commission or its successor. (Ordinance 426, sec. XI, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.014 Casing generally
The productive string shall have a mill test of eighteen hundred (1,800) pounds for wells six thousand feet
(6,000') or less in depth. The surface casing shall be a new pipe and shall have a mill test of eleven hundred
(1,100) pounds. (Ordinance 426, sec. XII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.015 Setting and cementing casing
No well shall be drilled within the city without properly setting the surface casing. No well shall be drilled
within the city without cementing the surface casing by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to
completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground, and without cementing
the production string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill the annular space
behind the production string to the surface of the ground. The production string shall be centralized from one
thousand feet (1,000') to the surface with the use of five (5) centralizers to be placed at depths of one hundred
feet (100'), three hundred feet (300'), five hundred feet (500'), seven hundred feet (700') and nine hundred fifty
feet (950'). Sufficient cement shall be used so as to insure the circulation of cement from the bottom of the oil
string to the surface. (Ordinance 426, sec. XIII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.016 Christmas tree and well head connections
The Christmas tree and all well head connections on each well shall be as follows: On all wells completed at a
depth above four thousand feet (4,000'), the Christmas tree and well head connections shall be at least a
minimum test pressure of one thousand (1,000) psi; and on all wells completed to a depth of from four thousand
one feet (4,001') to seven thousand feet (7,000'), the Christmas tree and well connections shall have at least a
minimum working pressure of three thousand (3,000) psi and a minimum test pressure of at least six thousand
(6,000) psi; and on all well head connections there shall be at least a minimum working pressure of five
thousand (5,000) psi and a minimum test pressure of at least ten thousand (10,000) psi. In the event the surface
shut-in pressure of any well exceeds two thousand (2,000) psi, the flow string of the Christmas tree shall be
equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valves. (Ordinance 426, sec.
XIV, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.017 Derrick and rig
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig in connection
with the drilling or reworking of any well, or to permit any derrick or derricks to remain on the premises or
drilling site for a period longer than thirty (30) days after completion of abandonment of the well. (Ordinance
426, sec. XV, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.018 Disposal of salt water
The permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities which may be
brought to the surface from the depth of the well. No salt water pits, vats or other open storage of salt water shall
be permitted within the city. All movement of salt water in the city shall be by enclosed lines with no leakage,
except by special permit from the city council, which may impose necessary restrictions on the use of transport
vehicles during certain times or the prohibition of transporting disposal fluids or substances for more than a
specified period, require a special bond, and impose reasonable inspection fees. (Ordinance 426, sec. XVI,
adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.019 Drilling fluid
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/536
All operators shall be required to drill all wells with mud through the process commonly referred to as mud
drilling. Drilling with air and/or gas shall be prohibited. (Ordinance 426, sec. XVII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.020 Drill stem tests
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or to complete any drill stem test or tests except during daylight hours
and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage
tanks, and effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed and flushed to the surface by
circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the pipe. (Ordinance 426, sec. XVIII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.021 Fence, firewall and landscaping
Any person who completes a well as a producer shall have the obligation to enclose said well, tank battery and
any other surface facilities by a substantially smooth net wire fence or other material sufficiently high and
properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure, as approved by the council. All
gates thereto shall be kept locked when the permittee or employees are not within the enclosure. Tank batteries
shall be enclosed by earthen firewalls arranged so that the capacity of the enclosure will be sufficient to contain
the full volume of fluids in the tanks. The well permit may require tree preservation and landscaping.
Landscaping shall consist of native plants. Retention of twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing trees will be
required through either retention or replanting. (Ordinance 426, sec. XIX, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.022 Injection wells
No water, gas, air or chemicals shall be injected into any well for the purpose of forcing oil out of the producing
formation or for any other purpose without applying for a special permit. In applying for such approval, the
permittee shall include in the application a detailed statement of the method to be used in injecting said water,
gas, chemicals or other fluids and its plan for inspections and protection of the groundwater from contamination.
(Ordinance 426, sec. XX, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.023 Noise
(a) No well shall be drilled or redrilled or any equipment operated at any location within the city in such a
manner so as to create any noise which causes the exterior noise level when measured at the nearest protected
use receiver's/receptor's property line or one hundred feet (100') from the nearest protected use structure (as
measured to the closest exterior point of the building), whichever is closer to the receiver/receptor, that exceeds
the ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels during daytime hours and more than three (3) decibels
during nighttime hours. Fracing operations may not exceed the ambient noise level by more than ten (10)
decibels. Backflow operations may not exceed the ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels during
nighttime hours.
(b) The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the city the pre-drilling ambient noise
level prior to the issuance of a gas well permit. Once the drilling is complete, the operator shall be required to
establish a new ambient noise level prior to the installation of any new noise generation equipment.
(c) Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in subsection (a) of this section may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
Permitted dBA Duration of Increase (minutes)*
5 15
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/536
10 5
15 1
20 Less than 1
*Cumulative minutes during any one (1) hour.
(d) All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours. “Workover operations” shall mean work
performed in a well after its completion in an effort to secure production where there has been none, restore
production that has ceased or increase production.
(e) Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative methods may be used to ensure compliance.
All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and is subject to approval by the city.
(f) The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National Standard
Institute's standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment
which will provide equivalent data.
(g) A citation shall be issued for the failure to correct the violation within twenty-four (24) hours of the notice
of violation by the city.
(Ordinance 426, sec. XXI, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.024 Pits
All slush pits or other means of storing mud or water for use in drilling or reworking operations shall be
constructed, dug, or placed at the location and in the manner specified by the state railroad commission or its
successor. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.025 No smoking signs
Printed signs reading “Dangerous, No Smoking Allowed” shall be posted in conspicuous places on each
producing unit. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXIII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.026 Storage tanks and pipelines
All storage tanks shall be located at the place designated by and in the manner recommended by the state
railroad commission or its successor. No oil, gas, salt water or other pipelines shall be installed in the streets,
alleys, public ways or on property owned by the city without prior consent of the city council. Use of such
streets, alleys, public ways or municipally owned property for such purpose shall be subject to the terms and
conditions imposed by the city council. The depth and location at which such lines shall be laid shall be
specified by the city council or its duly designated representative. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXIV, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.027 Tubing
All tubing used in any well drilled to a depth of six thousand feet (6,000') or less shall be J-55 mill tested to three
thousand (3,000) psi. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXV, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.028 Valves and blow-out preventers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/536
Valves and blow-out preventers shall be installed when deemed necessary. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXVI, adopted
9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.029 Venting and flaring of gas
No person engaged in drilling or operating any well shall permit gas to escape or be vented into the air within
the city. Flaring of gas within the city is prohibited. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXVII, adopted 9/18/08)
Secs. 4.08.030–4.08.050 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.08.051 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself/herself or acting as the agent, servant, employee, or
independent contractor of any other person to commence to drill or to operate any well within the city or to work
upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such well without a permit for the drilling and
operation of such well having first been issued by authority of the city council. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXVIII,
adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.052 Application
(a) Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or
by some person duly authorized to sign the same on his/her behalf, which application shall be filed with the city
administrator. No application shall request a permit to drill and operate more than one (1) well.
(b) The application shall contain full information, including the following:
(1) Date of application;
(2) Name and address of the applicant;
(3) Proposed site of the well, accompanied by a plat of the drilling unit showing the descriptions of
the lots, blocks or tracts owned or controlled by the applicant. Such plats shall be prepared by a
registered public surveyor of the state;
(4) Name(s) of the surface and mineral owner(s);
(5) Names and addresses of the lease owner(s);
(6) A brief description of the land;
(7) Type of drilling rig;
(8) Whether the well shall be drilled as an oil or gas well;
(9) Proposed depth of well;
(10) Motive power of the rig that is to be used;
(11) Fencing and landscaping plan; and
(12) Noise survey.
(c) The application must contain proof of a valid certification from the state railroad commission or its
successor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/536
(Ordinance 426, sec. XXIX, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.053 Fees
Every application for a permit to drill and operate a gas or oil well shall be accompanied by filing a fee in cash
as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code. In addition, there shall be an annual fee per
well commencing on the first anniversary of the permit issuance date of every application. A permit for a
disposal well for salt water or other fluids or substances shall be accompanied by a filing fee and the annual fee
as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXX, adopted
9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.054 Refusal of application
The city council shall have the authority to refuse any application for a permit when by reason of the location of
the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the drilling
unit in question or adjacent thereto, or the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for public or civic
purposes, or for sanitary reasons, the drilling of any well would be injurious or a disadvantage to the health,
safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXXI, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.055 Issuance
(a) Within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill and operate a well, the city
council shall determine whether the application complies with the provisions of this article and, if it does, shall
fix the amount of the principal of the bond required by this article. After such determination, the city council
shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well described in said permit.
(b) Each permit issued under this article shall:
(1) Have incorporated therein by reference all provisions of this article with the same force and
effect as if this article were copied verbatim in the permit;
(2) Specify the location of the well with particularity as to lot number, block number, name of
addition or subdivision or other available correct legal description;
(3) Specify that the term of such permit shall be for a period of six (6) months from the date of the
permit and for as long thereafter as the permittee is engaged in contiguous [continuous] drilling [or]
reworking operations or oil and gas is produced from the well in commercial quantities. Provided,
however, if at any time after discovery of oil or gas the production thereof in commercial quantities
shall cease, the term of the permit shall not terminate if the permittee commences additional
reworking operations within six (6) months thereafter and if such reworking operations result in the
production of oil or gas from said well in commercial quantities;
(4) Specify such conditions as are by this article authorized;
(5) Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled; and
(6) Specify that no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and
have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as determined by the city
council and conditions as specified in section 4.08.082.
(Ordinance 426, sec. XXXII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.056 Permit constitutes contractual obligation
Each permit shall be prepared in duplicate originals and shall be signed by the city secretary and by the
permittee prior to the delivery of such permit to the permittee. One (1) original shall be retained by the city and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/536
the other delivered to the permittee. When such permit is signed by both parties, it shall constitute the permittee's
drilling and operating license and the terms of such permit, such bond and this article. (Ordinance 426, sec.
XXXIII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.057 Refusal of or withdrawal from permit; partial refund of fee
If the permit for the well shall be refused by the applicant and [the applicant] notifies the city council in writing
that he/she does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw the application, or if the bond
of the applicant is not approved or if the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he/she wishes to
withdraw the application, then upon the happening of any said events the case [sic] deposit provided for to be
filed with the application shall be returned to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the
city one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as a processing fee plus any expenses incurred by the city in the
investigation of the proposed well with regard to safety issues or groundwater pollution issues. (Ordinance 426,
sec. XXXIV, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.058 Permittee must be leaseholder
A permit to drill and operate a well shall be issued only to the holder of a valid oil or gas lease. (Ordinance 426,
sec. XXXV, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.059 Transfer
Any permit for the purpose of drilling and operating a well granted by the city shall not be transferable.
(Ordinance 426, sec. XXXVI, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.060 Termination
When a permit to drill and operate a well is issued, the same shall terminate and become inoperative without
action on the part of the city unless within six (6) months from the date of the issuance of such permit actual
drilling of the well designated therein shall have commenced. The cessation for a like period of the drilling or
reworking operations, or the cessation of the production of oil or gas from the well after production shall have
commenced, shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for
all purposes under this section. It shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well
without the issuance of another permit. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXXVII, adopted 9/18/08)
Secs. 4.08.061–4.08.080 Reserved
Division 3. Financial Guarantees
Sec. 4.08.081 Required
In the event a permit is issued by the city council for the drilling and operation of a well, no actual drilling
operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city secretary a bond and a certificate of
insurance. (Ordinance 426, sec. XXXVIII, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.082 Bond
(a) A bond shall be required in the principal sum of such number of dollars as has been determined by the city
council but not to be less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) nor more than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). Said bond shall be executed by a reliable surety company authorized to do business in the state
as surety and by the permittee as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons
concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and provisions of this article in the drilling
and operation of the well. Said bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city
administrator and shall remain in full force and effect for at least six (6) months subsequent to the expiration of
the term of the permit issued, and in addition the bond shall be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/536
off all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of breach of any of the
terms, provisions or conditions of this article, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets, alleys,
sidewalks and other public ways and property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations
to their former condition, and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, and
other substances used, allowed or occurring in the drilling or producing operations and will, after abandonment,
grade, level, and restore said property to the same surface condition, as nearly as possible, as existed when
operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced; and that the permittee will indemnify and hold the
city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit. If at any
time the city council shall deem any permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the
permittee to file a new bond.
(b) If, after completion of a well, the permittee has complied with all the provisions of this article such as
removing the derrick, cleaning the premises, etc., he may apply to the city council to have said bond reduced to a
sum of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the remainder of the time said well produces without
reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount.
(Ordinance 426, sec. XXXIX, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 4.08.083 Insurance
(a) The permittee shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance,
including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city,
with an insurance company authorized to do business in the state; said policy or policies in the aggregate shall
provide for an umbrella coverage of at least five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) plus a minimum of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) coverage for each accident.
(b) The permittee shall file with the city administrator certificates of said insurance and shall obtain the
written approval thereof by the city council, who shall act thereon within ten (10) days from the date of such
filing. Said insurance policy or policies shall not be cancelled without written notice to the city administrator at
least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event said insurance policy or policies
are cancelled, the permit granted shall terminate and the permittee's rights to operate under said permit shall
cease until the permittee files additional insurance as provided herein.
(c) If, after completion of a well, the permittee has complied with all the provisions of this article, such as
removing the derrick, clearing premises, etc., he/she may apply to the city council to have said insurance policy
or policies reduced as follows:
(1) Bodily injury: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) one person; one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) one accident; and
(2) Property damage: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00);
for the remainder of the time said well produces without reworking operations. During reworking operations, the
amount of the insurance policy or policies shall be increased to the original amounts.
(Ordinance 426, sec. XXXX, adopted 9/18/08)
ARTICLE 4.09 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.09.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meaning and definition as
hereinafter stated:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/536
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or his duly authorized representative.
Health officer. The health officer appointed by the city council or the city administrator.
Massage. Any act or process of kneading, rubbing, stroking or other such touching or otherwise manipulating
the skin of the body of a human being either with the hands or any other part of the human body, or through the
use of any mechanical devices, electrical instruments, or other apparatus. The term “massage” as used in this
article shall not include kneading, rubbing, stroking or other such touching as above defined by duly licensed
medical doctors, doctors of osteopathy, chiropractors or registered physical therapists or registered nurses or
licensed vocational nurses at the direction or under the prescription of a medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy
when such treatment is administered or prescribed in the professional course of treatment of a patient for a bona
fide medical or mental infirmity. The term “massage” shall not include massage of the face or bust as authorized
by the state in establishments licensed by the state as beauty shops and barbershops staffed by licensed barbers
and beauticians.
Massage parlor or massage establishment. Any building, house, room or place where massage is practiced upon
the human body by any person other than a duly licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy or chiropractor.
This term shall not include duly licensed beauty parlors or barbershops or the office or place of business of a
registered physical therapist.
Prohibited body areas. Includes all genital organs, sex organs and private parts of the human body and shall
include, but not be limited to, the male and female genital areas, female breasts, the human buttock and the
human anus.
(Ordinance 148, sec. 1, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.002 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion
thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted, and each offense shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not to exceed $500.00. (Ordinance 148, sec. 14, adopted
3/13/73; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 4.09.003 Inspections
The chief of police of the city or his designated representative is authorized to make periodic inspection and
examination of massage parlor or massage establishment premises. Such inspection shall be made to safeguard
the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ordinance 148, sec. 10, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.004 Medical certificates
Before commencing operation, the owner or operator of a massage parlor or establishment shall furnish to the
chief of police of the city a medical certificate for each employee signed by a medical doctor or doctor of
osteopathy that such employee has been examined within three (3) days of the date of such medical certificate
and that such examination established the fact that such person is free from any infectious or communicable
disease. A medical certificate certifying that any such employee is free of infectious or communicable disease
shall be furnished to the chief of police on January 1st, April 1st, July 1st, and October 1st during any period of
employment by such massage parlor or massage establishment. (Ordinance 148, sec. 5, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.005 Hours of operation
No massage parlor or massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 11:00 a.m. (Ordinance 148, sec. 8, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.006 Premises not to be used for residence purposes
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/536
No massage parlor or massage establishment shall be used for residence purposes. (Ordinance 148, sec. 9,
adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.007 Sanitary requirements
(a) It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at
all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic, and bathing devices, or
parts thereof, that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method
of sterilization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices, or parts thereof, after having been used
upon one patron, shall be sterilized before being used upon another. All towels and linens furnished for use of
one patron shall not be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered.
(b) All masseurs and operators shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering massage manipulations
to each patron accommodated.
(c) No person suffering from a communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment.
(d) No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of
the owner, person in control, or any employee, such person is suffering from a communicable disease.
(Ordinance 148, sec. 11, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.008 Administering massage to person of opposite sex
It shall be unlawful for any person to administer a massage in a massage parlor or massage establishment to any
person of the opposite sex except in the visible presence of a third person in the same room or enclosure where
massage is performed. (Ordinance 148, sec. 12, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.009 Register of patrons
The holder of a license issued under this article shall maintain a complete written daily register listing the name
and address of each patron as given by such patron and as verified from personal identification papers of such
patron. A current Texas driver's license containing descriptive information consistent with the physical
characteristics of such patron shall be deemed, for purposes hereof, satisfactory personal identification in
verification of the name and address of the patron. It shall be unlawful for any patron to give false identification
as to name or address and it shall further be unlawful for the licensee or his employees to knowingly permit a
patron to give a false name or address. Such daily register shall be kept and maintained at the licensed
establishment and shall be made available to the chief of police of the city or his designated representative for
inspection upon request at any time during the hours of operation of such establishment. (Ordinance 148, sec.
16, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.010 List of services and charges
A licensee under this article shall cause at all times to be prominently and publicly posted, in writing and
numbers of a size of not less than one (1) inch, a detailed list of the various massage procedures, treatments and
services performed in said massage parlor and massage establishment and the respective charge or cost therefor.
A copy of such list of services performed and the charges or cost thereof shall be furnished to the chief of police
of the city at the time of application for license, and thereafter at the time of any change in such services or
charges therefor if any such change be made. (Ordinance 148, sec. 17, adopted 3/13/73)
Secs. 4.09.011–4.09.040 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.09.041 Required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/536
No person or corporation shall operate a massage parlor or massage establishment in the city without having first
obtained a license therefor from the city. (Ordinance 148, sec. 2, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.042 Application
An application shall be required by any operator for a license to operate a massage establishment or a massage
parlor in the city. The application shall be filed with the chief of police. The application shall be on such form as
may be prescribed by the city administrator or the chief of police. The application shall require the operator to
state under oath the proposed location of the establishment in an area properly zoned therefor and the name of
the owner or owners of the proposed business. If the owner of the massage parlor is a corporation, then the
application shall state the names of the officers of such corporation and the registered agent for service. If the
owner of the massage parlor is an individual, then the name and the business and residence address of such
individual shall be stated. If the owner is a partnership, then the names and residence and business addresses of
all the partners shall be stated. If the operator of the massage parlor is a lessee of any other business entity, then
a copy of the lease agreement shall be attached thereto. If the operator of the massage parlor is an employee of
any other business entity, then his position with such business entity should be stated. The application shall state
the names of all employees of the massage parlor and the operator shall state in writing under oath whether such
person has ever been convicted in any court of theft, sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy house,
engaging in prostitution or other criminal offense. No license shall be granted for the operation of any massage
parlor or establishment where either the owner or employees have been convicted of any of the offenses stated
herein. A license for the operation of a massage parlor or massage establishment shall be immediately revoked
by the chief of police should it be determined that a person convicted of any of the offenses stated in this section
shall become an owner, operator or employee of a massage parlor or massage establishment having a license
issued by the city. (Ordinance 148A adopted –/–/74)
Sec. 4.09.043 Fee; expiration; display
A license to operate a massage establishment or massage parlor shall be issued to expire on the 31st day of
December of each year. The annual license fee shall be $5.00 and shall be payable in full regardless of the date
upon which the license is granted. The license shall be posted and publicly displayed in a conspicuous place at
the location of the massage parlor or massage establishment. (Ordinance 148, sec. 4, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.044 Revocation
(a) The chief of police of the city shall revoke any license issued under this article should the holder of such
license or the owner, operator, manager, employee or patron of any massage parlor or massage establishment in
the city do or commit any of the following acts or fail to comply with or meet any of the following requirements
imposed by this article:
(1) Prior or subsequent final conviction in any court of the offense of theft, sodomy, procuring,
pandering, keeping a bawdy house, engaging in prostitution or other offense involving moral
turpitude.
(2) The occurrence at the massage premises of any act or conduct proscribed by this article.
(3) Massage of prohibited body areas.
(4) Failure to furnish current medical certificates as required by this article.
(5) Failure to maintain a correct patron registration ledger as required by this article.
(6) Permitting a patron to give false registration information as required by this article.
(7) Permitting any person to administer a massage in an establishment licensed under this article to
any person of the opposite sex, except in the presence of a third person.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/536
(8) Violation of the hours of operation as set forth in section 4.09.005.
(9) Violation of section 4.09.006 prohibiting the use of a massage parlor or massage establishment
for residential purposes.
(10) Prohibiting entrance to the city chief of police or his designated representative for the purpose
of inspection of the licensed premises or the books or records required to be kept by this article.
(11) Failure to furnish for inspection, as required by this article, the books or records so required.
(12) Failure to register a patron as required by this article.
(13) Failure to verify the information furnished by a patron at time of his registration as required
by this article.
(14) The performance of any massage procedure, service or treatment, or a charge for same, other
than that posted, described and set forth as required by section 4.09.010 of this article.
(15) Violation of any of the sanitary requirements set forth in section 4.09.007.
(16) Failure to post the services and price list as required by section 4.09.010 of this article.
(b) The chief of police of the city shall, upon revocation of a license issued under this article, furnish the
licensee a written statement of the reasons for such revocation upon written request therefor by the licensee.
(Ordinance 148, sec. 6, adopted 3/13/73)
Sec. 4.09.045 Appeals
Should the chief of police refuse to approve the issuance of an original license or the renewal of a license or
revoke an outstanding license issued under this article, such action shall be final unless the license holder or
applicant shall, within ten (10) days after notice of such action, file with the city administrator a written appeal.
The decision of the city administrator shall not be appealable to the city council. (Ordinance 148, sec. 7, adopted
3/13/73)
ARTICLE 4.10 SECONDHAND DEALERS, JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 4.10.001–4.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Secondhand Dealers and Junk Dealers*
Sec. 4.10.031 Permit; fence or indoor storage required
(a) Definitions and classifications.
(1) The following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
Junk. All scrap metals and their alloys; bones, rags, cloth, rubber, rope, tinfoil, used
bottles, paper, old cotton, secondhand mechanical and garden tools and utensils; used or
secondhand plumbing fixtures, appliances, fittings, pipes and supplies; used or
secondhand gas or water fixtures, fittings, pipes, appliances and supplies; used or
secondhand hose or harness, used or secondhand doors, window sash or glass, mantels or
parts thereof; old brick, old stone, old paint, or old lumber; and any other article of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/536
equipment or merchandise of any nature that is old, used or secondhand; provided that this
definition shall not include operable motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or watercraft.
Junk dealer. Is used in its ordinary and usual accepted meaning, and shall also mean and
include any person engaged in any of the following: collection, handling, buying and
selling any of the articles enumerated in the definition of “junk” in this section.
Secondhand dealer. Is used in its ordinary and usual trade acceptance meaning, and shall
also mean and include any person engaged in any of the following: collection, handling,
buying, trading, selling or engaging in the sale or traffic of any of the following: used or
secondhand wearing apparel and any and all kinds of clothing; used or secondhand
watches, jewelry, diamonds, luggage, musical instruments, and any type of kind of
firearm; and any and all kinds of used goods, wares and merchandise that are handled by
pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers in the usual course of trade; provided that this
definition shall not include operable motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or watercraft.
(2) The terms “junk dealers,” “dealers in junk” and “dealers in secondhand merchandise” are
hereby used synonymously, and shall include both class A and class B junk dealers, as the same are
classified in subsection (3) hereof.
(3) Junk dealers and secondhand dealers are hereby divided into two classes to be designated as
class A and class B.
(A) Class A shall mean and include all junk dealers within the city who are not included in
class B, as herein defined.
(B) Class B shall include and mean all junk or secondhand dealers having no fixed place of
business and who are engaged in any of the following: the gathering of, the purchase of, the
sale of or the disposition of junk by going from house to house, from point to point or from
store to store within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) General restriction. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
the business of secondhand dealer or junk dealer within the city limits from and after the passage of this section
as provided by the law. Provided that this subsection shall not apply to existing businesses of like nature that are
operating within the city limits prior to February 15, 1965.
(c) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation found doing business as a secondhand dealer or junk dealer in
violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine not in excess of
$500.00. Each day of the violation constitutes a separate offense.
(d) Fence or indoor storage required.
(1) It is hereby declared that this section shall not apply to any secondhand dealer or junk dealer
who fulfills all of the following requirements:
(A) The construction of a solid fence of a height of not less than six (6) feet, connected
[constructed] so as to enclose and obstruct from the public view all of the area within which the
old, used, secondhand or junk merchandise is to be stored;
(B) The old, used, secondhand or junk merchandise shall be stored, stacked, piled or
collected in such a manner so as not to protrude above the height of the fence;
(C) The fence shall be of a solid construction of wood, brick, stone, metal or any other solid
substance, and shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/536
(2) In lieu of the fence provided for herein, the secondhand or junk dealer may store all such
merchandise in a building for which a certificate of occupancy has been awarded pursuant to the
ordinances of the city.
(e) Permit and affidavit required; application for permit.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of secondhand dealer, junk
dealer or dealer in used or old merchandise is hereby required to procure a permit by making
application in writing to the city secretary, such application to contain the following information:
(A) Name of the business;
(B) Location of the business;
(C) Name of the owner or owners;
(D) Address of the owner or owners;
(E) Type of business to be conducted, and merchandise to be handled;
(F) Signature of the applicant.
(2) Prior to the issuance of the permit, and after application has been made, the applicant is hereby
required to make affidavit, sworn to before the city secretary, that a fence as described in subsection
(d) of this section has been fully completed or that all merchandise will be stored inside an approved
building, thereby showing the ability of the applicant to comply with the terms, conditions, and
exceptions of this section.
(3) No permit shall be issued unless and until the requirement of affidavit is fulfilled.
(f) Penalty for making false affidavit or false representations. Any person making a false affidavit, or making
false representations in said application, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not in
excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(g) Forfeiture of permit. Any person making a false affidavit, or making false representations in said
application, shall be subject to an additional penalty of forfeiture of their permit issued in reliance upon such
false information and affidavit, and such forfeiture shall render the applicant liable for the penalty as provided in
subsection (f) of this section.
(h) Time limit for filing affidavit. Any person, firm, or corporation making application as herein provided
shall be allowed ninety (90) days within which to make affidavit, after which period the application shall die and
a new application must be made as herein provided.
(Ordinance 312 adopted 1/12/95)
Sec. 4.10.032 Record of transactions
(a) Requirements. Every person or persons operating a business or commercial venture within the city limits
that deals with the buying or selling of used or secondhand appliances, machinery, tools, electronic equipment,
motor vehicle parts, scrap metal, or any other material that may be defined as used or secondhand in nature shall
maintain an accurate record of all such transactions on a form prescribed by the chief of police, which shall
include the name, address, date of birth, and driver's license number of the person from whom the material was
bought or sold, the date of the transaction, and the amount that was paid or received for the material.
(b) Inspection. The records of all such transactions shall be open for inspection by the police department at
any time without warrant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/536
(c) Violations. Failure to maintain accurate records or to make such records available to the police department
upon demand shall be a violation of this section, and the police department shall have the authority to suspend
the business permit of the commercial venture for noncompliance.
(d) Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$500.00.
(Ordinance 257 adopted 2/9/89)
Secs. 4.10.033–4.10.060 Reserved
Division 3. Wrecking Yards and Junkyards*
Sec. 4.10.061 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum of money
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ordinance 51, sec. IX, adopted 1/15/57; Ordinance 246 adopted
1/28/88)
Sec. 4.10.062 New wrecking yards and junkyards prohibited
From and after the effective date of this division, it shall be unlawful for any person or firm to build, construct,
or commence to operate or use any property in the city as a wrecking yard or a junkyard. It shall likewise be
unlawful for any person or firm operating any existing junkyard or wrecking yard to expand existing facilities or
to enlarge the area of such existing facilities, or to acquire additional property in the city for the prohibited use.
(Ordinance 51, sec. I, adopted 1/15/57)
Sec. 4.10.063 Operational requirements
(a) Burning automobiles. No automobile or any part thereof shall be burned for wrecking or salvage purposes
in or on any premises occupied as a wrecking yard.
(b) Fire extinguishing equipment. One two-and-one-half gallon foam type extinguisher or its equivalent shall
be provided.
(c) Storage on street. No automobile or any part thereof shall be stored for sale purposes on any street or
sidewalk, or portion thereof, in such manner as may interfere with the operations of the fire department.
(d) Piling and stacking automobiles. No old discarded automobiles, or parts thereof, shall be piled or stacked
in any manner as to exceed six feet in height, or six hundred twenty-five square feet in floor or lot area. An aisle
of at least four feet shall be maintained at all times between piles or stacks of old automobiles or parts thereof, in
such a manner as to allow free access on the part of the fire department.
(e) Repairing vehicles. Nothing but automobile dismantling shall be carried on in any automobile wrecking
yard or establishment, and if repairs are made to any automobile or other self-propelled vehicle, such repairs
shall be made in a building meeting all the requirements of a public automobile garage or automobile repair
shop, and in keeping with the regulations for such occupancy.
(f) Draining of gasoline. All gasoline shall be drained from the gasoline reservoirs of all automobiles or other
self-propelled vehicles stored or kept on the premises, unless such automobiles or vehicles are in such state of
repair as to enable them to be removed from the premises under their own power.
(Ordinance 51, secs. II–VII, adopted 1/15/57)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/536
ARTICLE 4.11 SALE, STORAGE OR REPAIR OF VEHICLES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 4.11.001–4.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Sales and Storage Lots
Sec. 4.11.031 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00, and each day that a violation exists or
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 261, sec. 9, adopted 9/14/89)
Sec. 4.11.032 Applicability
The establishment and operation of new and used motor vehicle businesses, motorcycle sales businesses, or
motor vehicle storage businesses within the corporate city limits are hereby regulated by the provisions of this
division. (Ordinance 261, sec. 1, adopted 9/14/89)
Sec. 4.11.033 Zoning requirements; required facilities
No person, firm, or corporation shall be permitted to establish a new and used vehicle sales business, motorcycle
sales business, or motor vehicle storage business, or display any new or used motor vehicles or motorcycles for
sale, until the location is in the district zoned commercial, and is inspected and approved by the planning and
zoning commission and building inspector, and approved by the city council. Any such location shall have a
dust-free lot paved with asphalt or concrete, and all materials and construction shall meet current city codes
standards. Any such locations shall have off-street paved parking. Any such location shall have a permanent
office building and meet all of the applicable building codes. All such locations shall have toilet facilities for
either sex or a separate facility usable by either sex. (Ordinance 261, sec. 2, adopted 9/14/89)
Sec. 4.11.034 Distance from existing businesses
No person, firm, or corporation shall be permitted to establish a new or used vehicle sales business, motorcycle
sales business, or motor vehicle storage business or display any new or used motor vehicles or motorcycles for
sale on any premises situated within two thousand (2000) feet from any existing business engaged in the sale of
new and used motor vehicles or motorcycles, or property used for the display of new and used motor vehicles or
motorcycles, or motor vehicle storage businesses. For the purpose of this division, a business shall be registered
by the building inspector thirty (30) days after the approval of such a location and the permit has been issued.
Each person, firm, or corporation shall notify the city secretary by registered mail when they discontinue
operating such a business. Such a business shall be considered to have ceased being used for display of a new
and used motor vehicle sales business, motorcycle sales business, or motor vehicle storage business when, for a
period of at least thirty-one (31) consecutive days, no new or used motor vehicles, motorcycles or motor vehicle
storage vehicles are located on the property or the premises. (Ordinance 261, sec. 3, adopted 9/14/89)
Sec. 4.11.035 Spacing of vehicles
A minimum area of ground space [is required] for each motor vehicle displayed for sales purposes. The
minimum area per motor vehicle shall not be less than one hundred and sixty (160) square feet, or a space eight
(8) feet by twenty (20) feet for each displayed motor vehicle. New and used motor vehicles on display shall not
be parked or placed closer than three (3) feet to another vehicle, or a motor vehicle in storage shall not be closer
than three (3) feet to another motor vehicle. (Ordinance 261, sec. 4, adopted 9/14/89)
Sec. 4.11.036 Storage of inoperable or junked vehicles; repair work
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/536
(a) No person, firm, or corporation operating a new or used motor vehicle sales business or motorcycle sales
business within the city limits shall have outside storage or keep or allow to be stored or kept inoperable or
junked motor vehicles or parts thereof on or about the premises used for display or sales of motor vehicles.
There shall be no repair work done except minor reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the
premises. There shall be no dismantling of cars or keeping of motor vehicle parts or junk on the premises. All
motor vehicles and motorcycles in need of minor repairs must be repaired inside a garage and not be visible
from a public place or public right-of-way, and all motor vehicles and motorcycles for sale must be in operating
condition.
(b) A person, firm, or corporation operating a new or used motor vehicle sales business, motorcycle sales
business, or motor vehicle storage business within the city at the time of the passage of this division shall have
sixty (60) days from the date of passage to abate and remove any motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts or junk on
the premises which is in violation of subsection (a) of this section.
(Ordinance 261, secs. 5, 6, adopted 9/14/89)
Sec. 4.11.037 Nonconforming uses
The city council deems it necessary and lawful that nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible
with the permitted uses in the districts involved. Within the city limits, there exist uses of land and structures
which were lawful before this division was enacted, but which do not conform to the regulations of the district in
which it is located. It is the intent of this division to permit such nonconforming uses to continue, under
regulations herein contained, until the same is removed, but not to encourage their survival. All new and used
motor vehicle sales businesses, motorcycle sales businesses, and motor vehicle storage businesses located within
the city limits and currently operating as such shall be accepted as nonconforming lots that are not in conformity
with the regulations contained in this division. All nonconforming lots shall be registered by the building and
zoning departments thirty-one (31) days after the approval of this division. Each lot shall be notified by
registered mail of their registration. Such person, firm, or corporation with a permit to operate such a
nonconforming use is discontinued [sic], any further use of said premises shall be in conformity with the city
codes and regulations contained in this division. The right to operate a nonconforming [use] shall be terminated
under any of the following circumstances:
(1) When such use is discontinued or abandoned. Discontinuance or abandonment shall be defined
as follows: when land used for a legal nonconforming use shall cease to be used in such manner for a
period of thirty-one (31) consecutive days.
(2) When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use.
(Ordinance 261, sec. 7, adopted 9/14/89)
Sec. 4.11.038 Nonconforming status of city impound lot and garage
The city council deems it necessary and lawful to use the property located at the corner of Kiowa and Waddell,
also known as 5501 Waddell, property zoned Public Facilities, for the city impound storage lot and other uses
such as a garage. The use of this property and structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of
passage of this division and has since been in regular and continuous use. Such property does not conform to the
provisions herein, [but] may be continued; but if said nonconforming use is discontinued, any further use of said
premises shall be in conformity with the city standards and codes. (Ordinance 261, sec. 8, adopted 9/14/89)
Secs. 4.11.039–4.11.070 Reserved
Division 3. Auto Repair and Painting
Sec. 4.11.071 Purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/536
This division has been written for the purpose of promoting and protecting public health, safety and the general
welfare of the community. (Ordinance 346, sec. I, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.072 Definitions
As pertaining to this division, the following definitions will have their specific meaning as follows:
Auto sales and service. A business engaged in the sale and service of automobiles to the general public.
Junk vehicle. A motor vehicle:
(1) That it is inoperative; and
(2) Either:
(A) Does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor
vehicle safety inspection certificate;
(B) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(C) Has remained inoperative for more than forty-five (45) consecutive days.
Major repairs, automotive. Repair or replacement of the engine, drive train, and other components requiring the
use of hoists, jacks, or jack stands; tire repairs, changes, and/or wheel repairs utilizing jacks or jack stands shall
be exempt from this provision.
Minor repairs, automotive. Repair or replacement of automobile parts that do not require the use of hoists, jacks
or jack stands.
Screening fence. Solid, opaque fencing of at least six (6) feet in height.
Vehicle repair garage. Three (3) spaces per bay, plus one (1) space per employee (maximum shift) plus one (1)
space per two (2) ton truck or other service vehicle.
(Ordinance 346, sec. II, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.073 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that such a violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant,
mortgagee or vendor in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land. (Ordinance 346, sec.
IX, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.074 Authority to enforce
A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures of this division may enter private property for the
purpose specified herein to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle
or vehicle part, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance as
defined in article 8.07 of this code[. The judge of the municipal court of the city] may issue orders necessary to
enforce the procedures of this division. (Ordinance 346, sec. VIII, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.075 Screening fence or enclosed building required
Auto sales, service, and repair regulations are subject to the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/536
(1) All major repairs, as herein defined, must be conducted within a completely enclosed building
or behind screening fences.
(2) No used parts, components or portable equipment shall be stored or displayed outside the
confines of the building or screening fences in such a manner as to be visible from adjacent city
streets.
(Ordinance 346, sec. III, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.076 Storage of parts
(a) Visibility to public and adjacent businesses or homes. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, manager
or employee of any garage or auto repair shop located within the corporate limits of the city to leave engines,
transmissions or any other parts of a vehicle on the premises unless same are behind a six-foot retaining wall
where they are not visible in any manner to the public traveling down the street, and where they are not visible
in any manner to other businesses or homes located adjacent to or directly behind said garage or auto repair
shop.
(b) Declaration of nuisance. The leaving of engines, transmissions or other parts of a motor vehicle of any
type on the premises of any garage or auto repair shop where same are visible in any manner to the public
traveling down the street, or where they are visible in any manner to other businesses or homes located adjacent
to or behind said garage or auto repair shop, within the corporate limits of the city, is declared a nuisance.
(Ordinance 129A adopted 1/9/69)
(c) Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or any agent or employee thereof who violates any of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, without notice, shall be fined not less
than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Each act in violation of this section should be considered
as a separate offense and a separate violation thereof. (Ordinance 129A adopted 1/9/69; Ordinance 246 adopted
1/28/88)
Sec. 4.11.077 Paint and body shops
(a) Automotive paint and body shops are subject to the following:
(1) Body work must be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(2) All damaged or disassembled vehicles or trailers awaiting repairs shall be parked behind a six
(6) foot screening fence, and all such vehicles or trailers awaiting repairs must be repaired or
removed from the property within forty-five (45) days; otherwise vehicles and/or trailers in a
disassembled or damaged condition will constitute a nuisance after forty-five (45) days.
(3) No spray finishing or body or fender repair shall be conducted on any premises that adjoin the
side or rear of any residential zoning district.
(4) No used parts, components or portable equipment shall be stored or displayed outside the
confines of buildings or screening fences in such a manner as to be visible from adjacent city streets.
(5) All damaged and disassembled vehicles or trailers stored for repairs must comply with state law
involving registration and a valid licensing sticker. No junk vehicles are allowed.
(6) Spray finishing operations inside a building must be performed inside of an approved spray
booth.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/536
(7) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all applicable fire code permits must be
secured from the fire marshal.
(8) All parking lots shall be of a dust-free surfacing such as asphalt or concrete type.
(9) All parking spaces shall be striped off, including the minimum spaces for handicap parking as
stated in the building code.
(b) Requirements for spray booths:
(1) An approved automatic fire extinguishing system shall be provided for an extra hazardous
occupancy with fire sprinkler heads or nozzles installed to cover the duct, spray area and behind the
filters. Plans shall be submitted to the fire marshal for review and approval prior to starting work.
(2) “No Smoking” signs posted in the spraying area.
(3) “No Welding” signs posted in the area.
(4) Only manufactured booths of steel not less than 0.044 inch (18 gauge) in thickness are
acceptable.
(5) Any spray booth having a floor area of two hundred (200) square feet or more shall be served
by at least two (2) exits. The area of the spray booth shall not exceed one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet and shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the basic area permitted for the major
use of the building.
(6) The interior surfaces must be smooth, without edges, for cleaning purposes.
(7) Each spray booth having a frontal area of more than nine (9) square feet and not equipped with
doors shall have a four and one-half (4-1/2) inch deep metal deflector installed at the upper outer
edge of the booth opening.
(8) No storage is allowed within three (3) feet and no welding is allowed within twenty (20) feet of
the booth.
(9) All lights must be behind heat treated or hammered wire glass. No portable lights are allowed.
(10) Wiring and electrical fixtures inside the booth must be designed and utilize devices UL listed
for Class I, Division I locations.
(11) Air velocity through the booth during spraying operations shall be not less than one hundred
(100) linear feet per minute.
(12) Approved UL listed filters shall be used.
(13) Space heaters or hot surfaces are prohibited inside spray booths.
(14) No electrical equipment is allowed in a booth unless it is listed by UL for Class I, Division I
locations and located to avoid deposits of combustible residues.
(15) All metal parts of a spray booth, exhaust ducts or flammable liquid piping systems shall be
properly electrically grounded.
(16) Electrical equipment shall be interlocked with the ventilation equipment so that the equipment
cannot be operated unless the vent fans are on.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/536
(17) Each spray booth shall have an exhaust duct discharging to the building exterior (through the
roof is preferred, through the wall is acceptable if not a fire hazard or a nuisance to neighbors).
(c) Exhaust fans, motors and ducts must meet the following requirements in spraying booths:
(1) Exhaust fan motors shall not be placed inside booths or ducts. Fan blades shall be nonferrous or
non-sparking or the casing shall be lined with such material. Fan motors shall be UL listed for Class
I, Division I locations.
(2) Fan belts and pulleys within the duct or booth shall be tightly enclosed.
(3) Exhaust ducts shall be constructed of steel having a thickness of not less than:
8" or less No. 24 gauge
Over 8" to 18" No. 22 gauge
Over 18" to 30" No. 20 gauge
Over 30" No. 18 gauge
(4) The discharge point for exhaust ducts shall be at least six (6) feet away from combustible
construction and twenty-five (25) feet away from doors or windows.
(5) Exhaust ducts shall have an eighteen (18) inch clearance from unprotected combustible
construction or materials.
(6) Exhausted air shall not be recirculated.
(7) The exhaust air intake ducts shall be extended to pick up flammable vapors within six (6)
inches of the floor.
(Ordinance 346, sec. IV, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.078 Inside storage of flammable liquids
(a) No storage near exits.
(b) Empty containers are considered to be full.
(c) Where the quantity of flammable liquids in five (5) gallon and smaller containers (other than original
sealed containers) exceeds a total of ten (10) gallons, it shall be stored in a UL (Underwriters Laboratories
listed)/Factory Mutual approved flammable liquids storage cabinet. Quantities greater than sixty (60) gallons
shall be stored inside a storage and mixing room as regulated by the Uniform Fire Code.
(Ordinance 346, sec. V, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.079 Enforcement of spray booth requirements
(a) All spray booth requirements must be approved by the fire marshal prior to and after construction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/536
(b) Plans shall be submitted to the building inspection department to install the booth.
(c) The building official will forward the spray booth plans to the fire marshal for his or her approval. Once
the fire marshal has reviewed and approved the plans, he or she will forward the plans back to the building
inspection department noting any comments and/or approving the plans by signing the permit “Approved by the
Fire Marshal.”
(d) Once the fire marshal has approved the plans, the building official will submit the permit application to the
city council for final approval.
(e) No certificate of occupancy will be approved for automotive repair, body and fender repair, automotive
painting or sales of automobiles until both the fire marshal and the building official have made their final
inspections and approved it.
(Ordinance 346, sec. VI, adopted 1/28/99)
Sec. 4.11.080 Distance from existing businesses
No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to establish a auto sales and services with repair and painting
of automobile parts business on any premises situated within two thousand (2,000) feet from any existing
business engaged in auto sales and services with repair and painting of automobile parts. For the purpose of this
division, a business shall be registered by the building official thirty (30) days after the approval of such a
location and the permit has been issued. Each person, firm or corporation shall notify the city secretary by
registered mail when they discontinue operating such a business. Such a business shall be considered to have
ceased being used for auto sales and service with repair and painting of automobile parts when, for a period of
thirty (30) consecutive days, no auto sales and service with repair and painting automobile parts are located on
the property or the premises. (Ordinance 346, sec. VII, adopted 1/28/99)
ARTICLE 4.12 CHILD CARE FACILITIES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.12.001 Definition
For purposes of this article, a child care facility is defined as follows:
(1) Child care facility: A facility where child care occurs, and the primary purpose is to provide
care for children whose parents or guardians find such care vital to establishing and maintaining a
viable home for such children. The term “child care” shall be applied where:
(A) Care and supervision is provided for more than six (6) children, exclusive of persons in
the immediate family of the center operator;
(B) Care is provided on a regular basis at least once a week; and
(C) The activity is intended to provide child care at least twenty-six (26) weeks per year.
(2) The term “child care” shall not apply to:
(A) Activities and programs of schools accredited by the central education agency, whether
before, during, or after regular class hours; or
(B) Activities and programs of an organization existing primarily as a community service,
entity or activity, such as the Boys Club, Girls Club, Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, where
membership or utilization in such organizations is elective in nature and for which parents have
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/536
the means and time in which to make their own investigations and where a substantial purpose
of said organization is other than child care.
(Ordinance 221, sec. I, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 221, sec. 2, adopted 6/27/85; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 4.12.003 Liability of city
All of the regulations provided in this article are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety,
and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or employee charged with
the enforcement of this article acting for the city in the discharge of his duties shall not thereby render himself
personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his said duties. (Ordinance
221, sec. 5, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.004 Injunction
Any violation of this article can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent
jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this article or in the code of the city.
(Ordinance 221, sec. 6, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.005 Fees
The various requirements for permits, licenses, and such administrative functions of this article shall require the
payment of fees submitted to the city in an amount approved by the city council by resolution. Fees shall not be
refundable. (Ordinance 221, sec. XIV, adopted 6/27/85)
Secs. 4.12.006–4.12.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit and Worker's License
Sec. 4.12.041 Permit required
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a child care facility in the city unless and until a permit for such
purposes has been issued by the building inspector for the city and has been approved by the city council.
(Ordinance 221, sec. I, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.042 Application for permit
(a) Application for a permit to operate a child care facility shall be submitted by the operator on a form
specified by the city.
(b) The permit application shall state the name, address, and telephone number of the permit applicant, and the
name and social security numbers of all employees and staff members of the child care center.
(c) The permit application shall indicate the name and street and mailing addresses of the child care center,
and the current zoning of the property. A site plan shall be submitted, drawn to an accurate scale, indicating the
legal description of the property and showing the indoor and outdoor areas to be used for the child care facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/536
(d) The permit application shall affirm that a certificate of occupancy has been applied for with the building
inspection department, its issuance contingent in part on the successful application for a child care facility
permit.
(e) The permit application shall include a certificate of liability insurance coverage for bodily injury or death
of any person entrusted to the care of the child care center. The amount of said insurance policy shall not be less
than $300,000.00, and a copy of the insurance policy shall be kept on file in the city secretary's office.
(Ordinance 221, sec. II, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.043 Duration of permit; renewal
A child care facility permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked as
hereinafter provided. Application for renewal of a permit shall be made on a form specified by the city. The
operator shall contact the city not later than four weeks prior to impending expiration of the permit. The
procedure for renewal shall require that the operator of the child care facility confirm the accuracy of the records
of the city regarding the facilities, equipment, manner of operation, employees, etc. Any incorrect information in
the records of the city department for the child care facility shall be corrected before the permit may be renewed.
(Ordinance 221, sec. III, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.044 Suspension or revocation of permit
(a) The environmental health official or his designee is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke a child care
facility permit for a violation of any provision of this article. Suspension or revocation of a permit shall be
effected by notice in writing, setting forth the reasons therefor, and specifying any requirements or schedules of
time for further action related to the suspension or revocation.
(b) The following actions shall constitute cause for suspension:
(1) Failure to respond within specified limits of time regarding violations observed during official
inspections of the premises and operation.
(2) Violation by the operator or any employee or staff member of the requirements for license as
specified in section 4.12.046 of this article.
(3) Any violation of this article which poses a danger to any child entrusted to the care of the child
care center.
(4) Failure to keep continually in force the required insurance against liability for bodily injury or
death.
(c) The following actions shall constitute cause for revocation:
(1) Failure to correct a violation for a period of thirty (30) days following suspension of the permit.
(2) Knowingly submitting false information, or allowing false information to be submitted, in the
application for permit.
(d) A permit that has been suspended may be reactivated only after an official inspection by the city has
confirmed that the condition causing the suspension has been corrected. Request for reactivation shall be made
to the environmental health official or his designee, and shall be evaluated as if for the initial application.
(e) A permit that has been revoked shall not be reissued.
(Ordinance 221, sec. IV, adopted 6/27/85)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/536
Sec. 4.12.045 Display of permit
The child care facility permit shall be conspicuously posted on an inside wall of the main facility, and shall be
continuously displayed in public view. (Ordinance 221, sec. V, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.046 Worker's license required
(a) No person shall operate, be employed, or serve at a child care facility unless such person is the holder of a
valid child care's worker's license issued by the county health department.
(b) A child care center may admit a special service instructor such as a music teacher only after a license has
been issued for such a person.
(Ordinance 221, sec. VI, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.047 Qualifications for worker's license
The applicant shall submit a license application on a form specified by the city, which shall state the name, date
of birth, sex, residence address, telephone number and such other information as may be specified. An
impression of the applicant's fingerprints taken by the city police department shall be required as part of the
application. A child care worker's license may be issued by the environmental health official or his designee
only after the license applicant has requested and received a review by the city police department for the
previous ten years of the license applicant's criminal history. A child care worker's license shall not be issued if a
review of such history shows a record of any conviction of any offense, felony, or misdemeanor protecting the
health, safety, or welfare of a child, for causing bodily harm to them or any person, or of any offense contained
in titles 5, 6, or chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code. (Ordinance 221, sec. VII, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.048 Duration of worker's license; renewal
A child care worker's license shall be valid for five (5) years from the date of its issuance, unless revoked as
hereinafter provided. Application for renewal of a license shall be made on a form specified by the city. The
licensee shall contact the city for renewal purposes not later than four (4) weeks prior to the impending
expiration of the license. Any incorrect information in the records of the city for the license [shall be corrected
and renewal of the license] shall be contingent upon continued compliance with original license qualifications
contained in section 4.12.047. (Ordinance 221, sec. VIII, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.049 Revocation of worker's license; workers under indictment for specified offenses
(a) If a licensee is subject to indictment or criminal complaint for one of the offenses specified in section
4.12.047, it shall be his responsibility to notify the environmental health official or his designee and the operator
of each child care facility at which he works. A worker who is the subject of such an indictment or complaint
shall not come into contact with the children enrolled at a child care center until he is acquitted or the charges
are otherwise dropped.
(b) The environmental health official or his designee is hereby authorized to revoke a child care worker's
license upon a finding by the environmental health official that a licensee has been convicted of one of the
offenses specified in section 4.12.047 or has failed to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this
section.
(c) A license that has been revoked shall not be reissued.
(Ordinance 221, sec. IX, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.050 Display of worker's license
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/536
A copy of the current child care worker's license shall be maintained at the child care center for each of its
employees or staff members. License records shall be available for reviewing upon request of the environmental
health official or his designee. (Ordinance 221, sec. X, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.051 Denial
Upon finding that the necessary permit or license may not be issued, or that said permit or license should be
suspended or revoked, or has expired, the environmental health official or his designee shall, within ten (10)
days of the finding, notify the applicant in writing, specifying the result of the finding and the reasons therefor.
The applicant's appeal shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ordinance 221, sec. XI, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.052 Transfer
No permit or license issued under this article shall be used for any purpose other than the niten [sic] for which it
was issued, nor be transferred or assigned to, or in any manner used by, any person, firm, or corporation other
than the one to whom issued by the environmental health official. (Ordinance 221, sec. XII, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.053 Notification of indictment for specified offense
(a) When the operator of a child care facility has been advised that an indictment or criminal complaint has
been filed with the county or district attorney's office against any person working at the center, alleging that such
person has committed one of the offenses specified in section 4.12.047, the operator shall notify the
environmental health official not later than the next workday.
(b) When the operator of a child care facility has been advised that a person has been indicted as specified in
subsection (a) [such person shall not come] into contact with the enrolled children until the charges are resolved.
(Ordinance 221, sec. XIII, adopted 6/27/85)
Secs. 4.12.054–4.12.080 Reserved
Division 3. Operation and Required Facilities
Sec. 4.12.081 Food service
A child care center in which food is prepared for human consumption shall comply with the pertinent food
service regulations and applicable state department of health services regulations. (Ordinance 221, sec. XV,
adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.082 Toilet and plumbing fixtures and facilities
(a) Toilet fixtures and facilities shall be provided in accordance with the edition of the International Plumbing
Code currently adopted by the city. (Ordinance 221, sec. XVI, adopted 6/27/85; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The temperature of any water available to the occupants or patrons of a child care facility shall not exceed
120 degrees Fahrenheit.
(c) Except where intended only for use by the children, each lavatory shall be provided with both hot and cold
running water, tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination faucet. Any self-closing, slow-closing, or
metering faucet shall provide a flow of water for at least fifteen seconds without the need to reactivate the
faucet.
(d) Toilet tissue, paper towels or clean cloths, and soap shall be available at all times for the use of occupants
and patrons.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/536
(Ordinance 221, sec. XVI, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.083 Playground
(a) An outdoor playground shall be provided and shall be supervised by adults in an adult-child ratio not less
than that maintained in indoor activities.
(b) A playground shall provide not less than 100 square feet of area for each child occupying the area at one
time.
(c) The playground area, including all play equipment, shall be maintained in a safe condition. No sharp
edges, dangerous protrusions, or other obvious hazards shall be allowed in the play area.
(d) A playground shall be surrounded by a chain-link fence not less than six (6) feet in height. Fences at a
child care facility in existence at the time of the effective date of this article may be continued and maintained if
they are a minimum of four (4) feet in height.
(e) Any pool, pond, or other body of water greater than ten (10) inches in depth shall be separated from a
playground by a fence as described in subsection (d) above.
(f) Outdoor activities and field trips where children may encounter a pond or other body of water shall be
attended by an adult competent in water safety procedures.
(Ordinance 221, sec. XVII, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.084 Release of child
(a) The child care center shall maintain a register for the signature of persons to whom children are released.
Daily signatures shall not be required by this article for authorized persons to whom children are regularly
released. However, the child care center may require such signature of any person at its discretion.
(b) An enrollment agreement required upon admission of any child to the child care center shall include a
statement that the child will be released only to a parent or a person named by the parent, and a statement that
persons bringing the child or picking up the child will ensure that a staff member is aware of the child's arrival
and departure. School-aged children who leave the facility to go to classes or other approved activities shall have
written permission from their parents; parents shall specify the activity, time, and method of transportation. The
child care center shall maintain a record of parents and other persons to whom the child is authorized for release.
Each parent shall provide the child care center with the final four (4) digits of their social security account
number for purposes of security in emergency conditions as identified in subsection (c) below. In the case of a
divorce after a child has been enrolled, it shall be the responsibility of the one who is granted custody of the
child (being the one with whom the child lives) to provide the child care center with a copy of the custody
decree or agreement, and request that the authorization records for release of the child be changed.
(c) When emergency conditions require that a child be released to a person not identified in the release
authorization records, the child care center shall require the parent's prior approval, which may be submitted by
telephone. The parent, identified for security by the four-digit social security number, shall designate the person
to whom the child may be released. The person to whom the child is to be released must in turn provide the
parent's four-digit number as identification, and shall be photographed by the child care center and provide a
signature on the photograph, which shall be retained by the child care center for at least three (3) months.
(Ordinance 221, sec. XVIII, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.085 Safety and sanitation
(a) The number of persons regularly occupying the building shall not exceed one person (child or adult) for
each 35 square feet of building area as determined by the city building code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/536
(b) A fire evacuation diagram shall be conspicuously posted in assembly rooms and classrooms in a child care
center. All employees and staff members shall be instructed in fire emergency procedures. Fire evacuation drills
shall be conducted at sufficient intervals to assure familiarity with emergency procedures among employees and
staff members.
(c) Electrical outlets accessible to children shall be protected with child-proof covers or safety outlets when
not being used.
(d) A child care center shall not be located in a mobile home or in any part of a building other than the ground
level.
(e) Employees and staff members shall have received a tuberculosis examination, with negative results, within
12 months prior to employment. Subsequent tuberculosis examinations shall be required at the recommendation
of local or regional health authorities. Employees and staff members shall not be present when ill with a
contagious virus or other disease which may affect the health of other persons. Any child ill with a
communicable disease shall be isolated from other children at the child care center. Persons shall not be
permitted in the child care center whose health status or behavior suggests a hazard to the health, safety, and
welfare of others, including symptoms of a contagious illness, a dangerous mental or physical condition, or
symptoms of drug or alcohol intoxication.
(f) A child care center shall maintain an adequate amount of first-aid supplies, including, but not limited to,
soap, antiseptic solutions, absorbent cotton, cotton-tip applicators, sterile gauze, adhesive tape, and adhesive
bandages. One medium-sized package or container of each of these first-aid supplies shall be maintained in
unopened reserve at all times. A magnifying glass and tweezers shall also be available. First-aid procedures and
supplies shall be applied, including cleaning and bandaging, for any cut or bleeding abrasion of the skin.
(g) Permanent signs shall be conspicuously posted in restrooms and food service areas, so as to be noticed by
normally observant individuals, reminding all persons to wash hands before eating and after using the toilet.
Employees and staff members shall wash hands before and after changing a diaper and before feeding a child.
Permanent signs including pictorial messages as provided by the health department shall be posted for
communications with children unable to read.
(h) A diaper-changing station shall be cleaned and sanitized before each use.
(i) Smoke detectors shall be installed to provide an effective warning to the building occupants of fire in any
kitchen area, sleeping area, or any area containing mechanical equipment. Location and connection of smoke
detectors shall comply with the city building code.
(j) A person certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation of children shall be present at the center during all
hours of operation. Certificates evidencing such training shall be available at the center.
(Ordinance 221, sec. XIX, adopted 6/27/85)
Sec. 4.12.086 Parking facilities
Parking must be hard-surface, dust-free, and provide one space each for faculty and one space for each ten (10)
children. Spaces must be 9' x 18' with 24' maneuverability room off the public right-of-way. (Ordinance 221, sec.
XX, adopted 6/27/85)
ARTICLE 4.13 NURSING HOMES, REST HOMES AND OTHER CARE HOMES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.13.001 Definition
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/536
The term “care home” shall mean any boarding home, nursing home, convalescent home, rest home, or any
institution or building or group of buildings in which accommodation is maintained, furnished or offered for any
fee, gift, compensation, reward or in expectation thereof for the care of three or more persons who, by reason of
advanced age or mental or physical infirmities, or addiction to drugs or alcohol, are not capable of properly
caring for themselves, or who are sixty-five years of age or upwards, but shall not include:
(1) U.S. government hospitals or facilities;
(2) Hospitals belonging to or maintained by the state; or
(3) Free clinics, dispensaries, children's boarding homes, maternity homes or other hospitals.
(Ordinance 88, sec. I, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.002 Penalty
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not in
excess of $500.00. (Ordinance 88, sec. XIV, adopted 1/13/61; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 4.13.003 Inspections
Every care home for which a permit has been issued shall be periodically inspected by a representative of the
city. Inspections may be made at any time an inspection shall be deemed advisable by the mayor and city
council. The refusal of the operator of the care home or any employee of the care home to permit such inspection
shall be a violation of this section. (Ordinance 88, sec. XI, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.004 Compliance with applicable regulations
In operating or maintaining any care home within the corporate limits of the city, the person operating or causing
to be operated such care home shall comply with all applicable laws of the state, ordinances of the city and
pertinent regulations promulgated by the building inspector and fire marshal. (Ordinance 88, sec. XII, adopted
1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.005 Buildings of wood frame construction
Buildings of wood frame construction may be used as care homes if such buildings are not more than two stories
in height and if the inside walls and ceilings are covered with noncombustible material, such as plaster or
gypsum board. (Ordinance 88, sec. VIII, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.006 Exits
In all care homes, at least two outside exits shall be required from each story. (Ordinance 88, sec. IX, adopted
1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.007 Bed-fast or detention patients to be kept on ground floor
Bed-fast or detention patients shall be kept on the ground floor in all care homes. (Ordinance 88, sec. X, adopted
1/13/61)
Secs. 4.13.008–4.13.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.13.041 Required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/536
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a care home, as defined herein, within the corporate limits of the
city without first obtaining and holding a permit for such operation from the mayor and city council. (Ordinance
88, sec. II, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.042 Application
Application for a permit to operate a care home within the city shall be made in writing to the mayor and city
council in triplicate, and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and of the person to be in active
charge of the home; the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; the address of the
proposed care home; the number of beds to be used; the experience the applicant has had in operating a care
home; the type of patients to be admitted; the maximum number of patients to be under care at any one time; the
total number of personnel, including a specification of the number of attendants; and any other information that
may be required by the director of the department of public health and welfare. Copies of the application shall be
forwarded to the building inspector and city fire marshal, and the report of their recommendation shall be made
to the mayor and city council. The applicant shall also submit evidence satisfactory to the mayor and council that
the applicant and operator is reputable, responsible and of good moral character, and, in the event the applicant is
an association or corporation, like evidence shall be submitted as to each member or stockholder thereof and as
to the person in charge of the care home. (Ordinance 88, sec. III, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.043 Investigation; issuance
If, after investigation of the application for a permit under the provisions of the preceding section, the mayor and
city council find that the staff, personnel, premises, equipment and appliances to be used in connection with the
operation of the care home conform to the sanitary laws of the state, the ordinances of the city and pertinent
regulations promulgated by the building inspector and the fire department, they shall issue the permit.
(Ordinance 88, sec. IV, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.044 Information to be shown on permit
The permit required by section 4.13.041 of this article shall specify the maximum number of patients to be under
care of the care home at any one time. In addition, such permit shall specify the maximum total number of bedfast
patients and detention patients to be under care at such care homes at any one time. (Ordinance 88, sec. V,
adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.045 Transfer; duration
The permit required by section 4.13.041 of this article shall not be transferable and shall be for the fiscal year
unless sooner revoked by the mayor and city council as provided in section 4.13.047 of this article. (Ordinance
88, sec. VI, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.046 Fee
The fee for the permit required by section 4.13.041 of this article shall be twenty-five dollars. Such fee shall not
be prorated. (Ordinance 88, sec. VII, adopted 1/13/61)
Sec. 4.13.047 Revocation or suspension
The mayor and city council are hereby authorized to revoke or suspend the permit issued hereunder on any of
the following grounds:
(1) Violation of any of the provisions of this article;
(2) Permitting, aiding or abetting the commission of an illegal act in such institution; or
(3) Conduct, practices or conditions in such care home detrimental or potentially detrimental to the
welfare of the residents thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/536
(Ordinance 88, sec. XIII, adopted 1/13/61)
ARTICLE 4.14 PUBLIC DANCES, DANCE HALLS AND DANCING SCHOOLS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.14.001 Definitions
This article shall be known as the dance hall ordinance, and the following terms when used herein are defined as
follows:
Cabaret or nightclub or tavern. Any space, structure, building or resort open to the public, enclosed or
unenclosed, where food or beer or wine or other beverage is served on the premises, including restaurants and
cafes, and where patrons are provided with a space for dancing or are permitted to dance.
Club. Any bona fide nonprofit society, association of persons or corporation organized for civic, fraternal, social
or charitable purposes, or any purpose not a business or commercial purpose, which owns, rents or operates a
place or building for the accommodation of its members when such place or premises or any part thereof is used
for dancing by members of the club or is rented to others for such purposes.
Dancing school. Any room, space or academy in which classes in dancing are held and instruction in dancing is
given for hire.
Operator. The person, firm, association, partnership or corporation which conducts, manages, maintains or
controls, either directly or indirectly, any dance hall as defined and designated herein.
Private dance. Any dance given at any home or any dance given or held by a bona fide club, admission to which
is granted to members and their invited guests and from which the general public is excluded.
Public dance. Any dance to which admission can be had by paying a fee or by the purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token, or in which a charge is made for checking wearing apparel or parcels, or any
other dance in which the public generally may gain admission with the payment of a fee directly or indirectly or
without payment of a fee.
Public dance hall. Any room, space or building where a public dance is held.
(Ordinance 74, sec. 1, adopted 9/22/58)
Sec. 4.14.002 Penalty
Any person, association or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more then five hundred
dollars ($500.00), and each day's action shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 74, sec. 9, adopted
9/22/58; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 4.14.003 Operation
In addition to the other provisions of this article, dance halls [shall] be governed by the following regulations:
(1) All class A and class B dance halls shall close and not operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 10:00 a.m., except on Saturday nights when the hour of closing shall be 3:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that the chief of police may grant special permits in writing to licensees to operate until a
later hour upon special occasions. Applications for such special permits shall be made not less then
forty-eight (48) hours prior thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/536
(2) No person under the age of seventeen (17) years shall be permitted to attend or take part in the
public dance after 9:00 p.m. unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be either parent or guardian of such minor for
the purpose of gaining his admittance to said dance hall.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a dance hall to permit any known prostitute, male or
female procurer or vagrant to be present at any public dance or dance hall.
(4) No dance hall shall have in any way connected with it any room or rooms equipped or fitted in
any way as sleeping rooms which are open to or let to the patrons of such dance halls or to the public
with or without charge being made therefor, except bona fide hotels.
(5) Each dance hall shall be supplied with separate and convenient toilet facilities for each sex.
(6) Free access and entrance into all dance halls shall at all times be accorded and granted to the
police officers of the city when on official duty.
(7) No operator or licensee of any dance hall hereunder shall permit any person or persons to
perform any indecent or immodest dance upon the premises.
(8) Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the issuance of a license under any
circumstances for the conduct of any dance hall commonly known as “taxi dance halls,” wherein
there are kept and provided male or female dancing partners for male or female guests who pay by
the dance for the privilege of dancing with said partners.
(9) No employee of any licensee or anyone employed on the premises shall be permitted to dance
with patrons of said dance hall.
(Ordinance 74, sec. 6, adopted 9/22/58)
Sec. 4.14.004 Dancing at unlicensed dance hall
It shall be unlawful for any person to dance at any public dance hall except a licensed public dance hall
hereunder. This, however, shall not apply to any entertainer performing any sort of entertainment at a public
gathering. (Ordinance 74, sec. 8, adopted 9/22/58)
Secs. 4.14.005–4.14.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.14.031 Required; issuance
It shall be unlawful to hold or conduct any public dance or dancing school as herein defined within the limits of
the city unless the dance hall where same may be held shall first have been licensed for such purpose. Said
license shall be issued by the city secretary when the conditions of this article have been complied with and
when said application has been approved by the chief of police and the city council. (Ordinance 74, sec. 2,
adopted 9/22/58)
Sec. 4.14.032 Classifications; fee; transfer
(a) The following classifications and license fees for each class are set out:
(1) Class A dance halls.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/536
(A) All cabarets, nightclubs and taverns as herein defined are made class A dance halls, and
the license fee shall be $25.00 per year.
(Ordinance 74, sec. 3, adopted 9/22/58)
(B) The dance hall fee of $25.00 per year called for in this article shall not be transferable or
assignable and shall not be subject to monthly proration.
(C) The $25.00 fee shall be payable on the first day of January of each year and shall be good
for the calendar year during which it is paid. If the ownership of said dance hall should be
changed, then the new owner must procure a new permit and pay the set $25.00 fee for the
remainder of the calendar year.
(D) If the fee is paid at any time during a calendar year, a new fee of $25.00 must be paid on
the first day of January for the following calendar year.
(Ordinance 87 adopted 12/10/60)
(2) Class B and class C dance halls.
(A) All other dance halls fall under class B, the license fee for which shall be $15.00 per year,
save end except class C dance halls shall be those described in the definition of “dancing
school” in section 4.14.001, the license fee for which shall be $1.00 per year.
(B) All licenses issued hereunder shall run for the calendar year, and in the event they are
issued during the year they shall bear the proportionate part of the annual fee as the part of the
year remaining, and there shall be no refund of any license [fee] paid hereunder for any cause
whatsoever.
(C) Licenses issued shall be deemed personal to the licensee and shall not be assignable;
provided, however, that licenses issued hereunder may be transferred from one location or place
of business to another after the chief of police and the city council shall have been given (5)
days' notice and shall have approved of such change.
(Ordinance 74, sec. 3, adopted 9/22/58)
Sec. 4.14.033 Application; issuance
(a) Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation desiring a license to operate a dance hall as
herein defined shall file with the chief of police a sworn written application for such license, which application
shall state:
(1) The location by street number of the place, space, building, room or floor and the size thereof
which is proposed to be used for such purpose, and the name and address of the applicant;
(2) If the applicant is an individual, that he is a bona fide resident of the city or the county and the
state, and the length of such residence therein, that he has not been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, and, if so, the nature of the offense, and in this connection he shall submit to having
his fingerprints taken if the chief of police so specifies;
(3) If a firm, association or partnership, all of the information prescribed in subsection (a)(2) of
this section as to each individual composing the firm, association or partnership;
(4) If a corporation, that the applicant is organized and chartered under the laws of Texas, or, if a
foreign corporation, that such corporation has complied with the laws of that state, and the same
information with reference to the operator or person in charge of said dance hall shall be given as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/536
prescribed in subsection (a)(2) of this section; in addition thereto a list of the officers, directors and
stockholders of said corporation shall be given;
(5) Previous occupation or employment of the applicant for a period of five (5) years next
preceding the filing of his application;
(6) In the case of applications for class C licenses, such application shall give the names and
addresses of each instructor in the school of dancing;
(7) Whether a hotel, rooming house or lodging house is conducted in any part of the premises for
which a license is sought, and, if so, the number of rooms contained in such hotel, rooming house or
lodging house; provided, however, that nothing contained herein will prevent the issuance of a
license to any public dance hall having connected with it any sleeping rooms which are not open to or
let to the patrons of such dance hall or to the public.
(b) The information given in such application is for the purpose of determining whether or not the applicant is
a fit and proper person to operate a dance hall, and it shall be unlawful to misrepresent the kind and character of
dance hall to be operated or any other fact or statement made in said application, and any misrepresentation of
any applicant for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this article shall in addition to other penalties
prescribed by law be cause for the revocation of the license in the mode and manner hereinafter provided.
(c) The license herein provided for shall state on its face to whom it is issued, and the date it will expire, the
address and location of such dance hall, and whether the license is issued for a class A, B, or C dance hall; it
shall be signed and sealed by the city secretary and posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance in such a place and position that it may be easily read at any time of the day or night.
(d) No license to operate a class A dance hall in any section of the city where private residences are located
shall be granted, except after notice has been given to all residents in the block where the proposed dance hall is
to be located and an opportunity has been given said residents to protest in writing the issuance of said license,
and if any such residents shall file a protest in writing, then it shall be grounds within the discretion of the chief
of police and the city council to refuse the issuance of said license for said location.
(e) The granting of any license under this article shall in no event be construed as the granting or conferring of
any right to the licensee but shall be subject to revocation and cancellation as herein provided.
(f) No license shall be granted hereunder unless it shall appear upon investigation by the chief of police and
building inspector that the premises desired to used for the purpose of conducting dance hall comply with all
ordinances of the city and laws of the state.
(Ordinance 74, sec. 4, adopted 9/22/58)
Sec. 4.14.034 Appeal of denial
In the event the chief of police and the city council shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant hereunder, said
applicant shall have the right of appeal within ten (10) days after such refusal, in writing, to the city council
requesting a hearing by the council upon the application, and in the event of such appeal a hearing shall be had
before the council within thirty (30) days thereafter to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of
police and the city council on said application, and whatever action shall be taken by the city council on such
appeal shall be final. (Ordinance 74, sec. 5, adopted 9/22/58)
Sec. 4.14.035 Cancellation
If any licensee hereunder shall violate any of the terms of this article or other ordinances of the city or the laws
of the state, the chief of police may at any time give notice in writing to said licensee or operator of said dance
hall of a hearing to be held in the city hall for the purpose of cancelling said license, and upon said hearing said
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/536
chief of police and the city council may cancel said license for any of the above causes, which notice shall
become final at the end of ten (10) days from the expiration of said hearing. Said licensee shall have the right of
appeal to the city council within said ten (10) day period from and after the expiration of said hearing, and if
such appeal is taken, then the city council shall conduct a hearing on said cancellation and may cancel said
license for any of the causes so shown, which action shall become final. (Ordinance 74, sec. 7, adopted 9/22/58)
ARTICLE 4.15 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 4.15.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings, respectively, as set forth:
Alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police or fire department, which is designed either to
be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion or fire.
Alarm site. A single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are
under the control of one owner.
Alarm systems. Any mechanical or electrical device which is used to protect buildings or premises from criminal
acts or unauthorized entries by warning persons of a crime or unauthorized entry through the emission of a crime
or unauthorized entry, or fire through the emission of a sound or the transmission of a signal or message. Alarm
systems, does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site.
Automatic alarm notification. An alarm notification sent over telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise,
a prerecorded voice message, synthesized voice message, or coded signal indication the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
Central station. An office to which remote and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators
supervise the circuits, and/or where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
Chief. The chief of police of the city or his authorized representative.
City. The City of Sansom Park.
False alarm notification. An alarm notification to the police department, when the responding officer finds no
evidence of unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to
take a person hostage, or fire.
Licensed installer. A person, contractor or repairman licensed by the state to install, repair or maintain an alarm
system within the city.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a
structure.
Permit holder. The person designated in the application as required in section 4.15.002 hereafter who is
responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is responsible for proper maintenance
and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.
Sec. 4.15.002 Permit required; application; transferability; false statements
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without an alarm
permit issued by the city. A separate permit is required for each alarm system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/536
(b) An initial fee, referenced in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code, shall be charged for the
issuance of each permit for both residential and commercial. A renewal fee, as referenced in the fee schedule
found in appendix A to this code, will be required for residents and commercial after their first initial fee.
(c) Upon receipt of a completed application form and the required fee, the city shall issue an alarm permit to
an applicant unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under section 4.15.014 hereof or has had
an alarm permit for the alarm system revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected.
(d) Each permit application must contain the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the permit holder who will be responsible for the
proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this
article;
(2) Classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial;
(3) For each alarm system located at the alarm site the purpose of the alarm system, i.e. burglary,
or personal hostage robbery or fire;
(4) Other information required by the city which is necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(e) Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit
shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit.
(f) An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another alarm system except by authorization of the city. A
permit holder shall inform the city of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application
within two (2) business days. No fee will be assessed for such changes.
(g) A permit holder shall cancel a permit for any alarm systems which is removed from an alarm site or which
otherwise ceases to come under the permitting requirements of this article. Cancellation may be accomplished
by returning the permit to the city.
(h) All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed.
Sec. 4.15.003 Permit duration and renewal
A permit is issued for one (1) year and must be renewed every year upon submission of an updated application.
It is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. The city
shall determine the first expiration date of a permit.
Sec. 4.15.004 Revocation of permit
(a) The city shall revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that:
(1) There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit.
(2) The permit holder has violated any part of this article.
(3) The permit holder has failed to make payment of a service fee assessed under section 4.15.014
hereof within thirty (30) days of receiving notice to do so.
(b) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is
revoked.
Sec. 4.15.005 Appeal from denial, revocation, or suspension of permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/536
(a) If the city refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit
holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an
appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the city to the city manager, or his/her
designee, by written request for a hearing, setting forth the reason for the appeal, within ten (10) days after
receipt of the notice from the city. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager, or his/her
designee, stays an action of the city in revoking a permit until the city manager, or his/her designee, makes a
final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the city is
final.
(b) The city manager, or his/her designee, shall set a time and place for the hearing which shall be served upon
the application or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested. The city manager, or his/her designee,
shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of
evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. All parties to the hearing shall have the right to present evidence and
shall have the right of cross-examination. The hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence within fifteen (15) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The time
for hearing an appeal may be extended by agreement of the parties. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or
modify the action of the city. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the
city.
Sec. 4.15.006 Proper alarm system operation and maintenance
(a) A permit holder shall:
(1) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of
the alarm system;
(2) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notification;
(3) Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when
requested by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the
premises or to provide security for the premises;
(4) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the
alarm system was intended to report;
(5) Notify the police department prior to activation of an alarm for maintenance purposes.
(b) A permit holder shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal
will sound for no longer than thirty (30) minutes after being activated.
Sec. 4.15.007 Alarm reset required
A permit holder of an alarm system that utilizes a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the
mechanism to be adjusted so that, upon activation, the local alarm will not transmit another alarm signal without
first being reset.
Sec. 4.15.008 Indirect alarm reporting
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notification to the city shall:
(1) Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by city;
(2) Comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the
city.
Sec. 4.15.009 Recorded message alarm notification prohibited
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/536
Following the effective date of this article, no permit will be issued for the use of systems using automatic
telephone dialing to report an alarm condition by means of a recorded message directly to the police department.
Sec. 4.15.010 Alarm system operating instructions
A permit holder shall maintain at each alarm site, a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm
system. Special codes, combinations, or passwords must not be included in these instructions.
Sec. 4.15.011 Requirements; application for a license; revocation; suspension
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of installing, causing to be
installed, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing or moving in or on any building, place, or
premises within the city, any device known as a burglar or hold-up alarm, without first being registered and
licensed with the state and then having made application and received a permit for the installation of new alarms
or the repair of existing alarms that have not heretofore been permitted. Homeowners may obtain a homeowners
license at a cost referenced in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(b) License shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year.
(c) The license issued hereunder is nontransferable.
(d) Duty of installer. Installers of alarm systems shall make the user aware that a permit must be obtained
from the city for which a fee is required.
(e) The installer shall also instruct the user regarding the operation of the system, including but not limited to
the criteria for use of the police alert button device, stressing it is for the summoning of police only in the event
of a real and immediate threat to life.
(f) The installer shall not install an alarm system contrary to the provisions of the section. Alarm systems that
are installed that are contrary to the provisions of this article are in violation of this article for the day the alarm
system is installed and each day or portion of a day thereafter are separate offenses until the alarm system
adheres to the provisions of this article.
(g) Any keyless configuration activating or deactivating device which contains only a single button to activate
a police alert alarm, shall provide for a design of such equipment that accidental activation will not occur and
that activation is a deliberate set.
(h) Alarm systems shall include a delay code which will be so engineered so as an alarm will not be sent due
to momentary breaks in electrical current caused by lightning.
(i) All electrical equipment used for the installation of alarm systems shall be Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.,
approved.
Sec. 4.15.012 Alarm dispatch records
(a) The police dispatcher receiving the alarm notification and/or the police officer responding to a dispatch
resulting from a burglary, robbery, personal hostage or fire alarm notification shall cause to be recorded in the
police information as necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including but not limited to the
following information:
(1) Identification of the permit holder;
(2) Identification of the alarm site;
(3) Dispatcher received time, dispatch time and officer arrived at scene time;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/536
(4) Date of occurrence;
(5) Name of permit holder's representative on premises, if any.
(b) The responding police officer shall prepare and submit the appropriate reports in regard to any criminal
offenses, attempts, fire or other incidents which contributed to the alarm notification as determined by
investigation.
Sec. 4.15.013 System performance reviews and consultations
(a) If there is a reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures
proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the city may require a conference with an alarm permit holder to
review circumstances of each false alarm.
(b) If there is belief that an alarm is the result of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the permit
holder, the permit holder or the permit holder's representative may request a conference with the city.
Sec. 4.15.014 Service fees
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) below, the holder of an alarm permit shall pay a service
fee as reflected in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code for each false alarm notification emitted
from an alarm system that is in excess of three (3) false alarms.
(b) If a person notifies the city and applies for an alarm permit before a new alarm system is put into service,
no service fee will be assessed during the first sixty (60) days after the system is put into service, and alarm
notifications during that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed.
(c) If the responding police officer determines that an alarm notification was caused by unauthorized
intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to take a person hostage or
fire (to include smoke) that notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed.
(d) An alarm notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed if the
permittee can prove that the alarm notification was the result of severe weather condition, such as a tornado,
hurricane or earthquake or other weather condition that causes physical damage to the alarm site, or the result of
a malfunction in the operation of telephone lines for the transmission of alarm signals, proof of the latter being
documented in the form of telephone company work orders or time stamped records from the alarm company
showing the periods of interrupted service.
Sec. 4.15.015 Inspection of alarm devices; systems
(a) For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the city or its designated agent shall have the
authority, at reasonable oral notice, to enter any premises in the city in or upon which the alarm system subject
to this article is located, to inspect the installation and operation of such alarm system.
(b) If such inspection reveals any violations of provisions of this article a written report detailing such
violations shall be promptly sent to the owner, lessors, or other person responsible for the alarm system. Such
report shall require the correction within thirty (30) days after receipt of a notice of the violation discovered, and
shall state that a failure to comply may result in permit being suspended.
(c) It shall be unlawful to continue to operate such alarm system until the violation is corrected.
(d) The city, or its designated agent, shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the operation of an alarm
system if the inspection reveals violations of this article which are not corrected.
Sec. 4.15.016 Liability; city to be held harmless
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/536
The application to the city, or its designated agent, shall contain a provision that the city shall not be liable for
any failure of service or damages including damages resulting from breaking to gain entrance, that might result
from the installation or operation of any receiving station alarm, automatic dialing device, or local alarm. All
applicants must agree to indemnify the city for all claims, demands, judgments, liability.
Sec. 4.15.017 Implementation of provisions; exemptions
(a) This section shall apply to any person who operates or causes to be operated an alarm system at any alarm
site.
(b) This section shall not apply to alarm systems operated by local, state or federal government entities.
(c) Alarm systems which are presently in operation within the city must be approved and a permit issued in
accordance with this article within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this article. The person operating
such system shall remove and cause it to be inoperative unless a permit is issued.
(Ordinance 487-15 adopted 1/15/15)
ARTICLE 4.16 DISPOSAL OF LIQUID WASTE
Sec. 4.16.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to regulate the generation, transportation and disposal of grease trap waste and grit
trap waste, for the protection of the sanitary sewer system and the environment. The wastes regulated by this
article do not include hazardous wastes or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes. With an increase in
recycling, the city feels the need to regulate every type of waste transported within the city, including waste oil
recyclers, Fry-O-Later grease recyclers and nonhazardous waste haulers such as waste groundwater (i.e.
companies that haul to a centralized waste treatment facility).
Sec. 4.16.002 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated.
Administration. The community development director and the director's authorized representatives are
authorized to administer and implement the provisions of this article.
Approved. Accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the
approving authority.
Approving authority. The director or any other official designated by the city administrator or his/her designee.
Commission. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
Director. The community development director or the director's authorized representative.
Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid or semi-solid
grease trap waste or grit trap waste, into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof
may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater.
Disposal site. A permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste or grit trap waste, is processed, treated
and/or intentionally placed into or on any land at which will remain after closure.
Disposer. A person, who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste.
Generator. A person, who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/536
Grease trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum
based oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected.
Grease trap waste. Greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by
a grease trap.
Grit trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum
based oils, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or
indirectly connected.
Grit trap waste. Petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery
repair and/or washing facilities.
Hazardous waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its
quality, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
(1) Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer,
flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or
illness; or
(2) Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a
hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or by the administrator, U. S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal “Solid Waste Disposal Act,” as
amended by the “Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976” and as may be amended in the
future.
Liquid waste. Waterborne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap,
chemical/portable toilet and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste.
Manager. The person conducting, supervising, managing, or representing the activities of a generator,
transporter or disposer.
Manifest system. The system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation,
and disposal of liquid.
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Permit. The formal written document issued to a person by the approving authority authorizing collection of
grease trap waste or grit trap waste.
Permittee. A person granted a permit under this article.
Person. An individual, corporation (including a government corporation), organization, government,
governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or
body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission, or
any other legal entity.
POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not normally
admitted.
Shall. The word “shall,” wherever used in this article, will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; “may” is
permissive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/536
Special wastes. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quality, concentration,
physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, require special handling and disposal to protect the
human health or the environment.
Spill. The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharges of grease trap waste or grit trap waste.
TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
TDH. Texas Department of State Health Services.
Tank. A device, designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste or grit trap waste, which is constructed
primarily of nonearthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment.
Toxic waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid, or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury
once it reaches a susceptible site in or on the body.
Transporter. A person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste.
Trip ticket. The shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information
required by the approving authority.
Vehicle. A mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway.
Sec. 4.16.003 Permits; generally
(a) Permit required.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person collects or transports liquid waste without a valid
permit issued by the director.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement action for a violation of subsection (a)(1) above,
that:
(A) The person was disposing of the person's own waste from the person's own recreational
vehicle, boat, travel trailer; or
(B) The person was transporting liquid waste through the city that was collected outside of
the city and which was disposed of outside of the city.
(b) Permit application procedures. A person required by subsection (a) to have a permit shall do the following:
(1) Complete and file a permit application on a form prescribed by the director;
(2) Submit with the application a photocopy of applicant's driver license. If the applicant is a
person other than an individual, the driver's license shall be that of the applicant's chief operating
officer or manager;
(3) Submit with the application a copy of the applicant's current registration issued by the
commission, pursuant to 30 TAC section 312.142, to collect and transport liquid wastes;
(4) Submit with the application a copy of the state registration license receipt issued to each
vehicle the applicant elects to register under the permit;
(5) Submit with the application a list of all disposers the applicant proposes to use;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/536
(6) Submit to the director proof that applicant's vehicles which will be registered under the permit
are insured in at least the minimum amounts as required by state law, or are self-insured as provided
by state law to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operation of each
vehicle. A written statement from an authorized agent of the applicant's insurance carrier verifying
the issuance of such insurance shall be filed with the director before a permit is issued. All such
verifications of insurance shall provide for thirty-day cancellation notice to the director;
(7) Provide any additional information requested by the director;
(8) Demonstrate to the director that the applicant and applicant's driver have sufficient knowledge
of the vehicles they will be operating and the liquid waste facilities they will be servicing, to collect
and transport liquid waste in a safe and competent manner; and
(9) Submit for inspection by the director each vehicle the applicant proposes to register under the
permit. Each vehicle shall meet the following requirements:
(A) The business name, telephone number, and address of the applicant shall be permanently
displayed on both sides of the vehicle in letters of a minimum height of three (3) inches, in a
color contrasting to their background. An address is sufficient if it includes the applicable city
and state. If the applicant's business is not within a municipality, the name of the county and
state will be sufficient.
(B) The vehicle shall display current state vehicle registration tags and inspection certificate.
(C) The vehicle shall display the commission assigned registration number in accordance
with state regulations.
(D) The vehicle shall have a single waste tank which shall be of a minimum 1,000-gallon
capacity, unless otherwise approved by the director, permanently mounted on the vehicle, and
designed to transport wastes. Portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in a
vehicle are prohibited. This subsection does not apply to vehicles used to transport chemical
toilet wastes.
(E) The vehicle's engine which powers its movement, drive train, and emissions system shall
not be modified for the purpose of creating a vacuum to empty liquid waste facilities.
(F) The vehicle shall have a power take off (PTO) unit to create vacuum sufficient to remove
the entire contents of the liquid waste facilities it services.
(G) The vehicle shall be clean and odor free.
(H) All piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to the tank or vehicle.
(I) The tank shall be liquid tight.
(J) The tank shall be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily
cleaned.
(K) All piping, valves, and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean.
(L) Any inlet, or opening of the tank, shall be constructed so that collected waste will not
spill during filling, transfer, or during transport.
(M) All outlet connections shall be constructed so that no waste will leak, run, or spill out of
the vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/536
(N) All outlets shall be of a design and type suitable for the waste handled and capable of
controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate
surroundings while in use.
(O) All pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances shall be of a design
and type suitable for the type of waste handled; be capable of being easily disassembled for
cleaning; and operate without spillage, spray, or leakage.
(P) All tank valves shall have a safety plug or cap.
(Q) All closed vehicles, tanks, or containers used to transport liquid wastes regulated by this
article shall have sight gauges installed and maintained in such a manner that they can be used
to determine whether a vehicle is loaded and the approximate capacity of the load. Gauges are
not required to read in gallons or liters, but shall show what percentage of the tank capacity is
filled. An alternate method to measure actual volumes may be utilized if the transporter has
received prior written approval from the commission's executive director and has provided a
copy of that approval to the director.
(R) All discharge valves and ports shall be prominently marked. All discharge ports shall be
visible and readily accessible.
(c) Issuance and display of permit.
(1) The approving authority shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate
established fee is paid. An applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
vehicle and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional vehicle operated by the applicant.
(2) A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, unless suspended or revoked.
(3) A permit shall not be transferable.
(4) The director shall issue a vehicle registration number to each vehicle registered under a permit,
and shall list this number on the permit. A vehicle registration number is not transferable.
(5) The approving authority shall number permits consecutively and each permit holder shall cause
to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background and in threeinch
letters or larger, the business name, TDH registration number and the following:
SPC (SANSOM PARK CITY)
The first three (3) letters (SPC) shall represent the city issuing the permit, followed by the
assigned permit number. The permit holder shall place the business name, TCEQ registration
number and the vehicle permit number on each vehicle before the vehicle is operated.
(6) The permit holder shall cause a copy of the permit to be kept in each vehicle at all times and
presented to the director or any peace officer upon demand. a copy of the permit holder's transporter
registration issued by the commission shall be kept in each vehicle at all times and presented to the
director or any peace officer upon demand.
(7) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a liquid waste
transportation vehicle without the vehicle registration number assigned to that vehicle by the director
displayed as required by subsection (c)(5) above.
(8) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a liquid waste
transportation vehicle which is not permitted by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/536
(9) A person commits an offense if the person operates a liquid waste transportation vehicle and
fails to display to the director or any peace officer upon demand, a copy of a valid city permit.
(10) A person commits an offense if the person operates a liquid waste transportation vehicle and
fails to display to the director or any peace officer upon demand, a copy of a valid liquid waste
transporter registration issued by the commission.
(d) Grounds for permit denial.
(1) The director may deny the issuance of a permit if:
(A) The applicant, a partner of the applicant, a principal in the applicant's business, or
applicant's manager or operator has:
(i) Within the five (5) years preceding the date of the application been convicted of a
misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine exceeding $500.00, and
which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste
transportation business; or
(ii) Been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in
operating a liquid waste transportation business;
(B) The applicant fails to provide evidence of liability insurance or self-insurance as required
by this section;
(C) The applicant had a permit, that was issued under this article or its predecessor,
suspended or revoked within the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the application;
(D) The application contains a false statement of material fact;
(E) The application or any other required information is incomplete;
(F) The applicant's vehicle submitted for inspection does not meet the criteria of subsection
(b)(9) above. However, the director may issue a permit but exclude from registration those
vehicles not meeting said criteria;
(G) The applicant has not shown proof that the applicant and the applicant's drivers are
qualified under subsection (b)(8) above;
(H) The applicant has violated a provision of this article within the preceding twelve (12)
months; or
(I) The applicant does not have a valid liquid waste transporter registration issued by the
commission.
(2) An applicant whose permit is denied will be notified by the director, in writing, of the denial
and the grounds therefore. Such notice will be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
mailing address listed on the application.
(e) Permit conditions. A person who has been issued a permit by the director shall comply with the following:
(1) A permit holder shall immediately notify the director of any management changes in the
business during the time the permit is in effect, and shall provide the director with a photocopy of the
new manager's or chief operating officer's driver's license;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/536
(2) The permit holder shall notify the director of all changes in disposal sites it wants to utilize
during the permit periods, and shall use only those disposal sites permitted or approved by the
commission and the director;
(3) The permit holder shall maintain insurance required by subsection (b)(6) above and
immediately notify the director of any changes in its insurance carrier or policy, and insured status or
self-insured status;
(4) The permit holder shall maintain all vehicles registered under the permit in compliance with the
requirements of subsection (b)(9);
(5) The permit holder shall immediately notify the director when it sells or otherwise disposes of
vehicles registered under the permit;
(6) The permit holder shall maintain vehicle registration numbering in compliance with subsection
(c)(5);
(7) The permit holder shall immediately notify the director when the permit holder's waste
transporter registration issued by the commission expires or is suspended or revoked;
(8) A permit holder shall ensure that all of the permit holder's employees collecting and
transporting liquid waste in vehicles registered under the permit remain sufficiently knowledgeable of
such vehicles and of liquid waste facilities they service, so that they are able to collect and transport
liquid waste in a safe and competent manner; and
(9) The permit holder shall ensure that none of the vehicles registered under a permit exceeds state
weight limits while transporting liquid waste.
(f) Permit modification.
(1) The permit holder may request a modification to the permit during the permit year to register
additional liquid waste transportation vehicles.
(2) A request to register additional vehicles shall be submitted to the director for consideration in a
manner determined by the director.
(3) Additional vehicles shall be submitted to the director for inspection and shall meet the
requirements of subsection (b)(9).
(4) The permit holder shall provide to the director proof of liability insurance or self-insurance for
such additional vehicles in accordance with subsection (b)(6).
(5) Before the director modifies the permit, the applicant shall remit a permit fee for each
additional vehicle in accordance with subsection (c)(1).
(6) All additional vehicles are subject to the requirements of this article.
(7) A permit modification shall not extend the term of the permit.
Sec. 4.16.004 Transporter responsibilities
(a) Before accepting a load of liquid waste, a transporter shall determine the nature of the liquid waste and
whether the transporter's equipment is sufficient to properly handle the transportation without spillage, leaks, or
release of toxic, odorous or harmful gasses. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall
inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/536
(b) A transporter pumping waste from a liquid waste facility shall remove one hundred percent (100%) of the
contents of such facility.
(c) A transporter operating under a city permit shall not transport hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous
industrial solid waste in a vehicle registered under the permit.
(d) A transporter operating under a city permit shall not commingle hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous
industrial solid waste with liquid waste.
(e) A transporter shall not mix incompatible wastes within the same container. A transporter shall not use the
same container or pumping equipment to collect or transport liquid waste which is incompatible with previously
handled waste, without first emptying and cleaning the container and equipment. A transporter may mix wastes
with different characteristics if the disposer to which the waste is being transported is authorized to store,
process, or dispose of such mixed wastes.
(f) A transporter shall handle and dispose of grease trap wastes or grit trap wastes at an authorized, licensed,
disposal site. This waste shall not be disposed of in a publicly owned treatment works.
(g) A transporter shall not operate a vehicle that fails to meet the requirements of section 4.16.003(b)(9).
(h) A transporter shall allow the director or any peace officer to inspect vehicles registered under a permit,
upon their request.
(i) A transporter shall allow the director or any peace officer to obtain samples of liquid waste from the
transporter's vehicle, upon their request.
(j) A transporter shall not empty liquid waste into a generator's solid waste receptacles.
(k) A transporter operating under a city permit shall use a manifest system book consisting of five-part tickets,
purchased from the director in packs of one hundred (100) for forty dollars ($40.00), in the following manner:
(1) Each manifest system book shall be used exclusively for a single vehicle.
(2) A transporter will complete one (1) trip ticket for each individual collection, with the exception
of chemical toilet companies servicing their own units. Such companies shall be exempt from trip
ticket requirements, but shall be required to submit to the director a monthly total of volumes
disposed of and the locations of such disposal, no later than the tenth (10th) day of the month
following the month in which the disposal occurred.
(3) The transporter shall sign the original part of a trip ticket and request the generator to do the
same at the time of the liquid waste collection. The transporter shall not remove liquid waste from the
generator's premises until the generator signs the trip ticket. The transporter shall leave the first copy
(yellow) of the trip ticket with the generator.
(4) The transporter shall have the disposer sign the original part of the trip ticket at the time the
waste is disposed of, and shall leave the second (pink) copy of the trip ticket with the disposer.
(5) The transporter shall retain the third copy (green) of the trip ticket for the transporter's own
records.
(6) The transporter shall return the fourth copy of the trip ticket to the generator within fifteen (15)
days after the waste is received at the disposal facility.
(7) The transporter shall deliver to the director all completed original trip tickets no later than the
tenth (10th) day of the month following the month in which they were completed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/536
(8) The transporter shall retain its copies of all trip tickets for a period of five years and shall make
such copies available to the director, upon request, for inspection at all reasonable times.
(9) A person commits an offense if the person engages in the transportation of liquid waste and
fails to comply with any provision of this section.
Sec. 4.16.005 Suspension or revocation of permit
After notice and hearing the director may suspend for up to six (6) months or may revoke a permit if the director
determines that:
(1) The permit holder, a partner of the permit holder, a principal in the permit holder's business, a
permit holder's manager or operator, or an officer of the permit holder:
(A) Has within the five (5) years preceding the date of the hearing been convicted of a
misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine exceeding $500.00, and which
relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business;
or
(B) Has been convicted of a felony which relates to the duty or responsibility in operating a
liquid waste transportation business;
(2) The permit holder failed to comply with any of the permit conditions stated in section
4.16.003(e);
(3) The permit holder or an employee failed to use the manifest system book in compliance with
this article, or to maintain manifests for five years, or to allow the director to inspect the manifest;
(4) The permit holder or an employee improperly disposed of liquid waste;
(5) The permit holder or an employee commingled liquid waste with hazardous waste or class 1
nonhazardous industrial solid waste in a city-permitted vehicle;
(6) The permit holder or an employee refused to allow the director or a peace officer to inspect a
liquid waste transportation vehicle or obtain liquid waste samples from such vehicle;
(7) The permit holder or any employee thereof, within the twelve months preceding the hearing,
was convicted of violating this article; or
(8) The permit holder's liquid waste transporter registration issued by the commission expired, or
was suspended or revoked.
Sec. 4.16.006 Generator responsibilities
(a) A generator shall have liquid waste removed from its liquid facilities only by a transporter holding a valid
permit issued by the director to do so.
(b) Prior to liquid wastes being removed from its premises a generator shall determine whether the disposer
who will be disposing of the waste is permitted or approved for such by the commission.
(c) A generator shall determine whether its liquid waste contains hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous
industrial solid waste and shall not have hazardous waste, class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste, or
hazardous wastes or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes combined with liquid wastes removed from its
premises by a transporter operating under a city permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/536
(d) Prior to a transporter leaving a generator's premises with a load of liquid waste, a generator shall sign the
original of a city trip ticket prepared by the transporter.
(e) A generator shall keep a copy of all city trip tickets for liquid waste collected from its premises, for a
period of five years, and shall make such trip ticket copies available to the director for inspection at all
reasonable times.
(f) A generator shall install or provide liquid waste facilities on its premises of such type and size as specified
by the director.
(g) A generator shall maintain its liquid waste facilities as follows:
(1) Liquid waste facilities shall be maintained in continuous, proper working condition.
(2) Pumping out of wastes.
(A) Grease traps located upon the premises of food establishments shall be one hundred
percent (100%) pumped out a minimum of once every ninety (90) days, and at all other times as
necessary to maintain their effectiveness. The director may order a generator to have its grease
traps pumped out more frequently than every ninety (90) days if the director determines such is
necessary for the protection of the sanitary sewer.
(B) Grit traps shall be one hundred percent (100%) pumped out minimum of once per year;
and at all other times as necessary to maintain their effectiveness. The director may order a
generator to have its grit traps pumped out more frequently than once per year if the director
determines such is necessary for the protection of the sanitary sewer.
(3) Liquid waste facilities shall be inspected for seepage into the surrounding media whenever the
trap has been pumped. The generator shall repair, replace, or install apparatus and equipment as
necessary to ensure the proper operation and function of the liquid waste facilities.
(h) A generator shall supervise the servicing of the generator's liquid waste facilities and shall insure that they
are completely emptied by the transporter during such servicing.
(i) A generator shall maintain records of liquid waste facility inspections for three (3) years and shall make
such records available to the director for inspection at all reasonable times.
(j) A generator shall report all spills occurring during collection to the director within 24 hours.
(k) A generator shall immediately clean up or cause to be cleaned up all spills of liquid waste and shall have
the waste properly disposed of by a transporter.
(l) A person commits an offense if the person is a generator of liquid waste and fails to comply with any
provision of this article or any order of the director authorized by this article.
(m) A person commits an offense of the person is a generator of liquid waste and allows liquid waste that
emits noxious odors or offensive odors, or that creates an unsanitary condition or which is injurious to the public
health, to accumulate upon premises under the person's control.
Sec. 4.16.007 Disposer responsibilities
(a) A disposer shall sign the original of a city trip ticket prepared by a transporter operating under a city
permit for all liquid waste received on the disposer's premises from such transporter.
(b) The disposer shall note any significant discrepancies on each copy of the trip ticket.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/536
(1) Trip ticket discrepancies are differences between the quantity or type of waste designated on
the trip ticket and the quantity or type of waste a disposer actually receives.
(2) Significant discrepancies in type are obvious differences which can be discovered by inspection
or waste analysis. Significant discrepancies in quantity are:
(A) For bulk weight, variations greater than ten percent (10%) in weight; and
(B) For liquid waste, any variation greater than fifteen percent (15%) in gallons.
(C) A person commits an offense if the person disposes of liquid waste in violation of
subsections (A) or (B) of this section.
(D) In order to retain city approval of its disposal site, a disposer shall comply with
subsections (A) and (B) of this section, and shall:
(i) Maintain all valid federal, state, and local permits required to operate a disposal site;
(ii) Comply with all federal, state, and local laws pertaining to the operations of the
disposal site;
(iii) Accept only those classes of liquid waste authorized under federal, state, and local
laws; and
(iv) Dispose of liquid waste in accordance with federal, state, and local laws.
Sec. 4.16.008 Additional permit holder responsibilities
(a) A permit holder shall immediately notify the director in writing when the liquid waste transportation
business is sold or ceases to operate.
(b) In addition to the written notification required in subsection (a) above, the permit holder shall immediately
deliver to the director:
(1) All completed original trip tickets in the permit holder's possession;
(2) All unused trip tickets in the permit holder's possession; and
(3) The permit holder's permit.
(c) The permit holder shall remove the city registration number from all liquid waste transportation vehicles
upon the sale or cessation of operation of the liquid waste transportation business.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person has a permit to transport liquid waste and violates any provision
of this section.
(e) A permit shall be invalid upon the sale or cessation of operation of a liquid waste transportation business.
Sec. 4.16.009 Previously issued permits
All permits issued by the director to liquid waste transporters pursuant to the previous version of this article shall
remain valid until their expiration or until their revocation pursuant to the ordinance under which they were
issued.
Sec. 4.16.010 Interference with grease trap, grit trap or sanitary sewer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/536
A person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes
with or permits the interference with a grease trap, grit trap, or the sanitary sewer.
Sec. 4.16.011 Bioremediation of grease traps
(a) A person commits an offense if the person introduces, causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any
bioremediation media into a grease trap.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection (a) above that the use of the bioremediation
media has been approved by the director, and the media and the use of the media met all criteria of subsection
(c).
(c) Bioremediation media may be used with the director's approval if the person has proved, to the satisfaction
of the director, that:
(1) Laboratory testing which is valid for the type of grease trap to be used has verified that:
(A) The media is a pure live bacterial product and does not contain any surfactants,
emulsifiers, or substances which act as solvents for fate.
(B) The total mass of oil and grease discharge to the sanitary sewer after the use of the media
will not exceed the discharge limits for oil and grease established in the industrial waste
regulations contained in article 13.06 of chapter 13 of this code.
(C) The pH of the discharge is not less than 5 or greater than 12.
(D) The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap
and does not increase the potential of oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer.
(E) The media is not destroyed by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and
detergents, or by hot water.
(F) Any waste pumped from the grease trap after use of the media is acceptable at disposal
sites for grease trap waste.
(G) The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming or obstruction in the
sanitary sewer.
Sec. 4.16.012 Nuisances
(a) A vehicle transporting liquid waste which is leaking or spilling from such vehicle is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
(b) Any premises upon which liquid waste has accumulated and which is emitting noxious or offensive odors,
or which is creating an unsanitary condition, or which is injurious to the public health is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(Ordinance 496-15 adopted 9/17/15)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/536
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Knox box rapid entry key system required for commercial buildings
(a) Requirements. Prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued for any newly constructed commercial
building or before a certificate of occupancy is issued for any reconstructed building or any change of occupancy
which would require a new certificate of occupancy, the owners or operators of such building must install a
Knox box rapid entry key system concurrent with the specifications posted with the city administrator by the fire
chief of the city.
(b) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day
or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction,
is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 377 adopted 1/17/02)
Sec. 5.01.002 Establishment and marking of fire lanes
(a) The fire marshal shall have the authority to establish fire lanes adjacent to, in front of, or around any
commercial establishment, or building having public access, to include but not be limited to stores, eating
places, bars or taverns, motels, and dance halls, for the purpose of an unobstructed means of ingress and egress
for fire and emergency vehicles.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or custodian of any premises upon which the fire marshal has
established fire lanes to have said lanes clearly marked as such, either by signs or pavement painting.
(c) The fire marshal, upon establishing fire lanes, shall notify, in writing, the owner or custodian of the
premises of such order. The owner or custodian of the premises shall have ten (10) days in which to mark said
lanes.
(Ordinance 212, sec. XIV, adopted 5/24/84)
State law reference–Marking of fire lane, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2308.251(c).
Sec. 5.01.003 Obstructing fire lane
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle within a designated fire lane, or to otherwise
obstruct a fire lane in any manner, provided that the fire lane is clearly marked as such, and in accordance with
the authority of the fire marshal.
(b) Any motor vehicle, or any other obstruction that so blocks a designated fire lane and impedes the ingress
or egress of emergency vehicles, may be removed at the expense of the owner or custodian of such motor
vehicle or other impediment.
(c) The fire marshal, chief of police, chief of the fire department, or their deputies, officers or agents shall
have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section and to remove or cause to be removed any obstruction
of a fire lane.
(d) Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00, in addition to any expenses incurred
under subsection (b) of this section.
(Ordinance 211 adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.01.004 Obstructing fireplug
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/536
(a) No person shall place or erect any object or structure within 8 feet of any fireplug in the city, and
specifically no person shall place any fence, mailbox, garbage cans, or utility poles within 8 feet of any fireplug
in the city. (Ordinance 212, sec. XIII, adopted 5/24/84)
(b) Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Said fines shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by
law for other misdemeanor violations. (Ordinance 212, sec. XVI, adopted 5/24/84; Ordinance 246 adopted
1/28/88)
Sec. 5.01.005 Burning refuse
(a) No person shall burn on a street, alley, or other public or private property in the city manure, straw,
garbage, or any refuse or trash of any kind or description. (Ordinance 212, sec. XII, adopted 5/24/84)
(b) Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Said fines shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by
law for other misdemeanor violations. (Ordinance 212, sec. XVI, adopted 5/24/84; Ordinance 246 adopted
1/28/88)
State law reference–Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 382.
Sec. 5.01.006 Burning motor vehicles
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner or agent of any premises located
within the corporate limits of the city, whether occupied or unoccupied, to suffer or permit the burning of
automobiles, pickup trucks, trucks, tractors or other motor vehicles upon such premises, and any such premises
upon which any burning of automobiles, pickup trucks, trucks, tractors or other motor vehicles is permitted shall
be deemed a nuisance, as dangerous to the public health and calculated to increase the fire hazards of the city.
(b) Duty of owner or occupant. It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any premises located within
the corporate limits of the city to use every precaution to prevent any person, firm, corporation, owner or agent
from burning of automobiles, pickup trucks, trucks, tractors or other motor vehicles on such premises so as to
become a nuisance as herein defined.
(Ordinance 130 adopted 2/13/69)
(c) Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, owner or agent violating any of the provisions, regulations and
requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined in any
amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each such offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 130 adopted 2/13/69; Ordinance 246 adopted
1/28/88)
State law reference–Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 382.
Sec. 5.01.007 Mobile service units
(a) Definition. The city council deems it necessary for the protection of the health and safety of the residents
of the city to prohibit the operation of mobile service units, defined as a vehicle, a tank truck, or other mobile
device from which flammable liquids used as motor fuels may, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed into the fuel
tank of a motor vehicle parked on an off-street parking facility.
(b) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other business entity to set up or
operate a mobile service unit, as hereinabove defined, within the city limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/536
(Ordinance 141 adopted 8/26/71)
(c) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, or shall fail to comply
therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to
a fine, and upon conviction of any such violation shall be fined in any sum of not more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00); each day any such violation shall exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ordinance 141 adopted 8/26/71; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
State law reference–Flammable liquids, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 753.
Sec. 5.01.008 Storage of gasoline at residence
(a) Quantity limited. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, whether it be for private or commercial
use, to store gasoline in a quantity greater than 50 gallons at a private residence as that term is hereafter defined.
(b) Applicability. A private residence shall mean any single-family or multiple-family dwelling located in the
city that is occupied, or constructed for the purpose of being occupied, as living quarters. A private residence
shall not mean a building or structure that is used solely and exclusively for a business or commercial purpose
and not as living quarters. Any commercial or business structure must be so licensed by the city and shall be
subject to all appropriate building codes and fire codes.
(Ordinance 155 adopted 8/9/76)
(c) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). (Ordinance 155
adopted 8/9/76; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created; appointment; salary; deputies
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, and the
fire marshal shall report directly to the mayor and city council. The office of fire marshal shall be filled by
appointment of the mayor and consent of the city council. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the
duties of said office, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. He shall be removable by a simple
majority of the council. He shall receive a salary in the amount established by the city council from time to time
and shall also receive net expenses incurred attending schools, and reimbursement for loss of time from his
regular position or employment. The fire marshal shall have the authority to appoint a sufficient number of
deputies to assist him in his duties. Said deputies shall have the same rights, powers and authority that are vested
in the fire marshal. Deputies shall hold their office at the discretion of the fire marshal, and shall not receive
compensation for performing their duties. Deputies appointed by the fire marshal shall serve upon approval by
and at the pleasure of the city council. (Ordinance 285, sec. I, adopted 5/28/92; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.02.002 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal or his deputy shall investigate the cause and circumstances of every fire occurring within the
corporate limits of the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make an
investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin, if
possible, within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a
record of all fires together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the
amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (Ordinance 212, sec.
II, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.003 Taking of testimony; duty when evidence indicates crime
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/536
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons believed to be cognizant of any facts, or believed to have knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing, and if he shall be of
the opinion that there is criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall furnish to the proper prosecuting
attorney all evidence in his possession or knowledge, together with the names of witnesses and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
(Ordinance 212, sec. III, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.004 Power to summon witnesses and require production of evidence
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (Ordinance 212, sec. IV,
adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.005 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall
be fined in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Provided, however, that any person so convicted
shall have the right of appeal, and provided further that nothing in this article shall authorize the fire marshal to
do any act in violation of constitutional or statutory prohibitions against compelling a person to incriminate
himself. (Ordinance 212, sec. V, adopted 5/24/84; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 5.02.006 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (Ordinance 212, sec. VI, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.007 Right of entry on premises where fire has occurred
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article and the laws of the state, to enter upon and examine
any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the
same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and discretion. (Ordinance 212, sec. VII, adopted
5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.008 Inspections for fire hazards; order to correct conditions or vacate premises
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty to enter upon and make, or cause to
be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together
with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of
repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so
situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property
therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other
heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/536
connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of
explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes,
combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or
liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the
same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be complied with by the owner or occupant of said
building or premises within ten (10) days. If, in the opinion of the fire marshal, such violation or fire hazard
causes an immediate danger to the occupants thereof, he may order the premises closed and vacated until the
violation or fire hazard is corrected and no longer exists. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to fail to
close or vacate such premises upon order of the fire marshal, and each day that the order is ignored shall
constitute a separate offense. If said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within
five (5) days, appeal to the city council, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by their
authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or
occupant. If the aggrievance involves an order of immediate closing and vacating of premises, such premises
shall remain closed and vacated until a decision is rendered by the city council. At the end of each month, the
fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with separate report
on each fire in the city during the month. Provided further that nothing herein shall authorize the fire marshal to
do any act in violation of the constitutional or statutory provisions against unlawful searches or seizures.
(Ordinance 212, sec. VIII, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.009 Maintaining dangerous structure or premises
Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises who shall keep or maintain the same when,
for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and
which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so
occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be in violation of this article.
(Ordinance 212, sec. IX, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.010 Maintaining dangerous conditions
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or
health, or safety of persons or property of others, or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, or
refuse so as to be of such a nature as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or with any other condition which
shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others, or which shall be dangerous in the
matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires, or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen or
occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the maintainor thereof, shall be in violation of this
article. (Ordinance 212, sec. X, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.011 Order required before prosecution
No prosecution shall be brought under sections 5.02.009 and 5.02.010 of this article until the order provided for
in section 5.02.008 be given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (Ordinance 212,
sec. XI, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.012 Obstructing fire marshal
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner interfere [with] or obstruct the fire marshal in the
performance of his official duties. (Ordinance 212, sec. XV, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.013 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/536
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Said fines shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law
for other misdemeanor violations. (Ordinance 212, sec. XVI, adopted 5/24/84; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 5.02.014 Continuing offenses
Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing sections shall be a distinct
and separate offense. (Ordinance 212, sec. XVII, adopted 5/24/84)
Sec. 5.02.015 Enforcement
All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall
be recovered and enforced, in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures,
penalties and punishments for offenses generally against the city. (Ordinance 212, sec. XVIII, adopted 5/24/84)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Sec. 5.03.001 Established
There is hereby created and established a fire department in the city. (Ordinance 68, sec. I, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.002 Composition; officers
The members of the fire department shall be a chief, two assistant chiefs, two (2) captains, two (2) lieutenants,
and such other members as may be deemed advisable by fire department. The chief and the assistant chiefs shall
be chosen by the members that make up said department, and such choice shall be subject to the approval of the
city council. The department shall consist of two (2) regular organized fire companies and subordinate to the
chief and assistant chiefs. Each of them shall be manned by a captain and lieutenant and such other men as the
chief may direct. The captain and lieutenant of each of said companies shall be elected by the department and
such election shall be subject to the approval of the city council. Failure on the part of the fire department to
elect any said official within 10 days from the date of disapproval by the city council shall give the city council
the right to fill said office for the fire department. All officers so elected and approved shall be commissioned by
the mayor. All members of said department shall perform such duties as may be prescribed from time to time by
the orders of the city council to be executed by the chief of the department. (Ordinance 68, sec. II, adopted
4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.003 Paid employees
Included in the personnel of the fire department as hereinabove provided, said department shall contain such
full-time paid employees or part-time paid employees as the city council may direct from time to time; the hours
of employment of the paid members of the fire department and the compensation to be paid said members shall
be fixed by the council and subject to further orders of the council. (Ordinance 68, sec. III, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.004 Powers and duties of chief
The chief of the fire department shall be the executive officer of the department. It shall be his duty and that of
his assistant to see that the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations concerning the department and the operation
thereof are carried into full force and effect. It shall be the duty of the chief to enforce such rules and regulations
made from time to time to secure discipline in said department. He shall have power to suspend any subordinate
officers or members for violation of such rules and regulations upon a temporary basis until the next regular
meeting, at which time the suspension will be voted upon by the department and shall upon executing any such
suspension, forthwith in writing and at that time he will advise the city council of the reasons therefor. He shall
diligently observe the condition of the fire apparatus and workings of said department at all times, and shall
report in writing at any time to the city council and make in connection with said equipment such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/536
recommendations as he may desire for the efficiency of said equipment and department. In the absence of the
chief, the assistant chief shall assume the duties of said office of chief of the department. (Ordinance 68, sec. IV,
adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.005 Storage and care of equipment
The fire apparatus belonging to the city shall be kept in such place or places as the city council shall from time
to time provide, and the company to which same may be assigned shall keep the equipment in constant readiness
for use. (Ordinance 68, sec. IX, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.006 Duties in case of fire; officer in command
It shall be the duty of the chief of the department and his assistant whenever a fire shall occur in the city to
immediately report to the place of such fire and take proper measures for placing apparatus in the most
advantageous position. The assistant chief, captains and lieutenants of the respective companies on arrival at a
fire shall immediately report to the chief; provided that, in the absence of the chief or assistant chief, the first
captain to arrive at the fire shall be the person in command. When the chief shall arrive at a fire, he shall have
sole command over all other officers, all members of the department and all other persons who may be present at
the fire. He shall take all proper measures for extinguishing the fire and protection of property and preservation
of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city and regulations respecting fires. (Ordinance 68, sec. V, adopted
4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.007 Authority to destroy buildings at scene of fire
Whenever any building in the city is on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief, or his assistant or acting chief, with
the concurrence of the mayor, to direct such building, or other building, or building erection, fence or fences,
which they may deem hazardous or likely to catch fire and communicate to other buildings, to be immediately
razed, torn down, or otherwise destroyed for the purpose of checking or otherwise extinguishing such fire, and
neither the city council or any individual member thereof, nor the chief of the department, assistant chief, or any
member of the department, shall in any wise be held responsible for the damaging of property or the destruction
thereof that may occur by reason of the attempt of the department to extinguish any fire. (Ordinance 68, sec. VI,
adopted 4/21/58)
State law reference–Destruction of buildings by fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 342.005.
Sec. 5.03.008 Right-of-way of fire apparatus
All moving apparatus under the fire department shall have the paramount right-of-way through all streets,
thoroughfares, lanes, alleys, places and courts of the city while en route to a fire, and such apparatus, together
with all other vehicles contiguous thereto, shall take and keep to the right-hand side of the street unless the same
be obstructed, in order to give the apparatus of the fire department the unobstructed use of the streets for the time
being. (Ordinance 68, sec. VII, adopted 4/21/58)
State law reference–Following or obstructing fire apparatus or ambulance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.407.
Sec. 5.03.009 Authority to restrict access at scene of fire
The fire department shall have the right, in time of fire, to place ropes or guards across all streets, thoroughfares,
lanes or alleys on which shall be situated any building on fire and at such other points as it may deem expedient
and necessary, and the members of said department who have been assigned by the chief for policing purposes
shall prevent any and all persons, except officers and members of the fire department and owners and occupants
of such buildings endangered by the existing fires, from entering the lines designated by ropes or guards.
(Ordinance 68, sec. VIII, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.010 Arrest of persons during and after fire
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/536
During the progress of a fire within the city, and for twenty-four (24) hours after its extinguishment, it shall be
lawful for the mayor, chief of police or any councilman or any policeman of the city or other officer in command
of any fire company to arrest and keep in custody all suspected persons and persons who conduct themselves in
a noisy or disorderly manner or hinder, resist or refuse to obey any officer while acting in the discharge of his
duty. (Ordinance 68, sec. X, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.011 Authority to command assistance at fire
The officers mentioned in section 5.03.010 shall be vested with full power and authority to command all persons
present at any fire in the city to assist in the discharge of any duty under the supervision of such officer in the
extinguishment of such fire, or the removal and preservation of property; provided that the person shall not be
bound to obey such officers unless the officers shall wear their badge of office, or unless his official title shall be
known or be made known to such person. (Ordinance 68, sec. XI, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.012 Interference with members or employees
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons not a member of the fire department to interfere with or in any
manner hinder any member or employee of the fire department in the discharge of his duties as such. (Ordinance
68, sec. XII, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.013 Interference with apparatus or equipment
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons not a member of the fire department to handle or in any way
interfere with any of the apparatus belonging to or used by the fire department, either at a fire or while traveling
to or returning from a fire, or while standing in the fire department quarters, or at any time, unless such person or
persons is requested to do so by an officer of the department. (Ordinance 68, sec. XIII, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.014 Penalty
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or [and]
upon conviction of same shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $2,000.00. (Ordinance 68, sec. XIV,
adopted 4/21/58; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 5.03.015 Organizational meeting; constitution and bylaws
As soon as possible after the effective date of this article, the members of the fire department shall meet and
effect their organization for the purpose of the good order and well-being of the department, the maintenance of
harmony therein, and the full promotion of the organization, and shall elect such officers as they may deem
necessary for the purpose of establishing discipline and to maintain a perfect unity among themselves, as well as
fully promoting the object for which the association is organized, and to adopt a constitution and bylaws which
will be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. Said constitution and bylaws shall be
subject to the approval of the city council, and any fire company or member thereof failing or refusing to comply
with such constitution, laws, rules and regulations adopted by the fire department and approved by the city
council shall forfeit the rights of said department, and to use of apparatus in its charge, and such apparatus shall
be taken charge of by the chief of the fire department until such company and members thereof shall comply
with such laws, rules and regulations, or until another company shall have been regularly organized, at which
time the chief at his discretion shall have the right to turn said apparatus over to the newly organized company.
(Ordinance 68, sec. XV, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.016 Disability and pension benefits
The city council may at its discretion provide for the relief of members of the fire department temporarily or
permanently disabled in the discharge of their duties, and shall have the right to provide for the organization and
administration of a pension fund for old, disabled and infirm members of said department under such system,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/536
rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable, whenever the finances of the city will justify the undertaking
of this service and subject to the laws of the state. (Ordinance 68, sec. XVI, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.017 Exemption of city from firefighters' relief and retirement fund
The city hereby elects to exempt itself from the requirements of the act (Senate Bill No. 411 of the 1977
Legislature) creating the firefighters' relief and retirement fund, and elects not to participate in any state
firefighters' relief and retirement fund. (Ordinance 162 adopted 9/22/77)
State law reference–Texas Local Fire Fighters Retirement Act, V.T.C.S., art. 6243e.
Sec. 5.03.018 Finances
The city council shall retain control of all monies paid by any political subdivisions, including federal, county,
state or city, or businesses, persons, or incorporations, for the benefit of the fire department, and said money
shall be kept in a special fund and shall be disbursed by the city council at its discretion for the use and benefit
of the fire department. Any other funds derived by the fire department through entertainment projects, except
personal solicitation, may be retained by the fire department and expended in such way or manner as the fire
department may desire. (Ordinance 68, sec. XVII, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.019 Badges
The city council shall provide each member of the fire department a badge descriptive of the office in which said
fireman is serving. (Ordinance 68, sec. XVIII, adopted 4/21/58)
Sec. 5.03.020 Emergency equipment on private vehicles of volunteer firemen
(a) Installation and use of emergency equipment. Active members in good standing of the city's volunteer fire
department be and are hereby authorized to install sirens and red lights on their private cars, under the following
terms and conditions:
(1) Such emergency equipment (sirens and red lights) shall be used only when an emergency exists
and the volunteer fireman is on his way to the fire hall to answer a fire call;
(2) Each individual volunteer fireman must cover his vehicle with public liability insurance within
the minimum limits required by the financial responsibility law of the state and must furnish a copy
of such policy to the city secretary.
(b) Removal of emergency equipment. When any volunteer fireman leaves the fire department, or ceases to be
an active member in good standing, he will be required to remove such emergency equipment within five (5)
days.
(c) Identification sticker. Each volunteer fireman is hereby authorized to place on his automobile a sticker
showing that the owner is a member of the city's volunteer fire department. Such sticker or emblem must be
turned into the volunteer fire department within five (5) days of the time that such member leaves the
department or loses his status of a member in good standing.
(Ordinance 114 adopted 5/12/66)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.04.001 Adopted; amendments
(a) The 2006 edition of the International Fire Code (IFC), as amended and published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety and maintained on file in the office of the city secretary and is fully
incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/536
(b) The city does hereby adopt amendments to the International Fire Code, 2006 edition, a copy of which shall
be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. Said amendments are attached to Ordinance 484-14 as exhibit A
and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ordinance 486-14 adopted 1/15/15)
Sec. 5.04.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for all violations involving zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation, including dumping of
refuse, and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations of this article.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 468-13, sec. 2,
adopted 10/3/13)
Sec. 5.04.003 Definitions
Wherever the words “chief” or “chief of the bureau of fire prevention” are used in the fire code, they shall be
held to mean the fire marshal. (Ordinance 215, sec. 2, adopted 2/14/85)
Sec. 5.04.004 Duties of fire marshal
The duties of the bureau of fire prevention and fire marshal shall be governed by the provisions of the fire code
and article 5.02 of the Code of Ordinances, pertaining to the office of fire marshal. (Ordinance 215, sec. 3,
adopted 2/14/85)
Sec. 5.04.005 Permits
Whenever in the fire code there is a requirement for obtaining a permit, such permit shall be issued and
governed by the appropriate city ordinance which is in force at that time. In the event there is no ordinance
covering the circumstances for which the provisions of the fire code require a permit, an application for permit
shall be made in writing to the fire marshal, on a form and in a manner prescribed by the fire marshal. The fire
marshal shall submit the application for permit to the city council, who shall render a decision either approving
or disapproving the permit. (Ordinance 215, sec. 4, adopted 2/14/85)
Sec. 5.04.006 Future amendments
No section of the fire code shall be deleted, modified or amended without cause showing that said amendment
would be in the best interests of public safety and fire prevention. (Ordinance 215, sec. 5, adopted 2/14/85)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.05.001 Definitions
The following terms used in this article are defined as follows:
Fireworks. Any contrivance made of paper, pasteboard or other material and containing explosives or materials
combined in various proportions for the purpose, when ignited or lighted by hand or otherwise, of making a
noise, creating an explosion or producing a pyrotechnic display.
Person. Any natural person or association of natural persons, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation,
organization, or the manager, agent, servant or employee of any of them.
(Ordinance 14, sec. 1, adopted 6/23/53)
Sec. 5.05.002 Penalty; additional remedies
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/536
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ordinance 14, sec. 6, adopted 6/23/53; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
(b) In case of any wilful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this article, the city, in addition to
imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court having
proper jurisdiction to restrain, correct or abate such violation, and the definition of any violation of the terms of
this article as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city from invoking all civil remedies given to it by the laws
of the state, but same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such
violation. (Ordinance 14, sec. 6, adopted 6/23/53)
Sec. 5.05.003 Prohibition
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, transport,
manufacture, discharge, ignite or in any manner aid, assist or abet in the discharging or igniting of any fireworks
of any size within the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 14, sec. 2, adopted 6/23/53)
Sec. 5.05.004 Prima facie evidence of violation
The possession of fireworks within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute prima facie evidence of an
intention to violate the provisions of this article and shall be deemed an offense. (Ordinance 14, sec. 3, adopted
6/23/53)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 6.01.001 Designation of health authority
The city designates the Tarrant County health department director as its health authority for the purpose of
insuring minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's
function. (Ordinance 321, sec. 1, adopted –/–/95)
State law reference–Health authorities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 121.021 et seq.
Sec. 6.01.002 State regulations adopted
(a) Adoption. There are hereby adopted by reference the department of state health services, division of food
and drugs, food safety rules as currently adopted by the city by article 6.03 of this code, and the Texas Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act (V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 431), and V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
chapter 341.
(b) Penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this section, upon conviction in the municipal court of the
city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 321, secs. 2, 9, adopted –/–/95; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/536
Sec. 6.01.003 Public swimming pools and spas
(a) Adoption of state standards; permit; inspections.
(1) The city council hereby adopts the current Texas Minimum Standards of Sanitation and Health
Protection Measures, title 5, chapter 341, subchapter D, section 341.064 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, and Standards for Public Pools and Spas, 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 265,
sections 265.181 through 265.208.
(2) All public swimming pools and spas within the corporate limits of the city shall maintain an
annual public swimming pool permit.
(3) The director of the county health department is hereby designated as the health authority for
purposes of inspecting public swimming pools and spas within the corporate limits of the city, issuing
the annual public swimming pool permit and collecting a public swimming pool permit fee of
$100.00 annually from permit applicants, said permit to be effective October 1st of each year. Said
fees are to be paid to the county health department at 1800 University Drive, Fort Worth, Texas,
76302. Said fees are due and payable upon October 1st of each year and the director of the county
health department is authorized to collect such fees direct from such permit applicants.
(b) Penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this section, upon conviction in the municipal court of the
city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 321, secs. 8, 9, adopted –/–/95)
State law reference–Sanitation of public swimming pools and bathhouses, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 341.064.
Sec. 6.01.004 United States Public Health Standards adopted
(a) Adoption. The provisions of the document known as “The United States Public Health Standards as
applied to the State of Texas,” attached to Ordinance 76, incorporated herein and made a part hereof, are hereby
adopted for the city and shall hereafter be in full force and effect within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ordinance 76 adopted 5/8/59)
(b) Penalty. Should any person, firm or corporation violate any portion of this section they shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not in excess of $2,000.00. (Ordinance 76 adopted 5/8/59; Ordinance
246 adopted 1/28/88)
ARTICLE 6.02 UNIFORM EMS REGULATIONS*
Sec. 6.02.001 Statutory authority
This article is enacted by city (“this jurisdiction”), pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code section 773.051,
which provides that local governments may establish standards for ambulances, and pursuant to Texas
Government Code chapter 791, which authorizes combinations of local governmental units to contract for the
provision of governmental services, including the creation of administrative agencies to promote public health
and welfare.
Sec. 6.02.002 General purposes and intent
It is the purpose of this article:
(1) To establish a regulated prehospital emergency medical services and medical transportation
system which can provide quality clinical care with performance measures and standards, with the
goal of facilitating the best possible outcomes for each patient;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/536
(2) To establish a mobile integrated healthcare program with effective medical direction and
quality assurance and review;
(3) To form an administrative agency to administer and operate the prehospital emergency medical
services and medical transportation system in a service area comprised of member jurisdictions and
to administer and operate the mobile integrated healthcare program;
(4) To designate the administrative agency as the sole-provider of emergency and nonemergency
ambulance service within this jurisdiction to maintain consistent, high-quality service while
controlling costs through efficiencies and economies of scale;
(5) To provide for effective medical direction by establishing a multi-jurisdictional emergency
physicians advisory board to advise the administrative agency's board and, through the agency's
office of the medical director, to oversee and regulate all clinical aspects of prehospital emergency
medical services, the administrative agency's mobile integrated healthcare program, and medical
transportation which affect patient care in the service area; and
(6) To provide for effective coordination and communication between first responder agencies in
the service area, the emergency physicians advisory board, and the board of the administrative
agency by establishing a multi-jurisdictional first responder advisory board.
Sec. 6.02.003 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Advanced life support. Out-of-hospital care that uses invasive medical acts (as defined in Texas Health and
Safety Code section 773.003(1)).
Aeromedical transportation unit. Any rotary or fixed wing aircraft providing basic or advanced life support
services and patient transportation that originates within the service area.
Ambulance mutual aid agreement. A written agreement between the authority and one or more entities whereby
the signing parties agree to provide backup ambulance service to one another under the terms and conditions
specified in the agreement.
Ambulance service. The transportation of patients by emergency or nonemergency ambulance.
Associate medical director. A licensed physician who assists the medical director in carrying out EPAB's duties
under this article through the OMD.
Authority (metropolitan area EMS authority). The public administrative agency, formerly known as the area
metropolitan ambulance authority, established to administer and operate the medical transportation and
prehospital emergency medical services system and the MIH program established by this article.
Basic life support. Out-of-hospital care that uses noninvasive medical acts (as defined in section 773.003(2),
Texas Health and Safety Code).
Board. The board of directors of the authority.
Emergency care attendant. A person certified as an “emergency care attendant” under section 773.046 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code.
Emergency medical technician (EMT). A person certified as an “emergency medical technician” under section
773.047 or an “advanced emergency medical technician” under section 773.048 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code, and any other class of EMT recognized by state law or regulation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/536
EMS communications center. The single facility designated by the authority as the central communications
center from which all services offered by the authority shall be dispatched and controlled.
First responder. Any agency that provides first response to requests for emergency medical services and, in
cooperation with the ambulance service, provides immediate on-scene care to ill or injured persons but does not
transport those persons to healthcare facilities.
Medical director. The licensed physician appointed by EPAB who is responsible for carrying out EPAB's duties
and for directing the office of the medical director.
Medical transportation. The transportation of patients by ambulance, specialized mobile intensive care unit,
specialty care transport, or aeromedical transportation unit, including both emergency and nonemergency
transports, where such transportation originates within the service area.
MIH associate medical director. An associate medical director who is specifically tasked with assisting the
medical director in overseeing the clinical aspects of the authority's MIH program.
Mobile integrated healthcare (MIH). Services provided by the authority that are designed to enhance,
coordinate, effectively manage, and integrate out of hospital care, in order to improve outcomes, enhance the
client's experience of care, and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare services provided to the
enrolled clients.
Office of medical director. The clinical office of the authority through which EPAB carries out its rights and
duties under this article. The office of the medical director is comprised of the medical director, the MIH
associate medical director and any other associate medical directors, and the employees of the authority who are
assigned to the office of the medical director to assist the medical directors in carrying out EPAB's rights and
duties under this article.
Paramedic. A person qualified as a certified or licensed “paramedic” as defined by Texas Health and Safety
Code sections 773.049 and 773.0495.
Patient. An individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated, and in need of or at risk of
needing medical care at the scene of a medical emergency or during transport to or from a healthcare facility.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, governmental entity, or other group, or a
combination of the same acting as a unit.
Restated interlocal cooperative agreement. The interlocal contract, as it may be amended from time to time,
adopted by this jurisdiction concurrently with the passage of this article pursuant to chapter 791 of the Texas
Government Code (the Interlocal Cooperation Act).
Service area. That geographical area which is contained within the boundaries of all the jurisdictions which
become members of the authority by adopting this uniform EMS article and executing the restated interlocal
cooperative agreement.
Special event. Any public event located within the service area for which standby ambulance service is arranged
in advance, and for which an ambulance is hired by the sponsor of the event or other interested party.
Specialty care transport. The transportation of a critically injured or ill patient at a level of service beyond the
scope of the EMT-paramedic when the patient's condition requires ongoing care that must be furnished by one or
more health professionals in an appropriate specialty area; for example, emergency or critical care nursing,
emergency medicine, respiratory care, cardiovascular care, or a paramedic with additional training.
Specialized mobile intensive care unit. A vehicle which is specially constructed, equipped, staffed, and
employed in the inter-facility transport of patients whose requirements for en route medical support are likely to
exceed the clinical capabilities of an advanced life support ambulance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/536
Sec. 6.02.004 Emergency physicians advisory board (EPAB)
(a) There is hereby created an emergency physicians advisory board (“EPAB”) which, acting through the
office of the medical director, shall, on behalf of this jurisdiction, oversee and regulate all clinical aspects of
medical transportation, the authority's MIH program, and prehospital emergency medical services in this
jurisdiction, including such services provided by the authority and first responders, and shall exercise
independent professional judgment in all matters related to patient care.
(b) EPAB's membership and other matters relating to EPAB shall be set forth in the restated interlocal
cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by EPAB.
Sec. 6.02.005 Metropolitan area EMS authority
(a) By adopting this article and executing and approving the restated interlocal cooperative agreement, this
jurisdiction has joined the authority, which shall now be known as the metropolitan area EMS authority.
(b) The authority shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) The authority is hereby designated as the sole provider of ambulance service and special event
ambulance standby service within this jurisdiction, whether directly or indirectly through contractors,
pursuant to the terms, conditions and provisions of the restated interlocal cooperative agreement,
except for those services exempted by section 6.02.007(b) of this article.
(2) The authority shall comply with all terms of the restated interlocal cooperative agreement and
have all the powers and duties enumerated therein.
(3) The authority is required to provide this jurisdiction with basic and advanced life support
ambulance service in accordance with system performance standards and all applicable law, rules and
regulations, as well as all patient care standards that EPAB may from time to time promulgate.
(4) The authority is authorized to operate an MIH program on a nonexclusive basis in this
jurisdiction.
(5) The authority shall enter into a first responder agreement with this jurisdiction and may issue,
suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the delivery of first responder services in this jurisdiction by
other agencies, subject to the credentialing process by EPAB and the office of the medical director
and subject to rights of appeal to the board.
(6) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the operation of specialized
mobile intensive care units and for specialty care transport within the service area, including
standards limiting the types of patients which may be transported thereby, and, subject to the
credentialing process by EPAB and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke,
and renew permits for the operation of such units as required by this article.
(7) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the operation of aeromedical
transportation units within the service area, including standards defining the circumstances under
which such units may be deployed to emergency scenes and, subject to the credentialing process by
EPAB and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the
operation of such units as required by this article.
(8) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the provision of special event
ambulance standby service within the service area and, subject to the credentialing process by EPAB
and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the
provision of such ambulance standby service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/536
(c) The authority board's membership and other matters relating to the authority shall be set forth in the
restated interlocal cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by the authority's board.
Sec. 6.02.006 First responder advisory board
(a) There is hereby created a first responder advisory board (“FRAB”) which shall advise and inform the
authority and EPAB on matters related to first response and prehospital emergency medical services in the
service area.
(b) The FRAB's membership and other matters relating to the board shall be set forth in the restated interlocal
cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by the FRAB.
Sec. 6.02.007 Violations
(a) It shall be unlawful:
(1) To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or aeromedical
transportation unit;
(2) To perform duties as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency ambulance dispatcher without
current credentials issued by the office of the medical director, unless participating in a training
program approved by the office of the medical director;
(3) To permit a person to work as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency ambulance dispatcher
without current credentials issued by the office of the medical director, unless participating in a
training program approved by the office of the medical director;
(4) To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance service other than the authority, except as permitted
in subsection (b) below;
(5) For any person or entity other than the authority to provide director within this jurisdiction,
unless pursuant to a written agreement with the authority;
(6) For any person to provide medical transportation originating in the service area without a
permit issued by the authority;
(7) For any agency to provide first responder services without a first responder permit issued by
the authority, unless pursuant to a first responder agreement with the authority or a written automatic
aid or mutual aid agreement with this jurisdiction;
(8) To use an ambulance for the transportation of persons other than in connection with the
transportation of a patient.
(b) It shall be a defense to any alleged violation of this section that a vehicle is being used or service is
provided solely in any of the following manners:
(1) As a privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting persons who
are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless;
(2) Rendering service as an ambulance at the request of the EMS communications center upon the
declaration of a disaster by this jurisdiction, the state, or the United States; or a declaration of a major
catastrophe or extreme system overload by the chief executive officer of the authority;
(3) Any ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state government;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/536
(4) Ambulance mutual aid calls when rendered pursuant to an ambulance mutual aid agreement
approved by the authority;
(5) Special event ambulance standby coverage, so long as such service is provided without charge
by an emergency medical services volunteer provider, as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code
section 773.003(13), or the authority has first declined to provide coverage and the entity providing
coverage has been issued a permit by the authority;
(6) Wheelchair transport services for persons other than patients, when the service is not provided
by ambulance; and
(7) Medical transportation of a patient where the transport originates outside the service area.
Sec. 6.02.008 Penalties
(a) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of section 6.02.007 shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 (Texas Penal Code section 12.23).
(b) This section does not serve to limit any other remedies available to the jurisdiction in law or equity.
(c) Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 6.02.009 Traffic laws; exemption
When the driver of an emergency medical response vehicle has reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency
exists, as determined by the EMS communication center, the vehicle shall be treated as an “authorized
emergency vehicle” within the meaning of chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code and shall be exempt
from traffic laws as provided therein.
(Ordinance 519-17 adopted 12/14/16)
State law reference–Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 546.
ARTICLE 6.03 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Sec. 6.03.001 Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted; definitions
(a) Adoption of state rules. The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as
amended by the executive commissioner of the health and human services commission found in 25 Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175, regarding the regulation of
food establishments in this jurisdiction.
(b) Definitions.
Authorized agent or employee. The employees of the regulatory authority.
Food establishment. A food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile
food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor.
Municipality. The City of Sansom Park, Texas.
Regulatory authority. The county public health department.
State rules. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and
sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/536
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.002 Permit required
A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are
not transferable from one person or entity to another or from one location to another location, except as
otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be visibly posted in or on every food establishment
regulated by this article. (Ordinance 447-11, sec. 2, adopted 10/20/11)
State law reference–Authority to require permit for food service establishment, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.004.
Sec. 6.03.003 Application for permit
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms
provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the
location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not
be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required, may result in denial
or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is
required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(b) Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall
inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food
establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit.
(c) Fees for permits issued under this article shall be as listed in the fee schedule in section 6.03.011.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 3, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.004 Review of plans
(a) Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing
structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such
construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is
begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20% or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled
or when equipment required by the rules is to be relocated or removed. The plans and specifications shall
indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work
areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be
approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The
approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion.
(b) Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or
revocation.
(c) Fees for the review of plans shall be as listed in the fee schedule in section 6.03.011.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 4, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.005 Inspections
(a) Before a permit is issued, the city or its authorized representative shall inspect and approve the food
establishment. An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at least once annually and shall be
prioritized based upon assessment of a food establishment's compliance and potential of causing food-borne
illness according to 25 TAC 229.171(h).
(b) The regulatory authority shall classify food establishments as special priority, high priority, medium
priority or low priority, according to the type of operations, particular foods that are prepared, number of people
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/536
served, susceptibility of the population served, history of violations and any other risk factor deemed relevant to
the operation.
(c) Refusal of an owner, manager or employee to allow the authorized representative of the regulatory
authority, upon presentation of credentials, to inspect any permitted business or operation therein during normal
business hours will result in an immediate suspension of the permit, requiring all permitted activities to abate
until after such time as a hearing may be held per section 6.03.007.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 5, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.006 Food manager and food handler certification
(a) Each food service establishment shall have at least one person employed in a managerial capacity
possessing a current food manager certificate approved by the regulatory authority.
(b) Each food service establishment with six or more employees that is required to have certified food
managers must have at least one certified manager on-site during all operations.
(c) Every employee of a food service establishment other than a certified food manager must maintain a valid
food handler certification registered with the regulatory authority.
(d) Food handler certification shall be valid for a period of up to three years as determined by the regulatory
authority
(e) Food manager and food handler certification documentation must be maintained in the food service
establishment and presented upon request by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 6, adopted 10/20/11)
State law references–Certification of food managers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 438.101 et seq.; authority to require
employment of certified food managers in certain establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.0076.
Sec. 6.03.007 Suspension of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health.
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is
suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit
shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten days of receipt of a request for a hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in
writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a
hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of
the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained.
The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 7, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.008 Revocation of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in
the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or
the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit
shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing
is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/536
(b) If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 8, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.009 Notices and hearings
(a) A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the
person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the permit as shown on their permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the
records of the regulatory authority.
(b) The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place
designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final
findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of
the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 9, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.010 Penalty; injunction
(a) Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise
operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any
responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than $2,000.00.
(b) The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules.
(Ordinance 447-11, sec. 10, adopted 10/20/11)
Sec. 6.03.011 Fee schedule
(a) Food store:
< 5000 sq. ft.: $200.00.
> 5000 sq. ft.: $300.00.
(b) Food service:
< 500 sq. ft.: $100.00.
> 500 < 1500 sq. ft.: $150.00.
> 1500 < 3000 sq. ft.: $200.00.
> 3000 < 6000 sq. ft.: $250.00.
> 6000 sq. ft.: $300.00.
(c) Child care food service: $150.00.
(d) Catering operation: $250.00.
(e) Food court: $200.00 per establishment.
(f) Adjunct operation:
(1) Food service: $150.00 per independent operation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/536
(2) Food store < 5000 sq. ft.: $150.00 per independent operation.
(3) Food store > 5000 sq. ft.: $200.00 per independent operation.
(g) Commissary:
(1) No food prep: $100.00.
(2) With food prep: $200.00.
(h) Mobile units:
(1) Prepackaged food only: $100.00.
(2) Open and/or food prep: $200.00.
(3) Pushcarts: $200.00.
(i) Plan review:
< 500 sq. ft.: $0.00.
> 500 < 3000 sq. ft.: $50.00.
> 3000 sq. ft.: $100.00.
(j) Late fee:
(1) From 1-30 days: 10% of fee owed.
(2) From 31-60 days: 20% of fee owed.
(3) The late fee increases 10% for each 30-day block until the permit fee and late fee are paid.
Permits that are more than 90 days overdue will be void and required to reapply.
(k) Reinspection fee:
(1) Required reinspection: $75.00.
(Ordinance 447-11 adopted 10/20/11)
ARTICLE 6.04 RUBBISH, WEEDS AND OTHER OBJECTIONABLE MATTER*
Sec. 6.04.001 Title
An article declaring tall grass, weeds, rubbish, brush, unsightly and unsanitary matter including objectionable
materials as a public nuisance.
Sec. 6.04.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings, respectively, as set forth:
City administrator. The city administrator of Sansom Park or his designee.
Developed. A tract of land upon which a structure is situated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/536
Garbage. Every accumulation of both animal and vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that is received from
kitchens, and also all decayable waste, it does not include compost heaps.
Junk. All worn-out or discarded material, including but not limited to old iron or other metal, glass and cordage,
machinery of any kind, tractors, refrigerators, stoves, any other household appliances, furniture, or old discarded
or abandoned boats, and broken, discarded or unused building materials such as lumber, brick, plaster, sand or
gravel. For purposes of this definition, a boat is considered old, abandoned or discarded if it is damaged to the
extent it is not seaworthy.
Litter. Discarded paper, wrapping material, used beverage or food containers, rubbish, trash or garbage.
Occupant. Any person, firm or corporation, both public and private, claiming or having possessory control of
any property.
Owner. A person, firm or corporation, both public and private, claiming title of any property.
Person. A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, companies, or
lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
Real property. Land, including an easement on, through or across the property and unpaved street and alley
right-of-way adjacent to the real property.
Refuse. An accumulation of worn-out, used, broken or rejected materials, and includes garbage, litter, rubbish,
yard waste and other decayable or nondecayable waste. It includes, but is not limited to, old barrels, old tires,
tree and brush trimmings and unused household items and appliances. It does not include compost heaps.
Rubbish. All loose and decayed material and dirt-like substances which is not intended for use, or which
accumulates from building, storing or cleaning, trash, debris, rubble, stone or fragments of building materials.
Undeveloped. A tract of land with no structure situated thereon.
Yard waste. Grass and brush trimmings, trees or tree limbs, hedge or shrub cuttings, leaves, weeds, vines or other
decayable waste which is generated by maintaining a yard.
Sec. 6.04.003 Height limitation
A person, who owns, occupies or has supervision or control of any lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof
commits an offense if the person permits grass, weeds, brush or any plant that is not cultivated thereon to grow,
on an average, to a height greater than twelve (12") inches.
Sec. 6.04.004 Declaration of nuisance
Weeds, brush, grass and plants not cultivated of a height in excess of the limits set forth in section 6.04.003 are
defined as a nuisance in accordance with section 6.04.002 of this article.
Sec. 6.04.005 Tracts greater than two acres
A person who owns, occupies or has control of any lot, tract or parcel of land greater than two acres that is
undeveloped or under cultivation shall not permit grass, weeds, brush or plants that are not cultivated to grow, on
an average, over twelve (12") inches in height, within an area one hundred (100') feet in width measured from
each property line of the tract.
Sec. 6.04.006 Parkway maintenance
(a) Grass and weeds. Responsibility of adjacent property owner: A person who owns any lot, tract or parcel of
land or portion thereof within the city shall not permit grass, weeds, brush or any plant that is not cultivated to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/536
grow to a height greater than twelve (12") inches, on an average, in, along, upon or across the sidewalk or street
adjacent to the same in the area between the property line and the curbline.
(b) Trimming of trees and shrubs. A person who owns any lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof within
the city shall be and is under a duty to trim and/or remove any trees, shrubs, bushes or other forms of vegetation
so as to provide a minimum vertical clearance of twelve (12') feet to any canopy limbs that may encroach upon,
into or over the public street or sidewalk.
Sec. 6.04.007 Notice of violation, abatement by city
(a) Notice required. If the owner of the land fails to comply with the requirements of section 6.04.003, section
6.04.005 or section 6.04.006 of this article, a city official may cause the property owner to be notified to cut the
grass, weeds or brush within ten (10) days of the date of the notice.
(b) Method of notice. The notice shall be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located;
(3) If the personal service cannot be obtained:
(A) By publication in the city's official newspaper once;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates.
(c) Unclaimed notices. If the notice is mailed to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b) above,
and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
(d) Contents of notice. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the record owners;
(2) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property upon which
the violation is located;
(3) A statement describing the violation and the work necessary to correct the violation;
(4) A statement advising the owner that, if the work is not completed within ten (10) days, the city
may complete the work and charge the expenses to the owner; and
(5) A statement that, if the city performs the work and the owner fails to pay the expenses, a
priority lien may be placed on the property.
(e) Subsequent violations. Although it is not required, the city may:
(1) Inform the owner by regular or certified mail and a posting on the property that, if the owner
commits another violation of the same kind (failure to mow weeds or high grass) on or before the
first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at
the owner's expense and assess the expenses against the property; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/536
(2) If a violation occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing
by the owner of an ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take corrective action and
assess the expenses against the owner and the property.
(f) Abatement by city. If the owner does not cut the weeds, grass or plants within ten (10) days of the notice,
the city may go on such property or authorize another to go on such property, and do or cause the work to be
done and charge the expenses incurred to the owner of the property and assess the expenses against the real
estate on which the work is done. The remedy provided in this section is in addition to any criminal penalties or
other remedies authorized by this article or other law.
Sec. 6.04.008 Assessment of city's expenses; lien
(a) The city does hereby assess the expenses incurred pursuant to section 6.04.007 against the real estate on
which the work is done or improvements made and charge the owner of the property for the same.
(b) The city shall send the owner of the property upon which the work was done a notice. This notice shall
include:
(1) An identification of the property;
(2) A description of the violation;
(3) A statement that the city abated the condition;
(4) A statement of the city's charges and expenses in abating the condition;
(5) An explanation of the property owner's right to request a hearing within ten (10) days; and
(6) A statement that, in the event the owner fails or refuses to pay the expense within thirty (30)
days after the first day of the month following the one in which the work was done, the city
administrator or his designee shall obtain a lien against the property by filing with the county clerk of
the appropriate county a statement of the expenses so incurred.
(c) The city administrator or his designated representative will conduct a hearing if the property owner
submits a written request within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. At the hearing:
(1) The owner and the city may testify or present witnesses or written information related to the
city's abatement of the nuisance.
(2) The city has the burden to show that a violation of this article existed, notice was given in
substantial compliance with this article, and expenses were incurred to abate the violation.
(3) At the close of the hearing, the city administrator or his representative may find, based upon a
preponderance of the evidence, that the expenses are valid, or that they are erroneous, or he may
adjust them.
(d) If no hearing is requested, or a hearing is held and the expenses are determined to be valid or are otherwise
appropriately adjusted, and the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses within thirty (30) days after written
notification to pay, the city administrator or his designated representative shall place a lien against the property
by filing with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located a notice of lien and statement of
expenses incurred.
(e) The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent annum
from the date of payment by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/536
(f) When the statement is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on that property, second only to tax liens
and liens for street improvements.
(g) For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had by the city.
The statement of expenses, or a certified copy thereof, is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city
in doing the work or making the improvements, all as more particularly specified in Texas Health and Safety
Code ann. section 342.007, as amended, which is adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
Sec. 6.04.009 Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without prior notice
(a) Abatement. The city may abate, without prior notice, weeds that have grown higher than forty-eight (48")
inches and are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person.
(b) Notice. Not later than the tenth (10th) day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city
shall give notice to the property owner in the same manner provide in section 6.04.007 of this article.
(c) Hearing. The city administrator or his designated representative shall conduct an administrative hearing
under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner
files with the city a written request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the city administrator or his
designated representative not later than the 20th day after the date a request for hearing is filed. At the hearing:
(1) The owner and the city may testify or present witnesses or written information related to the
city's abatement of the nuisance.
(2) The city has the burden to show that a violation of this article existed, notice was given in
substantial compliance with this section, and expenses incurred to abate the violation were
reasonable.
(3) The city administrator or his designated representative may approve the expenses, deny the
expenses, or adjust the amount of the expenses and approve them as adjusted.
Sec. 6.04.010 Penalty
Any person violating sections 6.04.003, 6.04.005, or 6.04.006 of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished upon conviction by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 493-15 adopted 4/16/15)
ARTICLE 6.05 SEPTIC TANKS, DRY TOILETS AND CHEMICAL TOILETS*
Sec. 6.05.001 Title
This article shall be known and may be cited as the sanitary code of the city. (Ordinance 42, sec. I, adopted
4/3/56)
Sec. 6.05.002 Penalty
Any violation of this article shall be punished by fine of not exceeding $2,000.00, and each day any violation of
this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 42, sec. VIII, adopted 4/3/56; Ordinance
246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 6.05.003 Specifications for septic tanks
Septic tanks may be installed in the city only when such septic tanks conform to the following specifications:
minimum width 3 feet, minimum length 5 feet, minimum depth 5 feet. Any round factory concrete tank,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/536
minimum 300 gallon capacity, accepted. All tanks shall be constructed of concrete, metal properly treated with
some noncorrosive substance, vitrified clay or other impervious noncorrosive material, and shall be watertight at
all times. Each tank shall be divided into two sections by a partition wall, which shall have an opening of at least
96 square inches, not less than one foot below the flow line. Affluent and effluent pipes shall be so constructed
that the sewage and effluent is introduced into and withdrawn from the tank below the surface to a distance of 6
inches. A suitable manhole shall be provided for cleaning. Distribution systems consisting of vitrified clay pipes
or field tile laid with open joints striped with not less than 3 inches or more than 4 inches in width of 15 lb. felt
paper or its equal in strength at least 2 feet in depth and filled to a depth of 4 inches below the pipe and 3 inches
above the pipe with nothing smaller than pea gravel shall be provided for every tank. The minimum length of
such tile distribution system shall be at least 100 feet for service to less than 5 people served and in case 5
people or more are served or a new house for sale to the public shall be 150 feet. In case any septic tank is to
used by a family of more than 5 persons or in any public or commercial building, the director of public health
and welfare may require the construction of a tank or distribution system of larger dimensions then that
prescribed above. (Ordinance 46 adopted 6/7/56)
Sec. 6.05.004 Dry toilets
Where a sanitary sewer is not available and in cases where a septic tank cannot be installed, due to the absence
of water under pressure, a dry toilet may be maintained. No dry toilet shall be maintained within the corporate
limits of the city except those which conform to the following requirements: A pit three feet wide, four feet long
and five feet deep, minimum inside dimensions, covered by a slab of concrete or suitable metal extending for at
least six inches beyond the edge of the pit in all directions. Curbing shall extend downward around the inside of
the pit to a distance of two feet. Curbing shall consist of wood not less than one inch in thickness or of metal of
suitable length, braced at the corners to the full depth of the pit by boards two inches by four inches crosssection,
in case wood curbing is used. A riser with a tightfitting self-closing seat and a vent pipe of at least three
inches cross-section shall be the only opening to the pit. The vent pipe shall be screened with no. 16 wire mesh
screen. Earth or other material shall be banked around the outside of the pit in such a way that drainage will be
away from the pit. (Ordinance 42, sec. III, adopted 4/3/56)
Sec. 6.05.005 Approval of sewage facilities required prior to issuance of building permit
No permit shall be issued for the erection of any buildings until an approval in writing shall have first been
secured from the director of the department of public health and welfare showing the manner of excreta disposal
to be employed. (Ordinance 42, sec. IV, adopted 4/3/56)
Sec. 6.05.006 Permit required; inspection
No septic tank or dry toilet shall be constructed until a permit shall have been issued by the director of the
department of public health and welfare for the building of such septic tank or dry toilet. The owner or builder of
such septic tank or dry toilet shall notify the director of the department of public health and welfare when such
pit toilet or septic tank is ready for inspection. No septic tank or toilet shall be covered or used until it has been
inspected and approved by the director of the department of public health and welfare. (Ordinance 42, sec. V,
adopted 4/3/56)
Sec. 6.05.007 Denial of permit
If, at the discretion of the director of the department of public health and welfare, the installation of any toilet or
septic tank would become detrimental to the public or injurious or offensive to the public, the permit for the
installation of such septic tank or dry toilet may be withheld. (Ordinance 42, sec. VI, adopted 4/3/56)
Sec. 6.05.008 Permit fee
A fee of $5.00 shall be paid by the applicant for a permit under this article to the director of the department of
public health and welfare at the time said permit is applied for. (Ordinance 42, sec. IX, adopted 4/3/56)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/536
Sec. 6.05.009 Cleaning
No person shall clean or allow to be cleaned any septic tank, dry toilet, chemical toilet or any other type of
excreta disposal which is approved for use in the city except by a person licensed by the city to perform such
service. (Ordinance 42, sec. VII, adopted 4/3/56)
Sec. 6.05.010 Nuisances
(a) A “nuisance” shall mean whatever is dangerous to human life or health, whatever renders the ground,
water or air a hazard and injurious to human life or health, or that which is offensive to the senses, or that which
threatens to become detrimental to the public health, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the following
specific acts, conditions and things are hereby declared to be a nuisance and prohibited and made unlawful.
(b) Any person or owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any building, house, yard, or lot of ground who shall
allow to accumulate or to remain in or on said yard or lot of ground any manure or filth or human excrement of
any kind which by its decay or putrification could or would become offensive to human beings or detrimental to
health, or create a nuisance by allowing said manure, filth or excrement to overflow from septic tanks located on
said yard or lot of ground, or any filthy water or excrement emanating therefrom to flow upon said yard or lot of
ground or upon any streets or alleys, public or private, in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor by
reason thereof.
(c) It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to watch for any violations as provided in this section
and to report at once said conditions complained of to said owner, agent, lessee or occupant of said property.
Any of said persons set out in this section, after not [sic] failing or refusing to comply with correcting said
existing nuisance immediately, shall each be subject to prosecution for violation of the provisions of this section.
(Ordinance 62 adopted 2/17/58)
(d) Any person found guilty under the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00). (Ordinance 62 adopted 2/17/58; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD*
Sec. 7.02.001 Established
The city council hereby establishes the city municipal court as a municipal court of record in order to provide a
more efficient disposition of cases arising in the city, and in order to more effectively enforce the ordinances of
the city. The municipal court shall become a court of record from and after the ______ day of ____________,
2004, and shall be designated the municipal court of record in the city. (Ordinance 404-04, sec. 1, adopted
10/21/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/536
State law reference–Creation of court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00003.
Sec. 7.02.002 Adoption of state law
This municipal court of record is established pursuant to the authority granted in chapter 30 of the Government
Code of the state, and the terms set forth therein are hereby adopted governing the operation of said court.
(Ordinance 404-04, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/04)
Sec. 7.02.003 Judge
The municipal court of record shall be presided over by a municipal judge appointed by the city council, who
shall serve for a two (2) year team concurrent with that of a mayor. The initial term shall be from the effective
date of this article through the end of the current term of the mayor. The municipal judge must be a licensed
attorney in good standing in the state and must have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in
Texas. The judge must be a citizen of the United States and of the state. The city council may appoint one or
more similarly qualified persons to serve as alternate or associate municipal judge when the municipal judge is
temporarily absent for any reason, or to serve under the direction of the municipal court judge. (Ordinance 404-
04, sec. 3, adopted 10/21/04)
State law reference–Judge, generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00006.
Sec. 7.02.004 Magistrates
The city council may appoint one or more magistrates, who need not possess all the qualifications necessary to
be a municipal court judge of the court of record. The magistrate may conduct an arraignment, hold an indigency
hearing, accept a plea, sign a judgment, set the amount of bond and perform other functions under article 15.17
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. A magistrate may not preside over the court or hear contested cases.
(Ordinance 404-04, sec. 4, adopted 10/21/04)
State law reference–Duties of magistrate, Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 15.17.
Sec. 7.02.005 Clerk
The city administrator shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court of record, who shall perform duties in
accordance with statutes and city ordinances. (Ordinance 404-04, sec. 5, adopted 10/21/04; Ordinance adopting
Code)
State law reference–Appointment of clerk and other personnel, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00009.
Sec. 7.02.006 Court reporter
The municipal clerk shall appoint a court reporter, who must meet the qualifications provided by law for official
court reporters. The court reporter may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or audio recording
equipment, or a combination of those methods of [to] record the proceedings of the court. The court reporter is
not required to record testimony in any case unless the judge or one of the parties requests a record in writing,
and files the request with the court before trial. If a record is made, it shall be kept for the twenty (20) day period
beginning the day after the last day of the court proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, whichever
occurs last. The court reporter is not required to be present during proceedings of the municipal court of record,
provided that proceedings that are required to be recorded by a good quality electronic recording device.
(Ordinance 404-04, sec. 6, adopted 10/21/04)
State law reference–Court reporter and recording devices, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00010.
ARTICLE 7.03 CITY MARSHAL
Sec. 7.03.001 Office created; appointment; qualifications
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/536
There is hereby created the office of city marshal, to be filled by a qualified person appointed by the city council.
The city marshal shall meet all qualifications necessary to be certified as a peace officer by the state commission
on law enforcement officer standards and education. The city marshal shall perform his/her duties under the
direction and control of the municipal court clerk. (Ordinance 378, sec. I, adopted 4/16/02)
Sec. 7.03.002 Duties
The city marshal, acting under the direction of the municipal court clerk, shall perform the following duties:
(1) Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal process issued by a judge of the
municipal court;
(2) Execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal process as authorized by law and
as determined by the municipal court clerk; and
(3) Serve as bailiff of the municipal court at all court hearings.
(Ordinance 378, sec. II, adopted 4/16/02)
Sec. 7.03.003 Police powers; eligibility for benefits
(a) The city marshal shall serve as a peace officer of the city and have full police authority in the exercise of
his/her assigned duties; however, he/she shall not be assigned to duties which are presently assigned to members
of the police department. In case of an emergency or special need, the city administrator may temporarily assign
the city marshal to assist any of the city's public safety forces in whatever manner he/she deems necessary.
(b) The city marshal shall not be a member of the police department of the city. The city marshal shall be
eligible for membership in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as the same manner as other city employees
and shall be a paid law enforcement officer for the purposes of qualifying for survivor's assistance benefits under
the provisions of chapter 615, Texas Gov't. Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 378, sec. III, adopted 4/16/02)
Sec. 7.03.004 Oath
The city marshal shall be required to take the oath of office before entering upon the discharge of his/her duties.
The oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city
secretary. The form of the oath shall be the same as required for other appointed city officers. (Ordinance 378,
sec. IV, adopted 4/16/02)
ARTICLE 7.04 FINES, COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES*
Sec. 7.04.001 Warrant fees
(a) If a warrant, writ of alias or capias pro fine is issued by the municipal court against any person, firm, or
corporation, the warrant officer of the city or the person executing such warrant shall collect from such person,
firm, or corporation the sum of $10.00 as warrant fees (capias fee or alias fee).
(b) Any warrant officer or other law enforcement officer of the state authorized to serve warrants, writs of
alias or capias pro fines will collect from the person, firm, or corporation the sum of 10 cents per mile for each
mile driven in serving, or attempting to serve, such warrant, writ of alias or capias pro fine.
(Ordinance 97 adopted 10/12/61)
Sec. 7.04.002 Building security fund
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/536
(a) Created. There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund. This fund shall be administered
under the direction of the governing body of the city.
(b) Fee assessed. All defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be
required to pay a three dollar ($3.00) security fee as a cost of court. A person is considered convicted for
purposes of this section if a sentence is imposed on the person, the person receives community supervision,
including deferred adjudication, or the court defers final disposition of the person's case. The security fee shall
be collected by the municipal court clerk and paid to the official who discharges the duties of municipal treasurer
for deposit in the municipal court building security fund.
(c) Authorized uses. The municipal court building fund may be used only to finance those items as specified
in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.017 when used for the purpose of providing security
services for any buildings housing the municipal court of the city.
(Ordinance 323 adopted 1/25/96; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.04.003 Technology fund
(a) Created. The city secretary, acting as the municipal treasurer for the city, shall create a fund which shall be
known as a municipal court technology fund.
(b) Authorized uses. The fund designated by this section may be used only to finance the purchase of
technological advancements including those items as specified in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, article
102.0172 for the municipal court or a municipal court of record, should such be established.
(c) Administration. The municipal court technology fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the
governing body of the municipality.
(d) Fee assessed. The municipal court technology fund may receive revenues from a technology fee of four
dollars ($4.00), taxed as a cost of court, from persons convicted of a misdemeanor offense in a municipal court,
and under this section a person shall be convicted if a sentence is imposed on the person, the person is placed on
community supervision (including deferred adjudication community supervision) or the court defers final
disposition of the person's case as part of a resolution of the charges.
(e) Collection of fee. All funds collected by this technology fee shall be collected by the municipal court clerk
and paid to the city secretary for the creation of the municipal court technology fund.
(Ordinance 353-A adopted 8/26/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Dumping garbage or rubbish on public property
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/536
(a) Prohibited acts. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, unload
or dump garbage, trash, rags, wood, trees, limbs, twigs, paper or rubbish of any kind and character on any
portion of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to bar ditches, sewage ditches, parks, playgrounds,
streets, alleys and all public property. (Ordinance 108 adopted 8/13/64)
(b) Penalty. Any portion of this section that shall be violated by any person, firm or corporation shall be
deemed a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation violating any portion of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a
violation exists constitutes a separate offense. (Ordinance 108 adopted 8/13/64; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
State law reference–Illegal dumping, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 365.012.
Sec. 8.01.002 Damaging or removing sign or notice posted by city
(a) Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, mutilate, destroy, remove or take down any
sign or bulletin board erected by the city, or to damage, mutilate, destroy, remove or take down any ordinance or
copy of an ordinance, or any notice or sign, put up or posted by the city, within its corporate limits; provided it
shall not be unlawful for any officer or person designated by the legislative body of the city to remove or take
down any such posted ordinance or notice after it has remained posted for the period required by law, or any sign
or notice upon direction of the mayor of the city. (Ordinance 72 adopted 8/11/58)
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of misdemeanor, and shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than $500.00. (Ordinance 72 adopted 8/11/58; Ordinance 246
adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 8.01.003 Storage of heavy machinery or commercial trailers on residential lots
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions will have meanings as follows:
Building line. The setback requirement established for the construction of permanent structures. Where
permanent structures exist at the time of passage of this section, the building line is established at the part of the
principal structure or house closest to the street as long as it is set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from
the curb or edge of the street.
Commercial type trailers. Movable equipment used to transport objects of various sizes from one place to
another set on axles and wheels whether open or flat or flat with sideboards. This type trailer must comply with
the state department of public safety for registration and licensing requirements.
Heavy machinery. Motor-driven equipment used for the purpose of construction work that is not legal for use on
public streets or is defined as slow-moving equipment. This does not include landscaping equipment used by and
for residential landscaping work as long as it is stored safely on the property.
(b) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons,
owner, agent, occupant, or anyone having supervision or control of any residential lot, tract, parcel of land, or a
portion thereof, occupied on unoccupied, within the city limits to suffer or permit to remain on said property,
within view of any public street or alley, heavy machinery, or parts thereof, including commercial truck trailers
that are wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, or are in a state of disrepair. Items shall be
considered to be in view even though covered with a tarp or other temporary means. Items shall not be
considered to be in view when they are located behind a screening fence which has no through visibility and
which completely blocks all view of the equipment, or parts thereof, from any public street or alley. Said fence
must be in compliance with the city's fence ordinance.
(c) Declaration of nuisance. The requirements, as set forth in this section, when violated, become a public
nuisance since [violations of] these requirements are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public
since it tends to reduce the value of private property, invite vandalism, and create fire hazards, and constitutes an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/536
attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic
welfare of city residents by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of
the city and so, therefore, is declared to be a public nuisance.
(d) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that such a violation is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 353 adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 8.01.004 Loitering; prohibited acts at business premises
(a) Loitering generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to be found loitering, concealed or sleeping at
night, or other inappropriate time, in or about any public building or private premises not such person's own,
under suspicious circumstances, and not being able to give a satisfactory account thereof.
(b) Definitions. As used in subsection (c) of this section, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
Grocery store. Convenience food stores, supermarkets, and businesses whose primary business is the sale of
foodstuffs and beverages for off-premises consumption.
Legally parked motor vehicle. Any motorized vehicle that is stopped or parked in a designated parking area on
business premises and the operator or the occupants are patronizing the business.
Owner or operator. The person who owns or manages a business premises; this does not include an employee
with no managerial capacity, but an employee's action may be sanctioned by an employer.
Premises. That area including structure, canopies, driveways, loading area, accessory building, and undeveloped
land in the same lot and block of an individual business parking lot and, in the case of communal parking, in a
shopping center all parking area that is immediately available to any person using or patronizing a business (the
parking area of a communal parking lot, public or private, shall be determined by the use afforded to the public
by the owners in the normal course of their business operations, as in the case of two (2) separately owned
public parking lots where the owners normally share and encourage their patrons to share each other's parking
facilities, and those areas which would be commonly defined and understood as shopping center parking lots).
(c) Prohibited acts at business premises.
(1) The following acts or conduct of any person entering or upon any restaurant, drive-in
restaurant, pool hall, amusement center, bowling alley, movie theater, grocery store, or any other
business providing goods or services to the public are hereby declared to be unlawful:
(A) To enter the premises of any restaurant, drive-in restaurant, pool hall, amusement center,
bowling alley, movie theater, grocery store, or any other business providing goods or services to
the public in a motor vehicle of any description and park such motor vehicle and leave the
motor vehicle on said premises without getting the consent of the owner or operator of such
premises.
(i) Any motor vehicle parked upon restaurant or drive-in restaurant premises which is
unattended and unoccupied for a period of two (2) hours or more shall be presumed to
have been parked without permission of the owner or operator of the restaurant or drive-in
restaurant.
(ii) Any motor vehicle parked upon a pool hall, amusement center, bowling alley, movie
theater, grocery store or any other business providing goods and/or services to the public
which is unattended and unoccupied after the business has closed to the public shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/536
presumed to have been parked without permission of the owner or operator of such
business.
(iii) In the event that the premises, as defined herein, are used by businesses listed in
both subsections (i) and (ii) above, then subsection (ii) would be controlling.
(iv) Leaving a motor vehicle unattended and unoccupied for the time period in
subsection (i) above and after business hours in subsection (ii) above is prima facie
evidence that the motor vehicle was parked without the owner's or operator's consent or
permission.
(B) To enter such premises in a motor vehicle of any kind and use such premises for cruising,
racing, as a short-cut to another street, accelerating or racing the motor of a vehicle from a
sudden start to stop as to cause a loud notice [noise] in a manner calculated to disturb the
persons present, bringing a motor vehicle to a sudden stop or start, or blowing the horn when no
necessity for the protection of the driver or personal property exists and in a manner calculated
to disturb the persons present, to annoy or endanger any person or other vehicle lawfully on
such premises.
(C) For three (3) or more persons to congregate on the premises and linger or loiter at any
location on the premises of any restaurant, drive-in restaurant, pool hall, amusement center,
bowling alley, movie theater, grocery store or any other business providing goods or services to
the public other than in the facility or in a legally parked motor vehicle.
(D) To enter upon the premises of any restaurant, drive-in restaurant, pool hall, amusement
center, bowling alley, movie theater, grocery store or any other business providing goods and/or
services to the public and consume any alcoholic beverage on said premises or possess
alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption on said premises. An alcoholic beverage means
alcohol and any beverage containing more than one-half (1/2) of one percent of alcohol by
volume which is capable of use for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted.
(i) Possession of any alcoholic beverage in an open container is prima facie evidence of
the intent to consume it immediately.
(ii) It shall be the duty of the premises owner or operator to post on the premises in a
conspicuous location one or more signs bearing the following legend: “No alcoholic
beverages on premises. City of Sansom Park Ordinance.”
(iii) Provided that this section does not apply to licensed alcoholic beverage dealers
under the T.A.B.C.
(2) It shall be the duty of the premises owner or operator to post on the premises in a conspicuous
location one or more signs bearing the following legend: “Cruising or congregating or loitering is
unlawful. No unoccupied vehicles may be left on these premises without the consent of the owner or
operator or Police Department of the City of Sansom Park.”
(d) Penalty. Any adult violating any provision of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00.
(Ordinance 258, secs. III–VI, adopted 4/13/89)
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.02.001–8.02.030 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/536
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 8.02.031 Definitions
As pertaining to this division the following definitions will have their specific meaning as follows:
Curfew hours. The hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00
a.m. of the following day; and the hours of 12.01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
This term includes, but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the legal guardian of the person or minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.
Minor. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
Officer. A police officer of the city.
Operator. An individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any
establishment. This term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least eighteen (18) years of age and who is authorized by a parent or guardian to have the
care and custody of a minor.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways and the common area of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave a premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator or other
person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes deadly, serious
permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sec. 8.02.032 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the corporate city limits during curfew hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/536
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he/she knowingly permits or, by insufficient control,
allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the corporate city
limits during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he/she knowingly permits
or allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 8.02.033 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.02.032 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning from home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor or going to or returning home, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
Sec. 8.02.034 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this division, an officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in section 8.02.033 is present.
Sec. 8.02.035 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a
day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 372 adopted 5/17/01)
ARTICLE 8.03 WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.03.001 Discharging air or pellet gun
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/536
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot off, fire or discharge any air or pellet gun within
the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 41 adopted 4/2/56)
(b) Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon violation
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ordinance 41 adopted 4/2/56; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 8.03.002 Discharging firearm
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any rifle, pistol, shotgun or any other firearm
within the city limits. (Ordinance 86 adopted 12/10/60)
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any portion of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not in excess of $500.00. (Ordinance 86 adopted 12/10/60; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 8.03.003 Carrying firearm
(a) Definition. The term “firearm” as used in this section shall be held to mean any revolver, semi-automatic
pistol or other handgun designed, made, or adapted to be fired with one hand.
(b) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his or her person any firearm as
defined in subsection (a) of this section except those persons legally licensed to carry a concealed handgun in
accordance with state law.
(c) Seizure of firearm. Any firearm that is being carried by any person in violation of the provisions of this
section may be seized by the police department.
(d) Disposition of seized firearms. Upon conviction of any person for violating the provisions of this section,
the judge of the municipal court may order that the seized firearm be destroyed, or forfeited to the state for use
by the city police department.
(e) Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Ordinance 244 adopted 11/12/87; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 8.04 NOISE*
Sec. 8.04.001 Penalty
(a) Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500.00; provided, however, if the maximum penalty herein provided for such offense is greater than
the maximum penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state, then the maximum
penalty for violation as provided by state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this article. (Ordinance 34,
sec. 3, adopted 7/13/55; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
(b) Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 34, sec.
4, adopted 7/13/55)
Sec. 8.04.002 General prohibition
(a) Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury
to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
hereby prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/536
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration which substantially interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of a private home by persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and is hereby prohibited.
(Ordinance 34, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/13/55)
Sec. 8.04.003 Specific noises prohibited
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article, but such enumeration
shall not be deemed exclusive:
(1) Radios, phonographs and other musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or
other musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between
7 p.m. and 7 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet comfort and repose of persons of ordinary
sensibilities in any dwelling, hotel, church, or other type of residence.
(2) Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier of such
intensity that annoys and disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof;
the use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier operated on any weekday between the hours of 7
p.m. and 7 a.m. or at any time on Sunday.
(3) Horns or other signal devices on vehicles. The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or
signal device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except as a danger or warning
signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh noise for
any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(4) Exhaust without muffler. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine, except through a muffler or
other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(5) Using of noise to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for attracting attention, by the creation of noise, to any performance, show or sale of
merchandise.
(Ordinance 34, sec. 3, adopted 7/13/55)
ARTICLE 8.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL PROPERTY
Sec. 8.05.001 Penalty
Any person or corporation violating this article shall be fined not more than $2,000.00. Each violation of the
provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 259, sec. III, adopted 4/27/89)
Sec. 8.05.002 Applicability
All uses on commercial property shall conform in operation, location and construction to the performance
standards herein specified for noise, odorous matter, smoke and particulate matter. (Ordinance 259, sec. I,
adopted 4/27/89)
Sec. 8.05.003 Noise
At no point at the bounding property line of any commercial use property shall the sound pressure level of any
operation or plant exceed the decibel limits specified in the octave band groups designated in the following
table.
(1) Maximum permissible daytime* octave band-decibel limits at the bounding property line**:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/536
Octave band (CPS)
scale
37
to
75
75
to 150
150 to
300
300 to
600
600 to
1200
1200
to
2400
2400
to
4800
4800
to
9600
“A”
Decibel band limit (dB
re 0.0002 microbar)
78 72 64 56 52 50 48 46 60
Note: “A” scale levels are provided for monitoring purposes only and are not applicable to
detailed sound analysis.
*Daytime shall refer to the hours between sunrise and sunset on any given day.
**Bounding property line for noise enforcement shall be interpreted as being at the far
side of any street, alley, stream or other permanently dedicated open space from the noise
source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and
adjacent property. When no such open space exists, the common line between two parcels
of property shall be interpreted as the bounding property line.
(2) The following corrections shall be made to the table of octave band decibel limits in
determining compliance with the noise level standards:
(A) When noise is present at nighttime, subtract 7 decibels.
(B) When noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive, that is, when the
meter changes at 10 decibels or more per second, subtract 7 decibels.
(C) When noise is present for not more than 1/2 minute in any 1/2-hour period, 1 minute in
any 1-hour period, 10 minutes in any 2-hour period, or 20 minutes in any 3-hour period, add 10
decibels.
(3) Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter or octave band analyzer meeting
the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute.
(Ordinance 259, sec. II(A), adopted 4/27/89)
Sec. 8.05.004 Smoke and particulate matter
(a) No operation or use on commercial property shall cause, create or allow the emission of air contaminants
which are in violation of the air quality standards, rules, and regulations of the state commission on
environmental quality as provided for in the Texas Clean Air Act V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter
382, as now existing or as later modified or amended, applicable to air quality control for the city area.
(b) Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements, which are a
source of wind- or air-borne dust or other particulate matter shall be subject to the standards and regulations
specified in subsection (a) of this section.
(Ordinance 259, sec. II(B), adopted 4/27/89)
Sec. 8.05.005 Odorous matter
(a) No use shall be located or operated on commercial property which involves the emission of odorous matter
from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/536
any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located.
(b) The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by a person or persons. In any
case where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor-emitting use may disagree with the
enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures as
specified by American Society for Testing and Materials, ASTMD 1391-57, entitled “Standard Method for
Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres,” shall be used, and a copy of ASTMD 1391-57 is hereby incorporated by
reference.
(Ordinance 259, sec. II(C), adopted 4/27/89)
ARTICLE 8.06 GRAFFITI
Sec. 8.06.001 Declaration of nuisance
(a) The city council hereby finds that graffiti that is visible from a public place, public right-of-way, or the
property of others:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of public property;
(3) Invites vandalism, additional graffiti, and other criminal activities; and
(4) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city.
(b) The presence of graffiti on property where it is visible from a public place, public right-of-way or from
another person's property is therefore declared to be a nuisance.
(Ordinance 412-06, sec. 1, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 8.06.002 Failure to remove
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of property and knowingly fails to remove or
knowingly fails to cause the removal of graffiti from the property, when the graffiti is visible from:
(1) A public place;
(2) The public right-of-way; or
(3) Another person's property.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that, after receiving notice pursuant to section
8.06.003, and prior to receiving the citation, the person requested the city's assistance in abating the graffiti, and
the city made no offer of free paint and/or labor for the purpose of removing or covering the graffiti.
(Ordinance 412-06, sec. 2, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 8.06.003 Notice of violation; abatement by city
(a) The city must notify the property owner of a violation of this article, and must give the owner the
opportunity to remove the graffiti before:
(1) Issuing a citation for a violation of section 8.06.002; or
(2) Entering the property and doing the work necessary to abate the nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/536
(b) Notice must be given:
(1) In writing and delivered to the owner in person;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address, and sent certified mail,
return receipt requested; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown:
(A) By publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(c) Notice will be deemed to have been received:
(1) For personal service, as of the date the notice was given personally to the owner;
(2) For mailed notice, three (3) days after it was mailed;
(3) For notice by publication, on the date that the last notice was published in the official
newspaper; or
(4) For notice of [by] posting, ten (10) days after notice was posted.
(d) A citation for a violation of section 8.06.002 may be issued on or after fourteen (14) calendar days from
the date notice is deemed received.
(e) If the owner does not comply with this article by the fourteenth calendar day after notice is deemed
received, the city may enter the property and do all work necessary to abate the graffiti.
(f) If the city does the abatement work pursuant to subsection (e), it shall initially pay for the work done, and
shall charge the expenses to the owner of the property.
(g) A property owner shall be granted a seven-day extension to complete the graffiti abatement if the owner
notifies the city in writing that more time is required. The request for an extension must be received by the city
prior to the expiration of the fourteen (14) day period.
(Ordinance 412-06, sec. 3, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 8.06.004 Assessment of city's expenses; lien
(a) The city may assess expenses incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti pursuant to section 8.06.003
against the real property on which the work was done.
(b) To obtain a lien against the property, the city must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk of the
county in which the property is located.
(c) The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent per
annum on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
(d) The lien is inferior only to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/536
(1) Tax liens; and
(2) Liens for street improvements.
(e) A lien may not be filed against a real property estate protected by the homestead provision of the state
constitution.
(Ordinance 412-06, sec. 4, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 8.06.005 Penalty
An offense as defined under this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ordinance 412-06, sec. 5, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 8.06.006 Criminal remedies
Unless otherwise provided, an offense under this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two
thousand dollars ($2000.00). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. If an offense defined under this article does not include a culpable mental state,
then one is not needed and the offense shall be one of strict liability.
(1) If it is shown on trial of an alleged offense under this article that within three (3) years prior to
the alleged offense date the defendant has been once previously convicted of an offense under this
article:
(A) Except as provided by subsection (B) below, upon conviction, the defendant shall be
fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(B) If it is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the defendant was not a residential
occupant of the property involved at the time of the alleged offense, upon conviction, the
defendant shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1000.00).
(2) If it is shown on trial of an alleged offense under this article that within three (3) years prior to
the alleged offense date the defendant has been previously convicted of two (2) or more offenses
under this article:
(A) Except as provided by subsection (B) below, upon conviction, the defendant shall be
fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(B) If it is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the defendant was not a residential
occupant of the property involved at the time of the alleged offense, upon conviction, the
defendant shall be fined not less than two thousand dollars ($2000.00).
(Ordinance 412-06, sec. 6, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 8.06.007 Civil remedies
(a) The city may invoke sections 54.012–54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code and petition the state
district court or the applicable county court at law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief, civil
penalties, or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it appears that a person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article that relates to:
(1) The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used in construction of
any structure or improvement of real property;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/536
(2) The preservation of public health or the fire safety of a building or other structure or
improvement;
(3) Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements; or
(4) Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding
and living places for insects and rodents.
(b) Pursuant to section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may obtain against the owner or
the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(1) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified in subsection (a) above; or
(2) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any
provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a) above.
(c) (1) Pursuant to section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may recover a
civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00) per day for each violation of any
provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a), if the city proves that:
(A) The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this article; and
(B) After the defendant received notice of the provisions of this article, the defendant
committed acts in violation of this article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with
this article.
(2) The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city,
and any costs of response, remediation, abatement, and restoration incurred by the city as allowed
under state or federal laws, or at common law.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, and any other factors as
justice requires.
(Ordinance 412-06, sec. 7, adopted 7/27/06)
ARTICLE 8.07 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases have the following meaning:
Antique auto. A passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before or a passenger car or truck that
is at least thirty-five (35) years old.
Collector. The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades
or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve
and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
(Ordinance 380, sec. 1, adopted 5/16/02)
Junked motor vehicle. A vehicle that is self propelled and:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/536
(1) Displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not
display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, chapter 501).
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
(Ordinance 380, sec. 1, adopted 5/16/02)
Sec. 8.07.002 Declaration of nuisance
A junked vehicle, not in a properly zoned location and kept under all applicable regulations, is detrimental to the
safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates
fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors and is
detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and
continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. Any person, firm or corporation maintaining a
public nuisance as defined above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to a fine. Each
and every day the maintenance of such public nuisance shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense. Upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, the court shall have the authority to order removal
and abatement of such nuisance. (Ordinance 380, sec. 2, adopted 5/16/02)
Sec. 8.07.003 Abatement procedures
(a) Upon complaint, or upon its own initiative, the code enforcement officer may initiate appropriate official
action to remove and abate a public nuisance in the nature of a junked vehicle. Upon initiation of the action, the
owner or occupant of the private premises, or premises adjacent to the public right-of-way, whereupon the public
nuisance exists, together with the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle and any lienholder of
record, shall be notified by the code enforcement officer of the city, by certified mail with a five-day return
requested, that the nuisance exists, and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days of the receipt of
such notice or that a request for hearing must be made before expiration of the ten (10) day period. If any notice
is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be
continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return.
(b) Upon timely request by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or the owner or occupant
adjacent to the public right-of-way, a public hearing shall be held before the municipal court of the city for
determination of the existence of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance and for the purpose of entering an order
requiring the removal of the same if found to be so. The judge of the municipal court shall be the designated
official to make such determination and, upon the finding that the vehicle is a junked vehicle and constitutes a
public nuisance, shall have the authority to enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or a part thereof.
Said order must include a description of the vehicle, and the correct identification number and license number of
the vehicle, if the information is available at the site.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/536
(c) When the junked vehicle is declared a public nuisance by the municipal court judge and is ordered to be
removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
(d) Notice shall be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth (5th) day after the
date of removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part which was removed.
(e) The provisions of this article do not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, or a vehicle
or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of
a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard. Nor does it apply to an unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or
special interest vehicle so stored by a collector on the collector's property. In any other case a vehicle may be
stored in a manner protecting the public health and screening [screened] from public view in a manner
satisfactory to the city administrator or such official's designee. Any such storage shall only be by written permit
issued by the appropriate official and shall not be valid more than ninety (90) days.
(f) The provisions of this article shall be carried out and enforced by regularly salaried, full-time employees of
the city, except that the removal of a vehicle or vehicle parts thereof from property may be done by any other
duly authorized person, including persons with whom the city may, at the time of passage of this article, or
hereafter, have a valid contract for the removal of such vehicles.
(Ordinance 380, sec. 3, adopted 5/16/02)
Sec. 8.07.004 Authority to enforce
A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures of this article may enter private property for the
purpose specified herein to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle
or vehicle part, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance as
defined herein. The judge of the municipal court of the city may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures
of this article. (Ordinance 380, sec. 4, adopted 5/16/02)
Sec. 8.07.005 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, or vender in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land. (Ordinance 380, sec. 5,
adopted 5/16/02)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01.001 Personnel policies adopted
The personnel policies of the city adopted by Ordinance 349, as amended, are not included in this code but are
specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of this code. The personnel policies are on file in the city
secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/536
Sec. 9.01.002 Employee safety handbook adopted
The employee safety handbook and the safety rules and regulations adopted by Ordinance 248, as amended, are
not included in this code but are specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of this code. The employee safety
handbook and regulations are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.01.003 Texas Municipal Retirement System
The specific ordinances providing for participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted by the
city, are not included in this chapter, but they are hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained
on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Texas Municipal Retirement System generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 851 et seq.
ARTICLE 9.02 POLICE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.02.001 Authority of mayor to summon special police force
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary, in order to enforce the laws of the city or to avert danger to or
protect life or property, in case of riot, or any outbreak or calamity or great public disturbance, or when he has
reason to fear any serious violation of law or order, or any damage to the city, or the inhabitants thereof, he shall
have the power to summon into service as a special police force all or as many of the citizens as, in his judgment
or discretion, may be necessary and proper, and such summons may be made verbally or by proclamation. Such
special police force shall be subject to the orders of the mayor, and shall have the same power and authority
while on duty as policemen as regular policemen, and shall receive, as compensation, not to exceed three dollars
for each day in actual service. (Ordinance 29, sec. XVI, adopted 10/5/54)
State law reference–Special police force in type A general-law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 341.011.
Secs. 9.02.002–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department
Sec. 9.02.031 Established
There is hereby created and established a police department of the city. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. I, adopted
6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.032 Composition
The police department shall be composed of a chief of police and such number of detectives and policemen as
the city council may from time to time deem necessary and proper. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. II, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.033 Appointment and suspension of chief of police and other members
The chief of police shall be appointed by the city council. Other members of the police department shall be
appointed by the chief of police, with the approval of the city council, and they shall hold their respective offices
at the will of the chief of police and approval of the council. The chief of police shall have the authority to
suspend any member of the police force for insubordination, infraction of rules of the department, etc., for a
period of three days. The accused member shall have the right to appeal his case, in writing, to the city council.
In the event no appeal is made, the suspension will be permanent. If the accused member is found guilty of the
charges by the council, his suspension will be permanent, or if he is found not guilty of charges, he shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/536
reinstated to his original position, rank and status as he formerly was, and be paid for the time he was off duty
due to the suspension. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. III, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.034 Compensation of members; bond; oath
The compensation of the members of the police department shall be by salaries payable monthly in the sum to be
fixed by the council, subject to change from time to time at the discretion of the council, and, before entering
upon the duties of their respective offices, the members of such department shall give bond, if same be required
by the council, in the sum as may be prescribed by the council, conditioned as the council may deem best for
efficiency of the public service, and said member of the police department shall take and subscribe to the oath of
office prescribed by the constitution of the state for county officials. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. IV, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.035 Jurisdiction over department
The chief of police and the police department shall be under the jurisdiction of the mayor on all emergency or
routine matters between council meetings and under the jurisdiction of the city council on matters of policy, said
policy items to be determined by the city council by a majority vote of the council. (Ordinance 101 adopted
4/26/62)
Sec. 9.02.036 Duties of chief regarding municipal court
The chief of police shall attend upon every session of the municipal court and shall promptly and faithfully
execute all writs and processes issued for said court. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. VI, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.037 Supervision of department; execution of search warrants
The chief of police shall be the chief police officer of the city, shall have supervision, subordinate to that of the
council, over other members of the police force of the department, and shall have the power, with the sheriff of
the county, to execute the writ of search warrant. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. VII, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.038 Duty to maintain public peace
The chief of police and all policemen and members of the police department shall be active in quelling riots,
disorders and disturbances of the peace within the limits of the city, and shall take into custody all persons so
offending against the public peace. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. VIII, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.039 Authority of chief to take bail
The chief of police shall have the authority to take suitable and sufficient bail for the appearance before the
municipal court of any person charged with an offense within the jurisdiction of said court. (Ordinance 81-A,
sec. IX, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.040 Authority of chief to close public places; general law enforcement powers
The chief of police, in order to prevent a breach of the peace, or to preserve quiet and good order, shall have
authority to close any theater, bar room, ballroom, drinking house, or any other place or building of public
resort, and in the prevention and suppression of crime and arrest of offenders within the city, he shall have like
power, authority and jurisdiction with the sheriff of the county under the laws of the state. (Ordinance 81-A, sec.
X, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.041 Arrest of disorderly persons and persons interfering with performance of duties
The chief of police, policemen, and other members of the police department shall arrest all persons who shall
obstruct or interfere with them in the execution of the duties of their offices, or who shall be guilty of any
disorderly conduct whatever. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. XI, adopted 6/24/60)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/536
Sec. 9.02.042 Power to execute writs and processes
Policemen of the city shall have like power with the chief of police to execute all writs and processes issued out
of the municipal court. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. XII, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.043 Arrest without warrant
(a) (1) The chief of police, policemen, and other members of the police department may, without
warrant, arrest any offender or alleged offender in any of the following cases:
(A) When any felony or disturbance, affray or breach of the peace, or violation of any city
ordinance, is committed within the view or presence of the members of the police department
making the arrest.
(B) When a felony or breach of the peace has been committed within the presence or view of
a magistrate and such magistrate shall verbally order the arrest of the offender.
(C) When it is represented to some member of the police department by some credible person
that a felony or disturbance, affray or breach of peace, or violation of some city ordinance, has
been committed, and that the offender will probably escape if the arrest is delayed to procure a
warrant.
(D) When persons are found in suspicious places, or under circumstances which reasonably
show that such persons have been guilty of some felony, or threaten or are about to commit
some offense against the laws of the state or ordinances of the city.
(2) For greater certainty, it is specifically provided that such officers or members of the police
department may so arrest without warrant any and all persons found or apprehended under the
following circumstances:
(A) Where a person is found lurking or hiding in alleys or on premises not their own, and
such person is unable to satisfactorily explain his actions;
(B) Where a person is fleeing under circumstances which indicate that he is attempting to
escape from the scene of some crime on his part;
(C) Where a person is caught or found in the nighttime in a house or residence, or outhouse,
barn or garage appurtenant thereto, and is unable to show or state any right or authority for
being in such place; or is found or caught in any business or public place in the nighttime and is
unable to show or state any right or authority for being in such place;
(D) Where a person is caught or found emerging from any house or building at an unusual
hour, or by unusual or suspicious means of exit;
(E) Where any person is discovered with tools, appliances or materials on his person or in his
charge which are of such nature as to indicate that they are intended or designed for use in the
perpetration of some crime.
The foregoing enumeration is not intended and shall not be construed to exclude the right
and authority of such officers to make arrests without warrants in all such [cases] coming
within the general provision of this subsection, and in all such cases such persons may be
arrested without warrant and held to be dealt with according to law.
(b) In all cases of arrest without warrant, the officer making the arrest shall immediately take the person
arrested before the magistrate who ordered the arrest, or, if the arrest was made without an order, then before the
nearest or most accessible magistrate having jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/536
(Ordinance 81-A, secs. XIII, XIV, adopted 6/24/60)
State law reference–Authority to make arrest without warrant, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. sec. 14.01 et seq.
Sec. 9.02.044 Arrest of accused persons within county
The chief of police and other members of the police department may execute writs issued out of the municipal
court, and arrest accused persons anywhere within the county. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. XV, adopted 6/24/60)
Sec. 9.02.045 Acting chief of police
In case of absence, sickness or inability to act on the part of the chief of police, the council shall designate some
other member of the police department, or other suitable person, as acting chief of police during the period of
such absence, and such persons shall exercise all rights, powers and duties of the chief of police during such
period of his absence. (Ordinance 81-A, sec. XVI, adopted 6/24/60)
Secs. 9.02.046–9.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Reserve Police Force*
Sec. 9.02.071 Established; supervision
A reserve police force is hereby established. The reserve police force shall be under the supervision of the chief
of police, subject to the ordinances of the city, the laws of the state, and the laws of the United States.
(Ordinance 187, sec. 1, adopted 6/26/80)
Sec. 9.02.072 Qualifications of reserve policemen; approval of appointments
All reserve policemen shall be of good moral character and subject to a background investigation before their
appointment to the force. Each appointment shall be approved by the city council. (Ordinance 187, sec. 2,
adopted 6/26/80)
Sec. 9.02.073 Oath of reserve policemen; commission
All reserve policemen shall take the oath as prescribed by law and after such oath shall be issued a commission.
(Ordinance 187, sec. 3, adopted 6/26/80)
Sec. 9.02.074 Uniform and badge
All reserve policemen shall wear the uniform as prescribed by the department and shall wear a badge that will
have the word “Reserve” or the letter “R” to designate their position. (Ordinance 187, sec. 4, adopted 6/26/80)
Sec. 9.02.075 Carrying firearms
While said officers are on duty and under the direct supervision of a regular police officer of the city, they shall
have the right to carry and use firearms to the same extent as a regular police officer, but no authority is given
under this division to permit reserve officers to carry firearms when they are off duty. (Ordinance 187, sec. 5,
adopted 6/26/80)
Sec. 9.02.076 Compensation and benefits
Each reserve policeman shall be required to carry his own injury, disability or hospitalization insurance. No
salary will be paid. (Ordinance 187, sec. 6, adopted 6/26/80)
Sec. 9.02.077 Training
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/536
All reserve police officers must fulfill the minimum training established by the state commission on law
enforcement officer standards and education or such other training required by the chief of police. (Ordinance
187, sec. 7, adopted 6/26/80)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE*
Sec. 10.02.001 Adopted
The subdivision ordinance, Ordinance 490-15, adopted by the city on February 19, 2015, as amended, is
included at the end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the subdivision ordinance and the
technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only
nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and
subsections have been retained as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and
denoted by a history note following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material
is unchanged from the original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other
material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Editorially supplied)
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL
Section 1.01 Authority
This ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including
Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Section 1.02 Purpose and Policy
a. Generally. These subdivision regulations are designed and intended to achieve the following purposes and
shall be administered so as to achieve the following purposes:
1. To promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community and the safe, orderly
and healthful development of the City;
2. To establish adequate policies and procedures to guide development of the City and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/536
3. To provide for the establishment of minimum specifications for construction and engineering
design criteria for public works improvements to maintain land values, reduce inconveniences to
residents of the area, and to reduce related unnecessary costs to the City for correction of inadequate
facilities that are designed to serve the public;
4. To ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of such nature, shape and location
that utilization will not impair the general welfare;
5. To ensure against the dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides, or other such menaces;
6. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features;
7. To realistically and harmoniously relate new development of adjacent properties;
8. To provide the most beneficial circulation of traffic throughout the City, having particular regard
to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and pedestrian traffic movements; and to
provide for the proper location and width of streets;
9. To ensure that public facilities for water supply, drainage, disposal of sanitary and industrial
waste, and parks are available for every building site and with adequate capacity to serve the
proposed development before issuance of a certificate of occupancy or release of utility connections
or final inspection within the boundaries of the plat;
10. To assure that new development adequately and fairly participates in the dedication and
construction of public works improvements that are necessitated by or attributable to the
development or that provide value or benefit that makes the development feasible;
11. To help prevent pollution, assure the adequacy of drainage facilities, control stormwater runoff,
safeguard the water table, and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources
throughout the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and
beauty of the community and the value of the land; and
12. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land, while
preserving the land use intensity as established in the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
b. Policy. To carry out the purposes hereinabove stated, it is the policy of the City to guide and regulate the
subdivision and development of land in such a manner as to promote orderly growth within the City.
c. Disapproval. Proposed plats or subdivisions which do not conform to the policies and regulations shall be
denied, or, in lieu of denial, disapproved conditioned on conformance with conditions.
d. Nexus. There shall be an essential nexus between the requirement to dedicate rights-of-way and easements
and/or to construct public works improvements in connection with a new subdivision and the need to offset the
impacts on the City's public facilities systems created by such new development.
e. Compliance with Federal Regulations. The applicant is responsible for compliance with applicable federal
regulations which may apply to a development, including any required permits or approvals from the United
States Army Corps of Engineers, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality.
Section 1.03 Adequate Public Facilities
a. Generally. Land proposed to be subdivided must be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, including water and sanitary sewer facilities, roadway and pedestrian facilities, drainage facilities and
park facilities. An application for a plat or development may be denied unless adequate public facilities
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/536
necessary to support and serve the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the
facilities are to be located within the property being platted or off-site.
b. Dedication. It is necessary and desirable to provide for dedication of rights-of-way and easements for
public works improvements to support new development at the earliest stage of the development process.
c. Mitigation. The City desires to assure that impacts of new development are mitigated through contributions
of rights-of-way, easements and construction of capital improvements, and that a new development be required
to contribute not more than its proportionate share of such costs.
d. Conformance. Proposed public works improvements serving new development shall conform to and be
properly related to the public facilities elements of the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan, other adopted master
plans for public facilities and services, and applicable capital improvements plans, and shall meet the service
levels specified in such plans.
Section 1.04 Minimum Standards
a. Generally. The standards established in this Ordinance for dedication and construction of public works
improvements are based upon engineering studies and historical usages and demands by different categories of
development. These regulations identify certain minimum requirements and sizes for utilities, roadways, parks
and other facilities that the City Council has determined to be necessary in order to provide the minimum level
of service necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to assure the quality of life
currently enjoyed by the citizens of Sansom Park. It is the intent of these regulations that no development occurs
until and unless these minimum levels of service are met. Therefore, each subdivision in the City shall be
required to dedicate, construct and/or upgrade required facilities and infrastructure to a capacity that meets these
minimum levels.
b. Basis for Standards. For each category of public infrastructure, a minimum standard of infrastructure, and
in some cases, service level, has been developed based upon historic studies and construction projects of the City
and other cities. These minimum standards take into consideration the soil conditions and topographic
configuration of the City, the use and impact analyses of the North Central Texas Council of Governments in
developing standard specifications for public works installation, and other historical use and performance
experiences of the City that reflect the minimum level of facilities and services that must be built to meet the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Sansom Park.
c. Denial If Adequate Levels Not Met. In order to maintain prescribed levels of public facilities and services
for the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, the City may require the dedication of easements and
rights-of-way for or construction of on-site or off-site public works improvements for water, sanitary sewer,
road, drainage or park facilities to serve a proposed development, or require the payment of fees in lieu thereof.
If adequate levels of public facilities and services cannot be provided concurrent with the schedule of
development proposed, the City may deny the subdivision until the public facilities and services can be
provided, or require that the development be phased so that the availability and delivery of facilities and services
coincides with the demands for the facilities created by the development.
d. Reimbursement. Whenever the City Council determines that levels of service in excess of these minimum
standards are necessary in order to promote the orderly development of the City, the owner shall qualify for
reimbursement for any costs in excess of the minimum levels of service through City participation, to the extent
funds are available by a pro rata reimbursement agreement or other means adopted by the City.
Section 1.05 Adequacy of Specific Facilities
a. Water. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be connected to a public water
system which has capacity to provide water for domestic use and fire protection. Minimum fire flow pressures
shall be as required by the City. Additional standards and requirements are defined in Article 8 hereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/536
b. Wastewater. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be served by an approved
means of wastewater collection and treatment. The City Engineer shall be responsible for determining the
approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The City may require the phasing of development
and/or improvements in order to maintain adequate wastewater capacity. Additional standards and requirements
are defined in Article 8 hereof.
c. Streets and Thoroughfares.
1. New development within the City must be supported by an adequate network of thoroughfares.
Thoroughfares are an essential component of the City's street network and are necessary to
accommodate the continuing growth and development. It is necessary and desirable to obtain rightsof-
way for off-site, abutting and internal thoroughfares to support new development at the time of
platting or development of the land. The City desires to assure that development impacts are
mitigated through contributions of thoroughfare rights-of-way and improvements and that a
subdivision contribute not more than its fair share of thoroughfare costs.
2. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular, bicycle and
pedestrian circulation and shall be properly related to the applicable thoroughfare plan and any
amendments thereto, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each
proposed subdivision or development. Additional standards and requirements are set forth in Article
7 hereof.
d. Drainage. Drainage improvements serving new development shall be designed to prevent overloading the
capacity of the downstream drainage system. The City may require the phasing of development, the use of
control methods such as retention or detention, the construction of off-site drainage improvements, or drainage
impact fees in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed subdivision. Drainage improvements serving new
development shall accommodate runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent
overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. Additional standards and requirements are defined
in Article 8 hereof.
Section 1.06 Enforcement
a. Building Permits. Except as provided in Section 2.01, no permit for building, construction, repair, or
plumbing or electrical work on any tract shall be issued until the approval and filing of a plat in the county plat
records.
b. Utility Service.
1. The City shall be under no obligation to furnish any public utilities or allow any City services
unless and until a plat meeting all rules, regulations, and requirements of this ordinance has been
approved and filed in the county plat records.
2. A person commits an offense if the person provides water or sewer service to any lot or tract of
land or any part thereof unless and until a plat of such tract of land meeting the requirements of
subsection 1 has been filed of record with Tarrant County.
Section 1.07 Definitions
a. General Rules. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following rules shall be applied in constructing,
interpreting, or otherwise defining the terms and provisions hereof:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular number shall
include the plural number and words used in the plural shall include the singular.
2. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/536
3. The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases, “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,”
and “occupied for,” and shall apply exclusively to physical uses.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words or terms applicable hereto are defined as
hereinafter provided. Words and terms used in this Ordinance, but not defined in this Ordinance shall have the
meanings ascribed thereto in the Zoning Ordinance of the City. Words and terms defined in both ordinances shall
be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict, in which case the definition contained in this
Ordinance shall control.
Acreage, Gross - The acreage included within the boundary of a subdivision.
Acreage, Net - The acreage included within the boundary of a particular subdivision, but excluding all public
rights-of-way.
Adequate Public Facilities - Facilities determined to be capable of supporting and servicing the physical area
and designated intensity of the proposed subdivision as determined by the City and based upon specific levels of
service.
Administrative Official - The City Administrator, or the City Administrator's designated representative,
authorized to enforce and administer the terms of this Ordinance.
Alley - A public or private right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side
of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
Applicant - The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the owner's authorized representative.
Base Flood or 100-year Flood - The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
Block - A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad
rights-of-way, shore lines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.
Bond - Any form of security, other than a cash deposit, to be used as surety or as a guarantee in an amount and
form satisfactory to the City.
Build - To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, restore, or alter a building or structure.
Building - Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
moveable property of any kind.
Building, Line - A line, generally parallel to a lot line or street right-of-way, located the required distance to
provide the minimum yards established by the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, to limit the area in which
buildings are permitted.
Building, Main - A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. In a
residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
Building Setback Line - The line on a plat delineating the nearest point to which a building or other structure
may be located to a street line, alley line or building lot line.
Certified Planner - A member in good standing of the American Institute of Certified Planners.
City - The City of Sansom Park, Texas.
City Engineer - A person appointed to serve as City Engineer or authorized to act in such capacity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/536
Common Area - A private lot(s) established, owned and maintained by a homeowners' association or a property
owners' association.
Comprehensive Plan - A series of planning documents intended to guide the growth and development of the City
and its adjoining areas including, but not limited to, the City's Comprehensive Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare
Plan, Master Water Plan, Master Wastewater Plan, and Parks/Trail Master Plan.
Council - The City Council of the City.
County Plat Records - The plat records of Tarrant County, Texas.
Cul-De-Sac - That street or part of a street having one common entry and exit and no other entry and/or exit.
Curvilinear Design - Any street segment which is designed with a degree of curvature not less than 3° 30' and
not greater than 22° 55', and which shall offset a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet, said offset being
measured perpendicular to the initial tangent line of the curve.
Density, Gross - The number of dwelling units per gross acre.
Density, Net - The number of dwelling units per net acre.
Design Standards - The documents adopted by the City that establish the minimum criteria for the design of
public works improvements.
Developer - The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or developed, or the developer's representative. A
subdivider is a developer.
Development - Any activity that requires the submission of a plat or the securing of a building permit, or any
man-made change to real estate, including, but not limited to, construction of a building or structure, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. A
subdivision is a development.
Easement - A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the
public, a corporation or another person.
Easement, Common Access - An easement intended to provide shared access to and from a development. It may
be public or private.
Easement, Drainage - (Abbreviated D.E., typically D. + U.E. when combined with utility easements) an
easement for the purpose of the overland or underground transfer of stormwater.
Easement, Emergency Access - An easement for the purpose of ingress, egress, access, and passage to and across
private property for police, fire and other governmental vehicles and personnel.
Easement, Maintenance and Access - An easement for the purpose of accessing and maintaining private
structures located adjacent to a common lot line, typically used along the “zero lot line” property lines within a
subdivision.
Easement, Pedestrian Access - An easement for the purpose of pedestrian ingress, egress and passage to and
across private property.
Easement, Private - An easement granted by a property owner to a specified person, group of persons or entity
in, on, across, over, or under property for a specified use or uses.
Easement, Public - An easement granted to the public or governmental agency in, on, across, over or under
property for a specified use or uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/536
Easement, Screening - An easement granted to a homeowners' or property owners' association for the
construction and perpetual maintenance of a screening device along the perimeter of a subdivision.
Easement, Utility - An easement for the installation, maintenance, and operation of water, sewer, electric,
telephone, cable, gas, and other similar utilities.
Engineer - A person who has been licensed and registered by the Texas State Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in this state and listed in State Records as
“Civil.”
Escrow - Money placed in the possession of the City to guarantee the performance of an obligation.
Exaction Requirement - A requirement imposed as a condition of approval for a plat or other permit to
accomplish the following:
1. Dedicate an interest in land for a public works improvement;
2. Construct a public works improvement; or
3. Pay a fee in lieu of constructing a public works improvement.
Feeder Line - an electrical line that emanates from an electrical substation or hub for distribution throughout a
local area.
Filing Date - The date the Administrative Official determines the subdivider has provided a complete
application, together with, drainage plans, vacations, draft plats, pre-application proposals, preliminary
engineering or other items, in compliance with State law and this and other applicable ordinances, including any
completed variance application(s), and all fees have been paid.
Floodplain - Any land area inundated by the base flood.
Floodway - The channel of a watercourse and the adjacent floodplain that must be reserved to convey the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than a designated height.
Frontage - That side of a lot, parcel, or tract abutting a street right-of-way and ordinarily regarded as the frontal
orientation of the lot.
Lateral Line - An electrical line that emanates from a feeder line and is used for distribution to smaller areas of
consumers, and is usually connected to a feeder line through a sectionalizing device such as a fuse or
disconnection switch.
Local Residential or Minor Street - A public thoroughfare which is intended primarily to serve as access to
residential property within a neighborhood interior or limited residential district and is not aligned or located to
attract other than limited local traffic movements.
Lot - A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by a recorded plat which is recognized as a
separate legal entity for transfer of title.
Marker - A permanent iron rod generally used on lot corners, points of curvature and tangency.
Monument - A permanent concrete survey monument generally used on subdivision property corners adjacent to
public.
Nonresidential Subdivision - A subdivision developed primarily for nonresidential uses.
Off-Site - Any premises not located within the area of the property to be platted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/536
Owner - A person who has a fee simple title in land, or a person acting on behalf of or through authority granted
by the owner.
Person - Any individual or group of individuals, general or limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated
association, any corporation, or governmental or quasi-governmental entity.
Plan for Development - A plan outlining the proposed use(s) of a tract or tracts of land, which provides the City
fair notice of the intended project and the nature of the permit sought. It includes an application for approval of a
plat or an application for approval of a zoning change or site plan which contains, at a minimum, a graphic
depiction or sketch of the tract and describes the proposed uses of land and their location within the tract(s) and
the general layout of streets and parks or other open spaces. It does not include any information or exhibit
presented to (1) City staff for the purpose of seeking information regarding the applicable regulations or (2) the
City Council unless the information or exhibit is required to be submitted with the permit application.
Plat - A plan or map of a subdivision of land showing all the essential dimensions and other information
essential to comply with the plat standards of this Ordinance. A plat may be a preliminary plat, final plat, replat,
amending plat, minor plat or development plat.
Plat, Amending - A plat which meets the requirements as set forth in Section 212.016 of the Texas Local
Government Code.
Plat, Final - A plat which substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat if required, and contains all or
a portion of the property within the approved preliminary plat. A final plat as referred to in this Ordinance may
also refer to replats, amending plats, and minor plats.
Plat, Minor - A plat which includes four or fewer lots and that fronts and existing street [sic], and that do not
require the creation of any new street or any public improvements.
Plat, Preliminary - The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed
manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the City Council for approval.
Plat, Vacation - A plat that meets the requirements as set forth in Section 212.013 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended.
Public Facilities System - With respect to water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage or parks, the facilities owned
or operated by or on behalf of the City to provide services to the public, including existing and new
developments and subdivisions. The public facilities system includes improvements to roads owned by the
County or the State to the extent such improvements are necessitated by and attributable to a proposed
development or subdivision.
Public Works Improvement or Public Improvement - A water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage or park facility
that is intended to be dedicated to become a part of one or more of the City's public facilities systems.
Replat - A plat which revises currently platted lots or combines platted and unplatted property.
Residential Subdivision - A subdivision developed primarily for residential uses as enumerated in the City's
Zoning Ordinance.
Retaining Wall - A structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures
and/or prevent erosion by retaining or restraining lateral forces of soil or other materials.
Right-of-Way - (Abbreviated as ROW) Land conveyed by plat, or other legal instrument, to the public ownership
and use for roadways, utilities and other public improvements. Land dedicated as right-of-way shall be owned
by the City, whereas land dedicated by easement is owned by the land owner with a right of use given to the
City.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/536
Roadway - The traveled portion of a street upon which vehicles traverse and circulate, to include the area from
back-to-back of the outer curb lines, or where curbs do not exist, said roadway includes the traveled area from
the outer edges of the surfaced and prepared portion of the roadway, excluding shoulders, etc.
Service Line - An electrical line which, through a transformer, supplies electricity to a customer's service
entrance.
Street - All property which is contained within fixed boundaries commonly referred to as right-of-way (ROW)
lines, for the primary purpose of vehicular movement and circulation, and in which traveled roadways exist,
along with various service utilities and sidewalks for pedestrian circulation.
Street, Arterial - A through street designed for the movement of heavy traffic volume, intended to carry traffic
from collector streets to state/county highways.
Street, Internal - Generally a street whose entire width is contained within a development.
Street, Collector - A street which is local in character and use but due to its configuration within the
development, serves as a collector of local streets, thereby connecting them to a collector street.
Street, Perimeter - A street which abuts a development or one whose width lies partly within a development and
partly without.
Street, Private - A street that is privately owned and maintained and that is not dedicated to the public for
general use and maintenance.
Street, Residential - A street which is continuous through several districts and is intended as a connecting street
between residential districts and a collector street providing access to major streets, business districts or places
of employment. This street is often referred to as a local street.
Subdivide - The act or process of creating a subdivision.
Subdivider - A person who subdivides or seeks to subdivide land into two or more lots or to construct a structure
on land that has not been platted.
Subdivision - The division of a tract or parcel of land situated within the City into two or more parts for the
purpose of sale, lease or development. A division of a tract includes a division regardless of whether it is made
by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or a contract for a deed, by using a contract of
sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. A subdivision includes a replat and a
one-lot subdivision of a tract which has not been previously platted. A division of land into parts greater than
five acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated, shall not constitute the
subdivision of land.
Surveyor - A person registered as a registered professional surveyor or licensed professional land surveyor by
the Texas Board of Land Surveying.
System-related Facility - A public works improvement or expansion that is for the use or benefit of the overall
water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park facilities systems, as applicable. A system-related facility has
capacity larger than needed to serve a single new development and exceeds the minimum standards required. A
system-related facility may include a public works improvement that is reflected in the capital improvement plan
or the Comprehensive Plan. A system-related facility may be located off-site, within the development site, or on
the perimeter of the development site.
Thoroughfare Plan - The master plan of major and secondary streets and highways which is a part of the City's
Comprehensive Plan and adaptations, amendments or supplements thereto as adopted by the City Council.
Tract - All contiguous property in common ownership.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/536
Transmission Line - An electrical line operated at a nominal voltage of 60,000 volts or higher that brings
electricity from a generating plant to an electrical substation.
Utility - A company providing electrical, telephone, cable television, or cable- or wire-based data transmission
services within the City.
Utility Provider - A person that provides a public or private utility or service to the general public, including but
not necessarily limited to a municipal water, sewer or drainage utility, electric company, telephone company,
natural gas company and a cable television provider.
Zoning Ordinance - Ordinance No. 480-14, as amended, the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City,
Chapter 14 of the Code of Ordinances.
Section 1.08 Jurisdiction
a. Applicability. Subject to the provisions of this section, the regulations of this Ordinance shall apply to all
land within the corporate limits of Sansom Park.
b. Utilities. The City shall be under no obligation to extend utilities beyond the limits of the area for which the
City has a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (CCN) from the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality or its successor. For property located within the City's CCN, the City shall extend utilities per the City's
utility extension policy.
Section 1.09 Grading Permit
a. Offense. A person commits an offense if the person clears, grades, fills, dredges, and constructs public
streets, utilities, or stormwater or other improvements which may affect adjacent or surrounding properties
without first obtaining a grading permit.
b. Application. Application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Administrative Official
and shall be submitted with a fee, which shall be established by the City Council. The permit application shall
describe the property and the nature of the development, and shall be accompanied by construction plans and
specifications adequate to describe the improvements. The plans shall show the existing contours and the
proposed contours in either one-inch or two-inch vertical intervals. All plans accompanying permits for any
work within a floodplain shall be certified by an engineer. The applicant shall also submit with the application a
site plan which meets the requirements of the Tree Preservation Ordinance, as amended.
c. Plans. The site grading plans shall demonstrate the following:
1. The work will not have any appreciable change in the site drainage characteristics or shall show
the site modification and any mitigation measures necessary to accommodate the change;
2. The grading will not adversely affect adjacent property owners;
3. The grading will, to the extent possible, preserve trees and unique natural features in the site
grading area such that the applicant demonstrates a valid reason for the removal of any protected
trees, along with a description on how existing protected trees will be protected from damage during
construction;
4. That provision has been made for temporary and permanent erosion control measures; and
5. All required federal and state approvals have been obtained.
The Administrative Official shall issue the permit when all conditions of this Ordinance have been satisfied.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/536
d. Post-Grading Maintenance. A person commits an offense if the person owns or develops property for which
a grading permit has been issued and fails to maintain all temporary erosion control devices, as specified in the
approved stormwater pollution plan and grading permit, until permanent erosion controls have been established
and approved by the City.
ARTICLE 2 - GENERAL PLATTING REGULATIONS
Section 2.01 Platting Required; Exceptions
a. Generally. Platting is required for the following purposes:
1. To create a building site and obtain a building permit on a single lot or tract;
2. To subdivide a lot or tract into two or more parcels for development of the parcels;
3. To combine lots or tracts; and
4. To amend a plat.
b. Exemptions. The following land divisions are exempt from the requirements of these regulations:
1. Sale, inheritance, or gift of land by metes and bounds description, of a tract of land upon which
no improvements, development, subdivision or alteration is intended;
2. Use of existing cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations;
3. A division of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction; and
4. A division of land that results in the creation of two or more parcels, each of which is greater
than five acres, when each parcel has direct access to an existing public street, and no dedication of
public facilities is required.
c. Exceptions for Alterations. No construction shall commence upon a tract prior to the recordation of a plat of
the tract in the county plat records, except that a building permit may be issued on an unplatted tract within the
City for any of the following purposes:
1. Residentially developed property not exceeding five acres in size may obtain a building permit
for additions to the main structure if such addition does not exceed 50 percent of the main structure;
2. Adding an accessory building or structure on an unplatted residentially developed lot provided a
primary structure exists on the unplatted lot;
3. Restoring any residential building or structure on an unplatted residentially developed lot,
destroyed by fire, explosion, or any other casualty or an Act of God where the extent of the
destruction is not more than 50 percent of the current value of the structure; or
4. Replacement of a mobile home previously legally permitted and used or occupied as a
residential dwelling with a HUD-code manufactured home.
Section 2.02 Preliminary Plat Required
a. Generally. Approval of a preliminary plat is required for any proposed subdivision within the City which
proposes five (5) or more lots or proposes any public works improvements prior to approval of a final plat.
When subdividing a tract which proposes four (4) or fewer lots, the owner may elect to submit an application for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/536
approval of a final plat or a minor plat without obtaining approval of a preliminary plat. Any resubdivision of
existing platted lots shall require the submittal and approval of a replat or an amending plat.
b. Inside City. Within the City limits, a plat may be approved in two stages: a preliminary plat and a final plat.
Section 2.03 Plat Vacation
a. General Requirements. The following must be submitted with any request to vacate a plat:
1. A complete plat vacation application form, as provided by the City, signed by all owners and
identifying the plat to be vacated.
2. A nonrefundable plat vacation processing fee in the amount established by City Council.
3. The signatures of approval of all representatives of all utilities serving the subdivision must be
on the vacating instrument.
4. If improvements have been constructed within the area of an easement, the easement must be
dedicated by separate instrument prior to the recording of the plat vacation.
b. Submission to Council. The request shall be placed before the City Council for action.
c. Effect of Plat Vacation. Upon the execution and recording of the vacation instrument, the vacated plat or
portion thereof shall have no effect.
Section 2.04 Replat
a. Requirements. A replat of a subdivision is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of the plat if
the plat:
1. Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted;
2. Is approved by the City Council after a public hearing on the matter at which parties in interest
and citizens have an opportunity to be heard;
3. Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
4. When applicable, in compliance with subsection b. below.
b. Replat for Residential Lots. If any of the proposed property to be replatted, within the immediate preceding
five (5) years, was limited by any interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than
two residential units per lot, or if any lot in the approved subdivision was limited by deed restriction to
residential use for not more than two residential units per lot, notice of the public hearing shall be given in
accordance with state law.
c. Note on Plat. A replat shall contain a note describing the purpose of the change or modification framed in a
bold line so as to be distinctly visible on the face of the plat.
d. Process. The application process, approval process, criteria for approval, and recordation of a replat shall
comply with the processes as provided for a final plat, as applicable.
Section 2.05 Minor Plats
a. Applicability. An application for approval of a minor plat may be filed only when all of the following
circumstances apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/536
1. The proposed division results in four or fewer lots;
2. All lots in the proposed subdivision front onto an existing public street and the construction or
extension of a street or alley is not required; and
3. The plat does not require ROW dedication, or the extension of any municipal facilities or public
improvements to serve any lot within the subdivision.
b. Criteria for Decision. The Administrative Official, or the City Council on appeal, shall decide whether to
approve, conditionally approve or deny the minor plat application based upon the following criteria:
1. The minor plat application is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property and all
other requirements of this Ordinance;
2. All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by all required utilities and
services, and
3. The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities or public improvements to
serve any lot within the subdivision.
Section 2.06 Amending Plats
An amending plat may be submitted in accordance with LGC 212.016. Any corrections or conditions not listed
in the statutory criteria for an amending plat will require full resubmittal of the plat and will be treated as a
replat.
ARTICLE 3 - EASEMENT DEDICATIONS AND ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY
Section 3.01 Easements
a. Generally.
1. Easements for utilities, drainage, walkways, access and other comparable purposes shall
generally be located along the side or rear or front lot lines and/or drainage flow lines and shall be
labeled “Utility Easement,” “Drainage Easement,” “Pedestrian Access Easement,” “Common Access
Easement,” “Maintenance and Access Easement,” “Emergency Access Easement” or other
specifically appropriate labeling on the final plat.
2. Unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer, the developer shall dedicate a ten-foot
general utility easement along the front lot line of each lot and any side that is adjacent to a street. A
general utility easement five feet in width shall be on dedicated [sic] along the rear lot line of each
lot. All other side lot lines shall have a five-foot general utility easement on each side of the common
lot line. Easements shall be larger when the City Engineer determines necessary special conditions
warrant.
3. To facilitate access from roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, the City
may require perpetual unobstructed access easements for pedestrian or bicycle traffic.
4. Easements dedicated on the plat shall be deemed dedicated to the public and to the City unless
specified otherwise.
5. Private streets shall be labeled as “Emergency Access and Utility Easements” in order to
facilitate access for police, fire and other public safety and governmental vehicles and personnel and
franchise utility and solid waste disposal vehicles and personnel.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/536
6. The width of easements for utility providers other than the City, such as for water, gas, electric,
telephone, cable television, or internet, shall be as required by that particular entity. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to determine appropriate easement widths required by other utility
companies.
7. Wherever possible, easements shall be centered or along front or side lot lines rather than across
the interior or rear of lots.
8. Each side of a lot shall adjoin either a public right-of-way or easement in order to facilitate the
connection of utilities to each lot. Where right-of-ways do not exist, easements must be dedicated as
specified in the zoning ordinance. If necessary for the extension of water or sewer mains, storm
drainage or other utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.
In all cases, easements shall connect with easements already established in adjoining property.
b. Drainage Easement or Right-of-Way. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way or
channel, there shall be provided a storm drainage easement conforming substantially with such course and of
such additional width as may be designated by the City Engineer, according to proper engineering
considerations. The required width shall, under normal conditions, be measured from the centerline of creeks,
ditches or drainage channels, conform to the requirements set forth by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the City and shall be sufficient to accommodate the
100-year flood return elevation.
1. Parallel streets or parkways may be required adjacent to certain portions of creek or drainage
ways to provide maintenance access and/or public access and visibility into public open space or
recreation areas.
2. The number of lots that back or side onto creeks, drainage ways, public parks and open spaces,
and public school sites shall be limited as required to provide public access, visibility, safety and
security within these areas are maximized.
3. Other utilities may be permitted within a drainage or floodway easement only if approved by the
City Engineer.
c. Drainage Piping Requirement. Any drainage piping that is to be dedicated to the City shall be in an
easement with a minimum width of the structure (i.e., pipe diameter or box width) plus twelve feet.
d. On-Site Easements. All necessary on-site easements shall be established on the plat and not by separate
instrument, and they shall be labeled for the specific purpose, and to the specific entity if other than the City, for
which they are being provided.
e. Off-Site Easements. Any necessary easements not shown on the plat shall be procured by separate
instrument, in a form approved by the City Attorney, and shall be the developer or property owner's
responsibility. If the developer cannot obtain a required off-site easement, then the developer may request that
the City assist in the acquisition of the easement. The developer must make an offer in writing, based on the fair
market value of the easement, to the property owner from whom the easement is being sought. All costs of
obtaining the easement shall be the responsibility of the developer or property owner and the City must be
reimbursed for any costs incurred including its attorney's fees, condemnation award and any fees or expenses of
litigation whether at the trial or the appellate level or both.
f. Common Access Easements and Cross Access Easements. To reduce the congestion created by a number of
drives along streets while maintaining adequate access to developments, the City may require that “common
access easements” or “cross access easements” be dedicated at the corners of lots not intended for low-medium
density residential developments when adjacent to lots of a similar use. These easements will typically be
sixteen (16) feet in width and thirty-five (35) feet in length but may vary given the shape of the particular tract
and traffic patterns.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/536
Section 3.02 Dedication Requirements
a. Division of Property. Every owner of property which an application for approval of a development has been
submitted shall be required to dedicate to the City that portion of such property as is necessary for the orderly
development of streets, roadways, thoroughfares, utilities, drainage improvements, or other public purposes.
Such dedication requirements shall be a prerequisite to plat approval.
b. Effect of Approval/Disapproval on Dedication. The approval of a plat is not considered an acceptance of
any proposed dedication and does not impose on the City any duty regarding the maintenance or improvement of
any dedicated parts until the City makes an actual appropriation of the dedicated parts by entry, use, or
improvement. The disapproval of a plat is considered a refusal by the City of the offered dedication indicated on
the plat.
c. Dedication and Construction of Improvements. The developer shall dedicate all rights-of-way and
easements for, and shall construct capital improvements within the rights-of-way or easements for those water,
wastewater, road or drainage improvements needed to adequately serve a proposed development consistent with
the applicable master facilities plans, whether the facilities are located on, adjacent to or outside the boundaries
of the property being developed.
d. Facilities Impact Studies. The City may require that a developer prepare a comprehensive traffic impact
study, drainage study or other public facilities study to assist the City in determining whether a proposed
development will be supported with adequate levels of public facilities and services concurrent with the demand
for the facilities created by the development. A study shall identify at a minimum the adequacy of existing
facilities and the nature and extent of any deficiencies, and the capital improvements needed to meet the adopted
level of service assuming development at the intensity proposed in the development application. The study shall
be subject to approval by the City Engineer. The City also may require, at the time of approval of a subsequent
development application, an update of a public facilities study approved in connection with a prior development
application.
e. Timing of Dedication and Construction.
1. Initial Provision for Dedication or Construction. The City shall require an initial demonstration
that a proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services at the time
for approval of the first development application that portrays a specific plan of development,
including but not limited to a petition for establishing a planned development zoning district, or other
overlay zoning district; a petition for annexation or an agreement; or an application for a preliminary
or final plat. As a condition of approval of the development application, the City may require
provision for dedication of rights-of-way or easements for, and construction of, public works
improvements to serve the proposed development.
2. Deferral of Obligation. The obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for or to construct one or more
public works improvements to serve a new development may be deferred until approval of a
subsequent phase of the subdivision, upon written request of the property owner, or at the City's own
initiative. As a condition of deferring the obligation, the City shall require that the subdivider enter
into a developer's agreement, specifying the time for dedication of rights-of-way for or construction
of capital improvements serving the development.
Section 3.03 Rough Proportionality Determination
a. Determination. Prior to a decision on an application for approval of a plat or permit for which an exaction
requirement is required as a condition of approval, the City Engineer shall affirm that each exaction requirement
to be imposed as a condition of plat or permit approval is roughly proportionate to the demand created by the
development on the City's public facilities systems, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the
development proposed. In making this determination, the City Engineer may consider the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/536
1. Categorical findings and recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments
in developing standard specifications for public works improvements;
2. The proposed and potential use of the land;
3. The timing and sequence of development in relation to availability of adequate levels of public
facilities systems;
4. Impact fee studies, traffic impact studies, drainage studies or other studies that measure the
demand for services created by developments and the impact on the City's public facilities system;
5. The function of the public works improvements in serving the proposed subdivision or
development;
6. The degree to which public works improvements necessary to serve the proposed subdivision
are supplied by other developments;
7. The anticipated participation by the City in the costs of necessary public works improvements;
8. The degree to which acceptable private infrastructure improvements to be constructed and
maintained by the developer will offset the need for public works improvements;
9. Any reimbursements for the costs of public works improvements for which the proposed
subdivision is eligible; and/or
10. Any other information relating to the impacts created by the proposed subdivision or
development on the City's public facilities systems.
b. Affirmation. Based upon the proportionality determination, the City Engineer shall affirm that the exaction
requirements of this Ordinance or other ordinance requiring the permit, as applied to the proposed subdivision or
development, does not impose costs on the applicant for public works improvements that exceed those roughly
proportionate to the impact of the proposed subdivision or development.
c. Additional Information. The City Engineer may require that the applicant, at its expense, submit any
information or studies that may assist in making the proportionality determination.
Section 3.04 Rough Proportionality Approval
a. Generally. An applicant for an approval of a plat or permit which imposes an exaction requirement as a
condition of approval may file an appeal to contest any exaction requirement, other than impact fees, imposed as
a condition of approval or in which the failure to comply is grounds for denying the application.
b. Purpose. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that an exaction requirement imposed on a
proposed development as a condition of approval does not result in a disproportionate cost burden on the
developer, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development
on the City's public facilities systems.
Section 3.05 Appeals Procedure
a. Requirements for Appeal. An applicant seeking approval of a plat or any other type of permit or zoning for
which an exaction requirement is imposed shall file a written appeal with the City Secretary within ten (10) days
of the date the Council or other City official takes action applying the exaction requirement. The applicant shall
submit fifteen (15) copies of the appeal. A separate appeal form shall be submitted for each exaction
requirement for which relief is sought. The City Secretary shall forward the appeal to the City Council for
consideration.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/536
b. Postponement of Action on Plat. The applicant may request postponement of consideration of the
applicant's plat application by pending preparation of the study required by subsection d, in which case the
applicant shall also waive the statutory period for acting upon a plat for the time necessary for the City Council
to decide the appeal.
c. Basis for Appeal. The appeal shall allege that application of the exaction requirement is not roughly
proportional to the nature and extent of the impact created by the proposed subdivision or development on the
City's public facilities systems and does not reasonably benefit the proposed subdivision or development.
d. Study Required. The appellant shall submit to the City Engineer fifteen (15) copies of a study in support of
the appeal that includes, with respect to each specific exaction requirement appealed, the following information
within thirty (30) days of the date of appeal:
1. Total capacity of the City's water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park system, as
applicable, to be utilized by the proposed subdivision development, employing standard measures of
capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system
capacity to be consumed by the subdivision. If the proposed subdivision is to be developed in phases,
such information also shall be provided for the entire development, including any phases already
developed;
2. Total capacity to be supplied to the City's public facilities systems for water, sanitary sewer,
roadway, drainage or parks, as applicable, by the exaction requirement. This information shall
include any capacity supplied by prior exaction requirements imposed on the development;
3. Comparison of the capacity of the applicable City public facilities systems to be consumed by
the proposed subdivision or development with the capacity to be supplied to such systems by the
proposed exaction requirement. In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public facilities
systems from the entire subdivision shall be considered;
4. The amount of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the public works improvements
to be constructed by the applicant in accordance with the City's requirements;
5. Comparison of the minimum size and capacity required by City standards for the applicable
public facilities systems to be utilized by the proposed subdivision or development with the size and
capacity to be supplied by the proposed exaction requirement; and
6. Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by
the proposed development and the exaction requirement imposed by the City.
e. Evaluation. The City Engineer shall evaluate the appeal and supporting study and shall make a
recommendation to the City Council based upon the City Engineer's analysis of the information contained in the
study and utilizing the same factors considered by the Engineer in making the original proportionality
determination.
Section 3.06 City Council Decision
a. Appeal Hearing. After the applicant certifies to the City Secretary that all evidence has been submitted, the
City Secretary shall schedule the appeal on an agenda of a meeting of the City Council, and shall cause the
applicant to be notified, at the address given on the appeal form, of the date and place at which the Council will
consider the appeal. The City Council shall decide the appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of final
submission of any evidence by the applicant. The applicant shall be allotted time to present his appeal at the City
Council meeting and may introduce other testimony and shall be allotted thirty (30) minutes to present testimony
in support of the appeal. The City Council shall base its decision on the criteria listed in Section 3.03.a and
Section 3.05.d.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/536
b. Action. The City Council may:
1. Deny the appeal and impose the exaction requirement in accordance with the City Engineer's
recommendation; or
2. Grant the appeal, and waive in whole or in part an exaction requirement to the extent necessary
to achieve proportionality; or
3. Grant the appeal, and direct that the City participate in the costs of acquiring land for or
constructing the public works improvement.
c. Factors. In deciding an appeal, the City Council shall determine whether application of the exaction
requirement is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impact created by the proposed subdivision
on the City's public facilities systems for water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage, or park facilities, as
applicable, and reasonably benefits the subdivision. In making such determination, the Council shall consider:
1. The evidence submitted by the applicant; and
2. The City Engineer's report and recommendation, considering in particular the factors identified
in Sections 3.03.a and 3.05.d.
d. Additional Information. The City Council may require the applicant or the City Engineer to submit
additional information that it deems relevant in making its decision.
e. Modification. The applicant shall not be deemed to have prevailed in the event that the City Council
modifies the exaction requirement.
Section 3.07 Action Following Decision of City Council
a. Decision to Modify. If the City Council finds in favor of the applicant and waives the exaction requirement
as a condition of plat approval, or modifies the exaction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve rough
proportionality, the applicant shall resubmit the plat application to the City Council within thirty (30) days of the
date the City Council takes action, with any modifications necessary to conform the plat with the City Council's
decision. If the applicant fails to conform the plat to the City Council's decision within the thirty (30) day period
provided, the relief granted by the City Council on the appeal shall expire.
b. Decision to Waive. If the City Council finds in favor of an applicant for any other permit and waives the
exaction requirement as a condition of permit approval, or modifies the exaction requirement to the extent
necessary to achieve rough proportionality, the applicant shall resubmit the permit application to the responsible
official within thirty (30) days of the date the City Council takes action, with any modifications necessary to
conform the application with the City Council's decision. If the applicant fails to do so, the relief granted by the
City Council shall expire.
c. Denial of Appeal. If the City Council denies the appeal and the applicant has executed a waiver of the
statutory period for acting upon a plat, the City shall place the plat application on the agenda of the City Council
within thirty (30) days of the City Council's decision.
d. Additional Dwelling Units. If the plat application is modified to increase the number of residential dwelling
units or the intensity of nonresidential uses, the City Engineer may require a new study to validate the relief
granted by the City Council.
e. New Appeal Required. If the plat application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new
appeal shall be required on any subsequent application.
Section 3.08 Appeal of City Council Decision
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/536
An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Council to the county or district court of the county in which
the development is located within thirty (30) days of the date that the Council issues its final decision. In the
event that the applicant prevails in such action, the applicant will be entitled to attorneys' fees and costs,
including expert witness fees.
ARTICLE 4 - REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT SUBMITTAL
Section 4.01 Submittal
a. Pre-application Conference. A property owner or applicant may request a pre-application conference with
the Administrative Official for purposes of identifying requirements that are applicable to a proposed plat. This
conference between a developer and City staff is intended to be of mutual benefit to the developer and the
community by determining the suitability and type of development of a tract of land. This step also involves
considerable planning which precedes actual preparation of the preliminary plat. The request shall be made in
writing on a form prepared by the Administrative Official and shall state that any proposed development concept
discussed at the pre-application conference is not intended as a plan for development or application for plat
approval. If the request for the meeting is to present a plan for development or application presenting a plan for
development or plat that describes the property, the proposed uses for the property and the permit which is
sought, the Administrative Official shall process the plan or application unless the applicant executes a form that
the plan is submitted only for the purpose of requesting information and is not intended to constitute an
application.
b. Application. An applicant shall submit a written application for plat approval to the Administrative Official
on forms prepared by the City, together with all required documents, such as studies, drawings, exhibits, or other
ordinance requirements, in sufficient size and number as required by the Administrative Official, and any
reasonable information requested by the Administrative Official to assist the City in its review of the application.
The owner, applicant, or other authorized agent shall sign the application. Proof of agency shall be submitted by
affidavit signed by all owners. The City may require evidence of fee simple title to the property.
c. Preparation and Reproductions. Each plat shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor, trained and
experienced in subdivision design. The City may require blueprints or Blackline copies of the plat for submittals.
The applicant shall provide all plat submittals in .pdf format. Once approved, the applicant shall be responsible
for providing the City with signed mylars and copies in electronic format. The number of signed mylars shall be
what is required by Tarrant County for filing purposes.
d. Fees. The applicant shall consent in the application to be responsible for payment of legal and engineering
and any other professional fees incurred by the City in connection with the processing of the application.
Approval of the final plat or minor or amending plat shall be conditional until the applicant has paid the fees or
has given security such as posting a deposit or bond.
Section 4.02 Completeness Determination
a. Generally. Every application for approval of a plat or plan for development shall be subject to a
determination of completeness by the Administrative Official.
b. Requirements. No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for processing unless the
Administrative Official determines it is complete and it is accompanied by all documents required by and
prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and other applicable standards. For a
determination of completeness to be issued, an application must include the following:
1. A completed application form signed by the owner or the owner's authorized agent;
2. Every item, study and document required by this Ordinance or other applicable ordinances for
the type of plat being submitted, or required for a plan for development;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/536
3. An application for approval of a plat for property located within the City shall not be considered
complete unless accompanied by a copy of the zoning ordinance or other certification verifying that
the proposed use for which the application is submitted is authorized by the zoning district in which
the property is located;
4. A plat application must conform to the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time
of the application, except as otherwise provided herein; and
5. An agreement to pay all fees incurred with the review and processing of the application, and a
deposit, if payment has not been timely made for previous applications.
c. Proper Zoning Required. If a zoning change is contemplated for the property, the zoning change must be
completed before the approval of any preliminary plat of the property. The City Council shall not approve a plat
which does not comply with the zoning requirements until any available relief from the Board of Adjustment has
been obtained.
d. Additional Requirements. The Administrative Official and the City Engineer may from time to time
identify additional requirements for a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent with
the application contents and standards set forth in this Ordinance.
e. Substantive Requirements. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of
compliance with the substantive requirements of this Ordinance.
f. Determination. Not later than the tenth business day after the date an application is submitted, the
Administrative Official shall make a determination whether the application constitutes a complete application.
This shall include a determination that all information and documents required by this Ordinance or other
applicable ordinances have been submitted. A determination that the application is incomplete shall be mailed to
the applicant within such time period by United States Mail at the address listed on the application or delivered
personally to the applicant. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to
complete the application and shall state that the application will expire if the documents or other information is
not submitted within forty-five (45) days after the date the application was submitted.
g. Complete Application. An application for approval of a plat shall be deemed complete on the eleventh
(11th) business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that
the application is incomplete. For purposes of this section, the applicant shall be deemed to have been notified if
the City has mailed a copy of the determination as provided in subsection f.
h. Incomplete Application. The processing of an application by any City employee prior to the time the
application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the City as the official acceptance of the
application for filing. The incompleteness of an application shall be grounds for denial of the application
regardless of whether a determination of incompleteness was mailed to the applicant.
i. Expiration of Application. An application for approval or of a plat or plan for development shall be deemed
to expire on the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application is submitted to the Administrative Official for
processing if the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance as specified in the determination provided to the applicant.
j. Denial of Application. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired
pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied.
Section 4.03 Preliminary Plat Submittal Requirements
a. Applicability. A preliminary plat must be prepared and approved for all subdivisions within the corporate
limits of the City which do not meet the requirements for a minor plat or amending plat. A preliminary plat is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/536
neither authorized nor required in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, unless expressly authorized by an
agreement between the City and the developer.
b. Submission. The developer shall prepare and submit copies of the preliminary plat to the Administrative
Official in the quantity as is determined, from time to time by the Administrative Official. An application
lacking required documentation or information shall be returned to the applicant as provided by Section 4.02.
c. Phasing. The preliminary plat shall be submitted on the entire tract proposed to be subdivided, regardless of
whether the applicant intends to final plat only a portion of the tract. Any phasing must be shown on the
preliminary plat. Any portion of a final plat that [is] developed in sections or phases must correspond to the
sections or phases on the preliminary plat. In the event the developer chooses to submit a final plat that does not
agree with the phasing plan contained on an approved preliminary plat, the preliminary plat must be resubmitted
with amended phasing indicated.
d. Required Information. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
1. The case number in the lower left-hand corner of the plat. (The case number shall be provided
by staff after the first submittal.)
2. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity. The preferred scale is one inch = 100
feet.
3. Appropriate title, i.e., “Preliminary Plat,” to include subdivision name, which shall not duplicate
that of another subdivision, City, county, state, survey and abstract, total gross acreage, number of
lots and date of preparation.
4. Name and address and phone number and e-mail address of record owner(s), and subdivider, if
different. Note volume and page of current deed record ownership.
5. Name, address and phone numbers and e-mail addresses of engineer, planner, and/or surveyor
responsible for preparing the plat.
6. Name of record owner and corresponding deed record volume and page for all adjacent
unplatted tracts within two hundred (200') feet, to include owners across any adjacent ROW.
7. All adjacent platted property within two hundred [feet] (200') shown in dashed lines, labeling lot
and block numbers, subdivision name, street names and plat record reference.
8. Location of City limit lines and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction lines.
9. Existing zoning noted on this tract and adjacent tracts and any proposed zoning labeled as such
with appropriate setback lines.
10. All existing easements on or adjacent to this tract shown and labeled as to type and size.
11. Any adjacent, previously approved and currently valid preliminary plats, concept plans or
development plans shown.
12. The location of existing or approved street intersections on the perimeter of the subdivision or
within two hundred (200') feet of the perimeter.
13. Legal description of the land to include the current owner's deed record reference, survey and
abstract, county, state, point of beginning tied to survey corner or previously filed subdivision corner,
or USGS monument.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/536
14. Graphic depiction of all boundary lines shown in heavy lines with deed record dimensions or
field surveyed dimensions if available. These should match legal description.
15. Existing ROW shown, labeled and dimensioned, i.e. public streets, highways, alleys, private
drives, railroads, etc.
16. Existing traveled roadway widths.
17. Site plan showing the information regarding trees, as required by the City's Tree Preservation
Ordinance.
18. Permanent structures and uses within the subdivision that will remain.
19. Lots and blocks labeled with numbers in consecutive order.
20. Drainage, utility and pedestrian access easements labeled and dimensioned.
21. The proposed uses of the property and the proposed location of the uses on the tract(s)
including uses to be dedicated for schools, parks, open spaces and other public uses, showing
acreage.
22. Approximate floodplain and floodway limits shown.
23. The location and width of the proposed streets, roads, lots, alleys, easements, widening of
existing thoroughfares, and other features, and their location in relation to platted streets, alleys and
easements in adjacent subdivisions for a distance of 500 feet beyond the boundaries of the tract shall
be shown consistent with the Thoroughfare Plan or other adopted plan for roads and streets.
24. Present physical features on the tract, including natural and artificial watercourses, ditches,
ravines, culverts, and bridges.
25. A topographical map with contour intervals not greater than two feet with all elevations shown
thereon tied to the City datum plane.
26. Profiles and cross-sections sufficient to ascertain that the preliminary plat proposals will
function in accordance with the standards of the City.
27. The following certifications shall be placed on the preliminary plat:
a. Reviewed for Preliminary Approval and Approved for Preparation of Final Plat:
Mayor, City of Sansom Park
Date
Attest:
City Secretary
Date
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/536
b. A preliminary plat application shall be accompanied by a written statement signed by the
subdivider stating the developer will comply with all City requirements in the proposed
subdivision and all such proposals shall conform to or exceed the standards for such
improvements prescribed by the City.
c. A certification that all City taxes and fees have been paid.
e. Preliminary Drainage Study. The applicant shall submit a preliminary drainage study with the preliminary
plat. A preliminary drainage study may also be required by the City when reviewing a use other than the current
land use. Approval of the preliminary plat may be contingent on the acceptability of the solutions proposed by
the preliminary drainage study. The preliminary drainage study shall be prepared, signed, sealed and dated by an
engineer. The City may waive the requirement of the preliminary drainage study or may waive certain
requirements where the City Engineer determines the impact of the proposed development does not necessitate
the review.
f. Preliminary Water and Sewer Utility Plans. The applicant shall submit a preliminary water and sewer utility
plan. This plan shall indicate the general location and approximate sizes of all existing and proposed public
water and sanitary sewer utilities, including off-site facilities and/or oversized mains. The proposed water and
sanitary sewer lines shall be designed in accordance with the requirements established by the Design Standards.
The City Engineer may waive all or a portion of the requirements for the study when, in the Engineer's opinion,
the impact of the proposed development does not necessitate the review.
g. Traffic Impact Analysis. The applicant shall submit a traffic impact analysis as required by Section 7.10 to
determine the traffic generated by the proposed subdivision and to demonstrate adequacy of the adjacent
roadway systems. The City Engineer may waive all or a portion of the requirement for the analysis depending
upon the size and potential impact of the proposed subdivision and the traffic to be generated.
Section 4.04 Revised Preliminary Plat
When a final plat deviates substantially from the approved preliminary plat, the applicant must obtain approval
of a revised preliminary plat prior to the submission of a final plat. If an owner proposes substantive changes to a
preliminary plat after the City Council has approved it, a revised preliminary plat shall be prepared, processed
and approved before preparation of the final plat.
Section 4.05 Final Plat Submittal Requirements
a. Purpose. The purpose of a final plat is to assure that the division or development of the land subject to the
plat is consistent with all standards of this Ordinance regulations and all other applicable ordinances, that public
improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the City or that
provision for such installation has been made.
b. Applicability. Approval of a final plat shall be required prior to any nonexempt subdivision of land and
prior to any site preparation or grading activities for a lot or tract of land that requires installation of public
improvements on or adjacent thereto. A final plat application shall not be required for any land division that may
be approved through the minor plat procedures.
c. Effect. Approval of a final plat authorizes the Administrative Official to record the plat upon completion of
public improvements or posting of security, and authorizes the subdivider to install any public improvements
under approved construction plans.
d. Application. After obtaining approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat and if required,
fulfilling all requirements of the preliminary plat approval, the applicant may submit an application for approval
of a final plat. The final plat shall be accompanied by a completed application and shall be in accordance with all
Ordinance requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/536
e. Phases. A final plat may include all or only a portion of the area of the approved preliminary plat. If a final
plat is approved in sections or phases, each final plat of each section is to carry the name of the entire
subdivision, but is to be distinguished from each other section by a distinguishing letter, number or subtitle
designating the Phase. Block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though
such subdivision may be finally approved in sections.
Section 4.06 Final Plat - Required Format and Information
a. Sheet Size. All final plats, replats, amending plats, and minor plats shall be drawn on a sheet size of twentytwo
(22) inches by thirty-four (34) inches. Mylars shall be photographically reduced to eighteen (18) inches by
twenty-four (24) inches prior to obtaining original signatures for filing in the county records. Where more than
one sheet is needed, an index showing the entire subdivision shall be added to the first sheet or provided on a
sheet of its own to be filed with the plat. The applicant shall submit copies of the final plat in .pdf format.
b. Scale. The permissible scale: one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet.
c. Requirements. The final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
1. Should more than one sheet be required for the layout, there shall be included a key map
showing the entire subdivision, drawn at a smaller scale, with block number and street names. The
key map is to be included upon the first sheet or presented separately as a cover sheet the same size
as the large-scale sheet.
2. The names, addresses, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses of the owner and, if different, the
subdivider and of the surveyor and/or engineer responsible for preparing the plat.
3. The name of the subdivision and adjacent subdivisions, the names of streets (to conform
whenever possible to existing street names) and numbers of lot and blocks, in accordance with
alphabetical block arrangements and numerical lot arrangement, with accurate dimensions in feet and
decimals fractions of feet, with the length of radii and of arcs of all curves, all angles, and with all
other engineering information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be
shown from all angle points.
4. An accurate boundary survey and description of the property, with bearings and distances
referenced to survey lines and established subdivisions, and showing the lines of adjacent lands and
the lines of adjacent streets and alleys, with their width and names. Streets, alley and lot lines in
adjacent subdivisions shall be shown in dashed lines.
5. The case number, as provided by the staff, shall be shown in the lower left-hand corner of the
plat.
6. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
7. Location map showing location of tract by references to existing streets or highways.
8. Appropriate title, i.e., “final plat,” to include subdivision name, City, County, State, Survey and
Abstract, total gross acreage, number of lots, and date of preparation.
9. Name of record owner and corresponding deed record volume and page for all adjacent
unplatted tracts within two hundred (200) feet, to include owners across any adjacent ROW.
10. All adjacent platted property within two hundred (200) feet shown in dashed lines, labeling lot
and block numbers, subdivision name, street names and plat record reference.
11. Any adjacent, previously approved and currently valid preliminary plats, or plans for
development shown.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/536
12. Location of City limit lines and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction lines, all survey lines with survey
names labeled.
13. All existing easements on or adjacent to the tract shown and labeled as to type and size with
dimensional ties to property corners and centerline or boundary dimensions and bearings.
14. The locations, street names and dimensional centerline references to existing or approved street
intersections on the perimeter of the subdivision or within two hundred (200) feet of the perimeter.
15. Point of beginning labeled on plat.
16. Two boundary corners geo-referenced by state plane coordinates in accordance with Section
10.03. (Monumentation)
17. Street ROW and ROW centerline dimensioned with bearings, all streets having street names as
approved by preliminary plat or names dissimilar from any existing street names.
18. Physical features relative to the property boundary, including survey markers, and existing
encroachments, fences and roadways.
19. The location and dimensions of all drainage and utility easements and pedestrian access
easements.
20. All building setback lines (on all streets) labeled or noted per the appropriate zoning.
21. Lots to be dedicated for public use labeled as such, i.e. schools, parks, open spaces, etc.,
showing acreage and calculated perimeter dimensions, and the entity responsible for maintenance.
Also show any private uses in same manner.
22. Calculated dimensions of all lots, street ROW, easements, or common area lots, etc. All curve
data should be labeled including delta, radius, length and tangent. All lots must meet the minimum lot
width, depth, and area requirements of the zoning district.
23. Floodplain limit shown and labeled. Floodway limit shown and labeled with dimensional ties
to all lot corners.
24. Minimum finish floor elevations shown on all lots impacted by drainage easements or intended
to be filled. Finish floor note shown on plat.
25. For amending plats or replats, certification signed by all owners concerning deed restrictions
shown.
26. Sight triangle note shown on the face of the plat, if applicable.
27. Driveway access limitation note provided, if applicable.
28. The following note shall appear on the face of the plat: “Selling a portion of any lot within this
addition by metes and bounds is a violation of state law and City ordinance and is subject to fines and
withholding of utility services and building permits.”
29. A complete and corrected preliminary water and sewer layout. This may be combined with the
drainage study and should show all intended easements and other information required by the Design
Standards.
30. A final drainage study which shall include all information specified in the Design Standards
and support the drainage improvements proposed in the final construction documents. The final
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/536
drainage study shall be prepared by an engineer and shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the person
preparing the study. The City may waive the requirement of the final drainage study or may limit
certain requirements where the City Engineer determines that such requirements are not necessary for
review of the development.
31. An application of a final plat shall also contain the following:
a. Completed Developer's Agreement, if applicable;
b. Certificate of taxes paid from the Tarrant County Appraisal District;
c. Any proposed or existing deed covenants/restrictions; and
d. Approval blocks in the form required by Section 4.07.
d. Prerequisite to Approval. Unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance, no final plat shall be accepted for
review unless a preliminary plat has been approved and is currently valid.
Section 4.07 Final Plat Dedication and Waivers
a. Requirements. The final plat shall contain a statement of dedication, signed and acknowledged by the
owner or owners and by all other parties who have a mortgage or lienhold interest in the property, showing all
restrictions, reservations, and/or easements, if any, to be imposed and reserved in connection with the addition.
b. Certificate of Dedication. The plat shall contain a certificate of dedication of all streets, public highways,
alleys, parks and other land intended for public use, signed by the owner or owners and by all other parties who
have mortgage or lien interests in the property and acknowledged before a notary public. All deed restrictions
that are to be filed with the plat shall be shown or filed separately. The certificate of dedication shall be
substantially in the following form:
1. Individual Owner(s).
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF ____________
I (we) the undersigned owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as
the ____________ addition to the City of Sansom Park, Texas, and whose name is
subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all rights-of-way,
streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown for
the purpose and consideration therein expressed. I (we) further certify that all other parties
who have a mortgage or lien interest in the ____________ addition have been notified and
signed this plat.
I (we) further acknowledge that the dedications and/or exactions made herein are
proportional to the impact of the subdivision upon the public services required.
Owner for __________________
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF ____________
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________,
known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/536
acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purpose and consideration therein
stated.
Given upon my hand and seal of office this ______ day of ____________, 2____.
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission Expires:
2. Lienholder's Ratification.
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF ____________
Whereas (Lien Holder Name), acting by and through the undersigned, its duly authorized
agent, is (are) the lien holder(s) of the property described hereon, does (do) hereby ratify
all dedications and provisions of this plat as shown.
(typed name of authorized agent, title, Lien Holder)
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________,
known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and
acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purpose and consideration
expressed and in the capacity therein stated and as the act and deed of said
____________.
Given upon my hand and seal of office this ______ day of ____________, 2____.
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission Expires:
If no liens exist, add the following statement to the end of the plat dedication:
There are no liens against the property.
Corporate or partnership dedication.
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF ____________
Whereas ____________, acting by and through the undersigned, its duly authorized agent,
is the sole owner of a tract of land situated in the ____________ Survey, Abstract
____________, County of ____________, according to the deed recorded in Volume
______, Page ______, Deed Records, ____________ County, Texas, and more
particularly described as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/536
(Insert legal description here)
NOW, THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
THAT, ____________ by and through the undersigned, its duly authorized agent, does
hereby adopt this plat designating the hereinabove described property as ____________,
an addition to the City of Sansom Park, Tarrant County, Texas, and I (we) do hereby
dedicate the rights-of-way, (alleys, parks) and easements shown thereon to the public's use
unless otherwise noted.
WITNESS my (our) hand(s) at Sansom Park, Tarrant County, Texas this the ______ day
of ____________, 2____.
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF ____________
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________,
____________ of ____________ a corporation (partnership, JV) known to me to be the
person(s) whose name(s) subscribed to the above and foregoing instrument, and
acknowledged to me that he/they executed the same for the purpose and consideration
expressed and in the capacity therein stated and as the act and deed of said corporation
(partnership, JV).
Given upon my hand and seal of office this ______ day of ____________, 2____.
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission Expires:
c. Surveyor Certificate. The plat shall contain the following certification by a surveyor to the effect that the
plan represents a survey made by him, and that all the necessary survey monuments are correctly shown thereon:
This is to certify that I, ____________, a Registered Professional Land Surveyor of the State of
Texas, have platted the above subdivision from an actual survey on the ground; and that all lot
corners, angle points, and points of curve shall be properly marked on the ground, and that this
plat correct represents that survey made by me.
(print name), Surveyor
Texas R.P.L.S. No. ____________
Date:
(seal)
d. Waivers. The final plat shall contain a waiver of claim for damages against the City occasioned by the
establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface of any portion of existing streets and alleys to conform to
the grades established in the subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/536
e. Approvals. The following approval blocks shall be executed after final approval:
1. I hereby certify that the above and foregoing plat of ____________ Addition to the City of
Sansom Park, Texas, was approved by the City Council of the City of Sansom Park on the ______
day of ____________, 2____.
This approval shall be invalid unless the approved plat for such addition is recorded in the
office of the County Clerk of ____________, County, Texas, within two (2) years from
said date of final approval. Said addition shall be subject to all the requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Sansom Park.
WITNESS OUR HAND, this ______ day of ____________, 2____.
City Secretary
2. The following approvals shall be placed on a final plat, in a manner that will allow the filing in
of the certificates by the proper party.
Approved:
Mayor, City of Sansom Park, Texas
Date
Attest:
City Secretary
Date
3. The following approvals shall be placed on an amending or minor plat:
Approved:
City Administrator
Date
Attest:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/536
City Secretary Date
Section 4.08 Construction Plans for Public Improvements
a. Generally. The applicant shall submit construction plans and profile sheets for all public works
improvements for review with the application for approval of the final plat. Incomplete plans shall be returned to
the applicant. Design standards of the City in effect at the time of submission of the plat shall be used, subject to
the approval of the City Engineer.
b. Specifically.
1. Construction plans and profiles shall be prepared by an engineer and drawn on sheet size as
approved by the Administrative Official, and shall include a cover sheet with index, general site
layout and required calculations.
2. Each sheet shall include north point, scale, and date. Benchmark description to sea level datum
shall be included with the plans.
3. Each sheet shall show the seal and signature of the engineer who prepared the plans and shall
include the following, unless specifically approved otherwise by the Administrative Official:
a. A plan and profile of each street with top of curb grades shown. Scale shall be one inch
(1") = one hundred feet (100') horizontally, and one inch = ten feet vertical scale.
b. The cross-section of proposed streets, alleys, and sidewalks showing the width and type of
pavement, base and sub-grade, and location within the right-of-way. These plan-profiles shall
show the existing ground and the proposed grade at five (5) points of cross-section; that is, at
the centerline, the back-of-curb lines, and the property lines.
c. A plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers, with grades and pipe sizes indicated and
showing locations of manholes, clean-outs, and other appurtenances, and a cross-section of
embedment.
d. A plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of
valves, fire hydrants, fittings and other appurtenances, with a section showing embedment.
e. A plan to scale of all areas contributing stormwater runoff or drainage within and
surrounding the proposed subdivision. Such plan shall indicate size of areas, storm frequency
and duration data, amounts of runoff, points of concentration, and other data necessary to
adequately design drainage facilities for the area. This should analyze upstream and/or
downstream impacts, and should address any improvements needed off-site to prevent flooding
of established developments.
f. A plan and profile showing size and location of proposed storm sewers, showing hydraulic
data, pipe grades and sizes, manholes, inlets, pipe connections, culverts, outlet structures,
bridges, and other structures.
g. Profile views of individual improvements shall have no more than two improvements on
one sheet unless specifically approved by the City Engineer.
c. Responsibility. The purpose of the City review is to assure conformance to City policies and standards.
However, the City review is limited to facts as presented on submitted plans. The City takes no project
engineering responsibility. The engineer certifying the plans is the engineer responsible for the accuracy and
completeness of the documents submitted for review and actual construction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/536
d. Corrections. The City reserves the right to require plan corrections when actual conditions in the field
which are found to be contrary to or omitted from the previously submitted plan.
e. Approval. If construction plans are approved, the plans shall be marked “approved” and one set shall be
returned to the applicant, and at least two sets shall be retained in the City's files. The developer shall provide
additional sets of the approved plans to the City, as specified by the City Engineer, for use during construction.
A full set of the City-approved and stamped construction plans must be available for inspection on the job site at
all times.
f. Revisions. If the conditions of approval require revision(s) to the construction plans, one set shall be marked
with objections noted (on the plans themselves and/or in memo format) and returned to the applicant for
correction, whereupon the applicant's engineer shall correct the plans as requested and resubmit them for
decision. A properly revised set of construction plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer within 10 working
days of receipt of the notice of the City's Engineer's decision.
Section 4.09 Minor Plat Submittal Requirements
a. Requirements. When a tract of land has not been previously platted and recorded, the subdivider may elect
to combine the preliminary and final plats of a subdivision and submit an application for approval of a minor
plat if the tract:
1. Involves four or less lots;
2. Is to be subdivided without ROW dedication, change of street location, or without substantial
effect on City services, drainage or adjacent properties; and
3. Does not require the extension of municipal facilities.
b. Name. A minor plat may bear the name of the original survey and abstract number in which said property is
located as an Addition. It is subdivided into numbered lots out of that survey.
c. Information. An application for approval of a minor plat shall contain the information required by Section
4.06 unless the Administrative Official determines additional information is necessary to ascertain whether
sufficient public infrastructure exists.
Section 4.10 Amending Plat Submittal Requirements
a. Purpose. An amending plat is a plat which is solely for one or more of the following purposes:
1. To alter the interior lot line or change building setback lines for purposes of a more buildable
area without increasing the number of lots;
2. To correct an error in course or distance;
3. To add any course or distance that was omitted;
4. To correct an error in the description of the real property;
5. To indicate monuments set after death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or
surveyor charged with responsibility for setting monuments;
6. To show location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character
or was incorrectly shown;
7. To correct scrivener or clerical error or omission; may include, but are not limited to lot
numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/536
8. To correct error in course or distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots where both lot
owners join in the proposed revision and neither lot is abolished but does not attempt to remove
recorded covenants or restrictions;
9. To relocate a lot line in order to cure an encroachment of a building improvement on a lot line or
an easement;
10. To relocate lot lines where all owners join in the application for the plat amendment provided
that the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded restrictions or covenants or change the
number of lots;
11. To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
a. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
c. The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
d. The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary
the extension of municipal facilities.
b. Note on Plat. Amending plats shall contain a note describing the correction, framed in a bold line so as to
be distinctly visible on the face of the plat.
c. Requirements. All requirements of Sections 4.02 and 4.06 shall be satisfied for submittal of an application
for approval of an amending plat and the following minimum certification shall be added to the owner's
dedication on all amending plats: “This plat does not increase the number of lots or alter or remove existing deed
restrictions or covenants, if any, on this property.”
d. Conditions. No conditions except those pertaining to the accuracy or clarity of the face of the plat or the
provision of adequate utilities or payment of delinquent fiscal charges shall be added as a condition of filing an
amending plat and no changes may be shown other than as specified in this Ordinance.
Section 4.11 Replat Submittal Requirements
a. Generally. The Administrative Official may require the applicant to submit a revised preliminary plat prior
to City approval of a replat involving four (4) or more lots. In addition, a final drainage study may be required if
determined necessary by the City Engineer.
b. Waiver. The Administrative Official may waive the requirement for a revised preliminary plat when the
replat is without significant change of street location, and without substantial effect on City services, drainage or
adjacent properties.
c. Requirements. An application for approval of a replat shall include all information required by Section 4.02
and, if applicable, Section 4.06, and the following minimum certification: “This plat does not alter or remove
existing deed restrictions or covenants, if any, on this property.” This statement shall also be included in the
owner's dedication on all replats.
ARTICLE 5 - PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL
Section 5.01 General Provisions
a. Authority for Approval of Minor and Amending Plats. The Administrative Official is authorized to approve
all minor plats, and amending plats. An applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Administrative
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/536
Official may request that the plat be referred to the Council, for decision.
b. Approval by City Council. The City Council shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove all preliminary plats, replats, and final plats.
c. Conformance. All preliminary plats shall substantially conform to any concept plan or plan for development
or planned development plan approved in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
d. Certain Planned Development District Plats. When preparing a plat for the subdivision or resubdivision of
unplatted tracts in a planned development (PD) district for manufactured housing, the subdivider is encouraged
to formalize pre-existing tract patterns into lots. In an effort to establish a consistent and cohesive lot pattern,
limited deviations from the pre-existing tract area boundaries may be permitted due to irregularity in tract
ownership and development. Any such allowance shall generally not result in an increase in the total number of
lots unless authorized by City Council. Any changes from the pre-existing tract layout shall be firmly based on
promoting a regular lot pattern that is in keeping with the characteristics for that particular neighborhood.
e. Plat Review and Conditional Approval. The City Council may include conditions for the approval of a plat;
these conditions may include those generated by City Staff and their representatives, and may include those
outlined in this Ordinance and other ordinances of the City, or conditions which are reasonable in nature and
intended to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. A plat which is approved with
conditions or stipulations constitutes a denial of the plat until such time as the conditions or stipulations are
satisfied.
f. Filing Date. The 30-day period for approval or disapproval of a plat, as established in Chapter 212 of the
Texas Local Government Code, shall commence on the date of the Administrative Official determines the
application meets the requirements of this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances, except for any variances
requested in writing.
Section 5.02 Expiration of Plats
a. Preliminary Plat. Approval of the preliminary plat expires two (2) years after the approval date. For a
phased subdivision, any part of the preliminary plat which has not been final platted shall expire after one year
from the completion of the previous phase if a new phase is not started.
b. Other Plats. A final plat, replat, amending or minor plat which has not been recorded in the County Records
within two (2) years from the date of approval shall expire.
c. Resubmittal. Upon the expiration of a plat, unless the City makes a determination that the applicant has
made progress, as that term is defined by Section 5.03, the applicant must resubmit an application for approval,
including payment of a fee and complete the review process.
d. Extension and Reinstatement Procedure.
1. Not later than sixty days prior to the lapse of approval for a preliminary plat, the property owner
may petition the City Council to extend or reinstate the approval. The petition shall be considered at a
public meeting of the City Council.
2. In determining whether to grant such request, the City Council shall take into account the
reasons for lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the
original approval, the extent to which the property owner agrees to abide by newly adopted
subdivision regulations, and any changed conditions in the surrounding area which would make an
extension undesirable. The City Council shall extend its approval of the plat, or deny the request. In
the event the City Council denies extension of the preliminary plat, the property owner must submit a
new application for approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/536
3. The City Council may specify a shorter time for lapse of the extended plat that is applicable to
original approvals, but shall not extend the period that a preliminary plat approval is valid to more
than one year from the date the original approval expires.
Section 5.03 Project Expiration
a. A project shall expire on the fifth anniversary of the date the application for the first permit application for
the project was filed with the City if no progress has been made towards completion of the project. For purposes
of this Section, “project” means an endeavor over which a regulatory agency exerts its jurisdiction and for which
one or more permits are required to initiate, continue, or complete the endeavor. A project shall expire on the
fifth anniversary of the date the application for the first permit for the project was filed with the City if no
progress has been made towards completion of the project. Progress towards completion of the project shall
include any one of the following:
1. An application for a final plat or plan for development is submitted to a regulatory agency.
2. A good-faith attempt is made to file with a regulatory agency an application for a permit
necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project.
3. Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs
associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in
part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five percent of the
most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located.
4. Fiscal security is posted with a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation
required by the regulatory agency.
5. Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid to a regulatory agency.
Section 5.04 Continuance of Plat Application
a. Time Period for Action. All plat applications shall be acted upon within 30 days from the filing date unless
a waiver request is submitted in accordance with Subsection (b) below. If the applicant desires that the Council
delay action on a plat application beyond the thirty (30) day period, the applicant shall submit a written request
to the Council stating the applicant's desire to waive the requirement for action within thirty (30) days.
b. Waiver Requests. An applicant may request in writing a waiver of the time limits for action. The waiver
request shall contain a statement of the reasons for the waiver and the time for which a waiver is sought. Waiver
requests which have not been received by the Administrative Official on or before the fourth calendar day prior
to the Council meeting at which action is to be taken on the plat, the application shall be submitted to the
Council who may grant the request, or deny the request and taken action on the plat application at such meeting
as scheduled. [sic]
c. Action on the Waiver Request: Action on the waiver request shall be taken at the Council meeting at which
the plat is scheduled for decision. If the waiver is granted, action on the plat application shall be tabled for a time
certain consistent with the approved waiver.
Section 5.05 Preliminary Plat Processing
a. Generally. After an application for approval of a preliminary plat has been determined to be complete in
accordance with Section 4.02, the Administrative Official shall review the application to determine whether the
application complies with applicable ordinances, and forward the application to the other City departments,
generate plat review comments and notify the applicant of same. It is the applicant's responsibility to revise the
application to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/536
b. Requirements. The plat application shall be deemed filed with the City on the date that the Administrative
Official determines that the application and all supporting documents meet the requirements of this Ordinance
and other applicable ordinances, except for any variances requested in writing by the applicant. This shall
constitute the filing date. Thereafter, the Administrative Official shall present the plat to the Council for their
consideration and action on the preliminary plat.
c. Filing Date. The plat application shall be deemed filed with the City on the date that the Administrative
Official determines that the application and all supporting documents meet the requirements of this Ordinance
and other applicable ordinances, except for any variances requested in writing by the applicant. This shall
constitute the filing date. Thereafter, the Administrative Official shall present the plat to the City Council for
action.
d. City Council Action. The City Council shall determine whether to approve, approve with conditions or
deny the preliminary plat application. The Council shall consider and act upon the preliminary plat within 30
days from the official date of filing of the application.
e. Conditions. The City Council may impose such conditions to the approval of a preliminary or final plat
application as are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with this Ordinance. Such conditions may address
but are not limited to matters involving conformity with the City's zoning regulations, the availability and
capacity of public improvements, or the phasing of development. A plat approved with conditions shall
constitute approval subject to conformity with the prescribed conditions, but shall constitute disapproval until
such conditions are met.
Section 5.06 Revisions Following Approval of Preliminary Plat
a. Minor Changes. Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a preliminary plat may be
incorporated in an application for approval of a final plat without the necessity of filing a new application for
approval of a preliminary plat. Any substantial deviation in street layout or alignment, lot size or configuration,
utility and/or drainage layout, or easements shall require submittal for consideration of a new preliminary plat.
b. Amendments. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved
preliminary plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new application for
approval of a preliminary plat before approval of a final plat.
Section 5.07 Final Plat
a. Purpose. The purpose of a final plat is to assure that the division or development of the land subject to the
plat is consistent with all standards and regulations of this Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, that
public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the City or
that provision for such installation has been made, and that all other requirements and conditions have been
satisfied or provided for to allow the plat to be recorded.
b. Applicability. Approval of a final plat shall be required prior to any nonexempt division of land and prior to
any grading or site preparation activities for a lot or tract of land that requires installation of public
improvements on or adjacent thereto. A final plat application shall not be required for any land division that may
be approved through the minor plat procedures.
c. Where No Preliminary Plat Approved. Where no preliminary plat is required, the final plat application must
meet all of the submittal requirements for a preliminary plat that are not included in the list of application
requirements.
Section 5.08 Final Plat Processing
a. Generally. After an application for approval of a final plat has been determined to be complete, the
Administrative Official shall forward the application to other City departments for review to determine whether
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/536
the application complies with applicable Ordinances. The Administrative Official shall, within a reasonable
time, generate plat review comments, and notify the applicant of same.
b. Filing Date. The plat application shall be deemed filed with the City on the date that the Administrative
Official determines that the application and all supporting documents meet the requirements of this Ordinance
and other applicable ordinances, except for any variances requested in writing by the applicant. This shall
constitute the filing date. Thereafter, the Administrative Official shall present the plat to the City Council for
action.
c. Council Action. The Council shall take action on the final plat within thirty (30) days of the filing date
unless the applicant requests and consents in writing to waive any time deadline for action upon the plat. If the
final plat meets all the requirements of these regulations, the Council shall approve the plat. If the plat does not
meet the requirements of these regulations, the Council shall disapprove the plat. A plat approved with
conditions shall constitute approval subject to conformity with the prescribed conditions, but shall constitute
disapproval until such conditions are met.
d. Criteria for Decision. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a final
plat shall be approved or denied.
1. The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat except for minor changes authorized
under Section 5.06 and that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved
preliminary plat.
2. The final layout of the subdivision meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained
in this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
3. The plat conforms to the Comprehensive Plan, including its future land use map (within the City
limits), the master plans for current and future streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, and public utility
facilities, as well as extension of the City's roads, streets, and public highways within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, taking into account access to and extension of sewer and water mains and
the instrumentalities of public utilities.
4. The plat conforms to the City's zoning regulations or regulations contained in an approved
development agreement affecting the land, and all other applicable City ordinances and regulations.
Section 5.09 Minor Plat Processing
All minor plats will be accepted for review in accordance with Section 4.02, and plat review comments
generated and a copy of this review given to the applicant. It will be the applicant's responsibility to revise the
plat as needed to receive approval from City Staff. Within 30 days of the filing date, the Administrative Official
shall take action on the application. Upon approval of a minor plat, the Administrative Official and City
Secretary shall attest to the approval of the plat by signing the plat. If the plat complies with Section 5.11 hereof,
the Administrative Official will file the plat in accordance with this Ordinance. If the plat does not meet the
requirements of this Ordinance, the Administrative Official shall deny the plat.
Section 5.10 Amending Plat Processing
a. Generally. An amending plat will be accepted for review in accordance with Section 4.02. After an
application for approval of an amending plat has been determined to be complete, the Administrative Official
shall forward the application to other City departments for review to determine whether the application complies
with applicable Ordinances. The Administrative Official shall, within a reasonable time, generate plat review
comments, [and] notify the applicant of same. It is the applicant's responsibility to revise the application to meet
the requirements of the Ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/536
b. Approval. Within 30 days of the filing date, the Administrative Official shall take action upon the
application. Upon approval, the Administrative Official shall sign the plat. If the plat meets the requirements of
Section 5.11 hereof, the Administrative Official will record the plat. If the plat does not meet with requirements
of this Ordinance, the Administrative Official shall deny the plat.
c. Alternative. Should any of the conditions imposed pursuant to this Ordinance prove unacceptable to the
applicant, the applicant may submit an application for a replat. An amending plat may be submitted and
processed as a replat.
Section 5.11 Recording of Plat
a. Requirements. For a plat to be recorded after approval, all conditions of approval must be satisfied,
including, but not limited to, the following:
1. All required fees shall be paid, including park dedication and tree replacement fees, if required.
2. All plats shall be provided in an electronic format approved by the Administrative Official.
3. All covenants required by ordinances shall be reviewed and approved by the City.
4. On-site easements and rights-of-way shall be properly described and noted on the plat.
5. Off-site easements and rights-of-way shall be dedicated by the respective owners, approved by
the City and filed of record with the county.
6. All required abandonments of public rights-of-way or easements that must be approved by the
City Council and the abandonment ordinance numbers shall be shown on the plat.
7. Original tax certificates showing that all taxes are paid, as well as a statement from the City that
no outstanding monies are owed to the City shall be presented from each taxing unit with jurisdiction
of the real property.
8. A copy of the ownership and dedication statement from the plat shall be submitted on separate
letter or legal size paper, executed before a notary public, with all original signatures.
9. A copy of the executed developer's agreement, if one was required to be executed, shall be
submitted.
10. The required financial assurance and contractor's proof of insurance for any proposed public
improvements.
11. Monumentation required by Section 10.03.
12. Evidence of approval of any necessary permits from the Texas Department of Transportation,
any utility district, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or any other state or federal agency shall be
submitted.
13. Any lienholder of the property to be platted must execute a statement on the plat or a separate
instrument subordinating the lienholder's interest to the plat and the dedications thereon.
b. Proof of Title. The applicant shall furnish the City a title insurance policy or other documentation of title
satisfactory to the City, covering the platted area dedicated to the City. The documents shall reflect that the
applicant has fee simple title to the property to be dedicated with no encumbrances except for those liens for
which consents have been filed and shall be updated to the date the City Engineer releases the plat to be filed
with the county clerk.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/536
c. Recording. Within fourteen (14) days after the later to occur of plat approval and compliance with all
stipulations of approval and the requirements of this Section, the City shall record the plat in the county plat
records. The final plat shall not be returned or released to the developer until recorded.
d. Original Signatures on Mylar. All revisions to the plat shall be made prior to running the black-line mylars
which are to be signed by the owner, notary, surveyor, and City representatives. The City will then obtain
signatures of the appropriate City representatives.
e. Special Filings. In the event that the applicant requests a special filing with the County, a check payable to
the City shall be submitted to the City Secretary in the amount of the appropriate fee and expenses. Fees for
special filings of plats shall be set by the City Council.
ARTICLE 6 - PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS
Section 6.01 General Standards
a. Documents. Design and construction of public works improvements must conform to the standards, criteria,
and requirements of the following, as they may from time to time be amended by those responsible for their
promulgation:
1. The Thoroughfare Plan;
2. The Thoroughfare Standards of the City of Sansom Park;
3. The Texas Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual;
4. The North Texas Council of Governments Standard Specifications for Construction of Public
Works;
5. The City of Sansom Park Public Works Manual;
6. The American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials Design Manual;
7. The Texas Health Code;
8. The Master Drainage Plan, as applicable;
9. The Floodplain Ordinance;
10. All other codes and ordinances of the City.
b. Design Expiration. If the construction of public works improvements is not completed within two (2) years
from the preliminary plat approval date, then the infrastructure must be redesigned using the most current
Design Standards.
Section 6.02 Common Areas
An area retained in private ownership but intended for the benefit of the owners of lots in the plat must be shown
as a common area and a separate lot on the plat. A homeowners' or property owners' association which meets the
requirements of Section 10.05 must be approved for the area before the final plat is recorded.
Section 6.03 Fire and Police Access
a. Generally. The layout design of a plat must take into consideration the provision of adequate fire and police
access.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/536
b. Water supply. Provisions must be made for the extension of water lines and the appropriate placement of
fire hydrants as required by the fire department before approval of the final plat.
Section 6.04 Timing of Public Works Improvements
a. Deeds in Escrow. As a condition of preliminary plat approval, the City Council may require the property
owner to deposit deeds in escrow describing by metes and bounds street rights-of-way, park land, and easements
required by these regulations, conveying such rights-of-way, park land and easements to the City, pending
acceptance of improvements by the City and recordation of the final plat. In the event the property owner fails to
complete the public works improvements, and the improvements are deemed necessary for the preservation of
the public health and safety, the City may compel the delivery and recording of the deeds in order to complete
the improvements as required.
b. Installation after Final Plat Approval. The City Council on request of the applicant may defer the obligation
to install one or more public improvements to serve the development until after final plat approval. The request
shall be submitted with an application for preliminary approval. If the subdivider elects not to file for
preliminary approval, public works improvements shall be installed after approval of the final plat. In either
case, deferral of the obligation to install public improvements shall be conditioned on execution of a
development agreement and sufficient surety to secure the obligations defined in the agreement.
Section 6.05 Sanitary Waste Collection Access
Each nonresidential development that has a refuse facility or location for solid waste collection containers shall
provide for safe and convenient access.
Section 6.06 Retaining Walls
a. Material. All retaining walls shall be constructed of inorganic material such as masonry, brick or stone.
Timbers, railroad ties, or wood materials are prohibited.
b Plans required. Plans for a retaining wall must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. The review
shall verify the following:
1. That the retaining wall does not encroach on an adjoining property without the consent of the
adjoining owner;
2. That the wall is constructed of a permitted material; and
3. The wall in not constructed within a utility easement or without a written waiver or consent from
the utility company holding rights to the easement.
c. Inspection Required. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until the retaining wall is constructed,
been inspected by the City and the requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied.
Section 6.07 Fiscal Assurance
a. Performance Bonds; Escrow Agreement. If the developer requests that building permits be issued for
construction on lots within the development prior to completion and acceptance of all public works
improvements, and the Administrative Official determines that permits should be issued, the following
requirements shall apply:
1. A performance bond meeting the requirements of Chapter 2253, Texas Government Code, will
be submitted in an amount of not less than the value of the public works improvements, as
determined by the City Engineer, to insure completion of all improvements; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/536
2. If the cost of completing the public works improvements at the time the building permits are
requested is one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars or less, as determined by the City Engineer,
cash money in the amount of the cost of completing the improvements, as determined by the City
Engineer, may be deposited with a bank as escrow agent pursuant to an escrow agreement, the form
and provisions thereof to be approved by the City Attorney, to insure completion of the improvement.
b. Model Home. The Administrative Official may authorize construction of a model home in a subdivision
without completion of the public works improvements.
c. Payment Bond; Assurance of Payment. Prior to acceptance by the City of any improvements, the developer
shall provide one of the following assurances:
1. A payment bond meeting the requirements of Chapter 2253, Texas Government Code, in an
amount of not less than one hundred (100%) percent of the approximate total cost of the contract,
guaranteeing the full and proper protection of all claimants supplying labor and material for the
construction of the improvements, in the form approved by the City and by a surety authorized to do
business in Texas; or
2. If the total contract amount of all public works improvements is fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars
or less, as determined by the City Engineer, or the improvements, regardless of the contract amount,
are for a one-lot development, the owner and contractor may, in lieu of furnishing a payment bond,
agree to pay and satisfy all claims, liens, charges and encumbrances arising from construction of the
public works improvements and furnish a written affidavit signed by the developer, in a form
provided by the City Attorney, stating the following:
a. All charges, accounts and claims for labor performed and material furnished in connection
with the improvements have been paid in full; and
b. There are no unreleased recorded liens filed against the improvements or land to which
they are affixed that are to be dedicated to the public.
d. Amount and Acceptability. The security shall be issued in the amount of 125% of the cost estimate
approved by the City Engineer for all public improvements associated with the subdivision. The bonds must be
issued by a Best-rated surety company that is duly authorized to transact business in the State of Texas; however,
the City retains the right to reject any surety company regardless of such company's qualifications or
authorization to do business in Texas if the company does not have a resident agent and/or surety does not meet
the requirements of Art. 7.19-1 of the Texas Insurance Code. The security shall be subject to the approval of the
City Attorney.
Section 6.08 Maintenance and Warranty of Improvements
a. Maintenance During Construction. The property owner shall maintain all required public works
improvements during construction of the development.
b. Warranty after Construction. The developer shall covenant to warranty the required public works
improvements for a period of two (2) years following issuance of a letter of acceptance by the City of all
required public improvements and shall provide a maintenance bond in the amount of the cost to construct the
improvements guaranteeing the maintenance and good condition of the improvements insuring the repair and
replacement of all defective work due to faulty materials and workmanship that appear within a period of two
(2) years from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the City. The bonds must be issued by a Best-rated
surety company that meets the requirements of Section 6.08.d. [6.07.d.]
Section 6.09 Inspection and Acceptance of Public Improvements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/536
a. Inspections. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the City Engineer. Construction shall be in
accordance with the approved construction plans. Any significant change in design required during construction
shall be made by the subdivider's engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer. If the City
Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required public works improvements have not been constructed
properly and in accordance with the approved construction plans, the property owner shall be responsible for
completing and/or correcting the public improvements.
b. Fees. The developer shall reimburse the City for all inspection costs, plan review costs, plus 4% of the costs
of the public works improvements to reimburse the City its administrative costs.
c. Submission of As-Built Plans or Record Drawings. The City shall not accept dedication of required public
improvements until the applicant's engineer has certified to the City Engineer, through submission of a detailed
“as-built” record drawing or survey plat of the property and any off-site easements, the location, dimensions,
materials, and other information establishing that the public improvements have been built in accordance with
the approved construction plans. Each as-built sheet shall show all changes made in the plans during
construction and on each sheet there shall be an as-built stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and date.
Required formats include:
1. One (1) full-size mylar set (22" x 34" sheet size); and
2. Electronic drawing in autocad or .pdf format of the final plat and water, wastewater and storm
drainage layouts.
d. Acceptance of Improvements. When the developer has certified to the City that the public works
improvements have been completed in accordance with the plans and applicable ordinances, the City Engineer
shall determine whether the public improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved
construction plans and Design Standards and applicable ordinances. If so, the City Engineer shall accept such
improvements on behalf of the City. Acceptance of the improvements shall mean that the property owner has
transferred all rights to all the public works improvements to the City for use and maintenance. The City
Engineer may accept dedication of a portion of the required public works improvements, provided adequate
surety has been given for the completion of all of other improvements. Upon acceptance of the required public
improvements, the City Engineer shall issue a certificate to the property owner stating that all required public
improvements have been accepted.
e. Disclaimer. Approval of a preliminary or final plat by the City Council shall not constitute acceptance of
any of the public improvements required to serve the subdivision. No public improvements shall be accepted for
dedication by the City except in accordance with this Section.
Section 6.10 Tree Removal
Regulations regarding the protection of existing trees on properties being developed or redeveloped. Refer to the
Zoning Ordinance, Tree Preservation. The design and construction of public works improvements must be done
with due regard for the protection of existing trees in accordance with the City's Tree Preservation Ordinance.
ARTICLE 7 - STREET AND RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS
Section 7.01 General
a. Thoroughfare Plan. The streets of a proposed development shall conform to the general intent of the
Thoroughfare Plan. The City's Engineer shall determine final alignment and related right-of-way dedications.
b. Continuity of Street Systems. Proposed streets for a subdivision shall be effectively related to the present
and future street system and development of the surrounding area. Any proposed streets shall provide for
appropriate continuation or completion of any existing streets, whether constructed or dedicated, which project
to the limits of a proposed subdivision or are adjacent to the subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/536
c. Substandard Street Improvements. Where an existing thoroughfare that does not meet the City's right-ofway
or design standards abuts a proposed subdivision, the City may require that the entire right-of-way be
dedicated and/or improved to the City's Design Standards, based upon factors including the impact of the
proposed development on the road, safety to the traveling public, conditions and life expectancy of the road, the
impact of the proposed subdivision on other roads, the timing of this development in relation to need for
improving the road, the impact of the traffic on the road and City's roadway system as a whole.
d. Layout. The street layout shall be in conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of the
entire neighborhood areas. Whenever the proposed development contains or is adjacent, or parallel to a railroad
right-of-way or a major thoroughfare or freeway, provision shall be made for a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such right-of-way to provide reasonable use of the intervening land.
e. Participation in Costs of Improvements. The City may participate in the costs of improvements required by
this Section in order to achieve proportionality between the traffic impacts created by the proposed development
and the obligation to provide adequate roadways. The construction of improvements and the provisions for
participation in costs by the City shall be included in a developer's agreement.
Section 7.02 Street and Driveway Access
a. Access. To insure adequate access to each subdivision, there should be at least two (2) points of ingress and
egress to the City's improved thoroughfare system. The City may require that more than two access points be
constructed if the configuration, number of lots, or other consideration creates the need for the additional access
points. “Two (2) points of vehicular access” shall be construed to mean that the subdivision has at least two (2)
road entrances accessing the subdivision from the City's improved thoroughfare system.
b. Limitations on Driveway Access.
1. To minimize traffic hazards created by numerous intersections along major thoroughfares, where
a residential subdivision will abut on or contain an existing or proposed arterial street, the street shall
be designed so that direct vehicular access from any residential lot to such arterial street is prohibited.
Where other means of access are not available or permitted, private easements for access shall be
provided when approved by the Council. The street system should be designed to allow a minimum
of individual access drives to collector streets.
2. Streets shall be designed to conform to existing or proposed driveway openings (including those
on the other side of an existing or planned median-divided arterial, in which case new streets shall
align with such driveway openings such that median openings can be shared).
3. To the greatest extent possible, the number of lots fronting along residential collector streets
shall be minimized in order to ensure adequate traffic safety and efficiency. No more than twenty
percent (20%) of the total centerline length of a collector street may have residential lots fronting
onto the collector on each side of the street.
4. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, traffic safety concerns so necessitate, the Engineer may
require a residential subdivision to be designed to provide rear entry access from a private access
easement.
5. The following note may be required on the face of any plat intended to be filed in the county
plat records. “No lot within this addition shall be allowed driveway access onto ____________
Street.”
c. Reserved Strips. The reservation of private ownerships of strips of land at the end of or alongside proposed
or existing streets intended solely or primarily for the purpose of controlling access to property not included in
the development is prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/536
d. Half-Streets. Half-streets are prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conformance with other requirements of this Ordinance and where the City Council finds it will
be practicable to obtain dedication when the adjoining land is platted.
e. Emergency Access. Each subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate emergency access for public
safety vehicles.
Section 7.03 Right-of-Way Requirements
a. Generally. The applicant shall be required to dedicate right-of-way as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan, or
as required in this section for all streets, or parts thereof, within or at the perimeter of the subdivision. Such
roadways are shown on the City's Comprehensive Plan and all affected areas being platted are required to
conform to this plan. The design speeds, right-of-way and pavement widths, street classifications, drive lanes,
edge lanes, median requirements and center turn lanes shall be as set forth in the Public Works Manual and
Thoroughfare Plan. The street classifications are as follows: Primary Arterial, Minor Arterial, Collector and
Local or Residential.
b. Additional Right-of-Way. Additional right-of-way may be required for the following purposes:
1. At intersections where adjacent property is zoned for commercial, industrial, or other high
intensity use to provide free right turns, center turn lanes, or other beneficial alignments intended to
alleviate existing or potential traffic congestion; or
2. To eliminate street intersection offsets, as determined by the City Engineer; or
3. When necessitated by one or more of the factors set forth in Section 7.01.
c. Slope Easements. The dedication of easements, in addition to dedicated rights-of-way shall be required
whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall
be no steeper than three feet (3') horizontal run to one foot (1') vertical height, or a three-to-one (3:1) slope.
Section 7.04 Street Design Requirements
a. Curvilinear Design Requirements. Curvilinear streets will be required in residential subdivisions.
Horizontal curve design must be such that safe travel through the curve can be anticipated at the design speed for
the roadway. In no case shall the centerline horizontal curves be less than as shown in the Design Standards.
b. Design Speed. Streets should be designed for a maximum speed based upon their classification, as set forth
in Section 7.03a.
c. Intersections.
1. All thoroughfares shall be continuous or in alignment with existing streets, unless variations are
deemed advisable by the City Council upon consideration of the City Engineer's recommendation.
2. Off-center street intersections (in which intersections are closer than 200 feet for thoroughfares
or 100 feet for residential streets) shall not be approved except in unusual cases.
3. More than two (2) streets intersecting at one point shall be avoided except where it is
impractical to secure a proper street system otherwise. Where several streets converge at one point,
setback lines, special rounding or cutoff of corners and/or a traffic circle may be required to insure
safety and facility of traffic movement.
4. No street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/536
5. The number of minor or local street offsets shall be minimized but, when approved, shall be
offset a minimum distance of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet on centerlines. At the intersection of
two collector and/or arterial streets, no offsets are permitted.
6. Acute angle intersections approved by the City Engineer are to have 25 feet or greater radii at
acute corners.
d. Hierarchy of Street Pattern.
1. Where a development will abut or contain an existing or proposed arterial street, a plan shall be
approved which would provide a minimum number of intersections along each arterial street.
2. Arterial streets should be intersected only by other arterial streets or collector streets rather than
minor streets.
3. There shall be a minimum of two thousand (2,000) feet between intersections of arterials and/or
collector streets.
4. There shall be no median break at intersections of arterial streets and/or collector streets, and
they must be at an interval of six hundred (600) feet or greater.
5. Minor collector streets may intersect arterial streets upon specific approval of the City Engineer
and the Administrative Official.
6. Minor or local streets should be planned to serve only local traffic.
e. Horizontal Alignment and Vertical Alignment. Horizontal and vertical alignment shall be in accordance
with the Design Standards. Reverse circular curves having a common tangent shall be separated by a tangent
section in accordance with the minimum tangents set forth in the Design Standards.
f. Street Cross Slopes. For drainage, all streets shall have a cross slope. The typical cross slope is 2.00%. At
intersections, the minimum cross slope allowed is 0.50% and the maximum allowed is 2.00%.
g. Street Drainage.
1. Topographic maps with contour intervals of two (2) feet (or less) and details of existing drainage
structures and watercourses shall be submitted along with calculations for all watersheds affecting
areas of the proposed storm drain design. Drainage design shall be computed as noted in the drainage
section of this Ordinance. Maps showing the delineation and flow from each drainage area must be
included in the plans along with all hydraulic calculations. Street and drainage profiles shall show the
location of the hydraulic grade line.
2. No streets shall be designed or constructed to a grade less than established in the Design
Standards.
h. Curb Radii. Radii at street intersections shall not be less than twenty (20) feet for residential streets and
thirty (30) feet for thoroughfare streets. If necessary, property lines shall be adjusted accordingly.
i. Variations. If existing topographic features prohibit the reasonable use of the above-specified design
requirements, the City Engineer may approve a variation. A request for the variation must be made in writing to
the City and must include an accurate topographic map of the area in question showing the proposed design.
j. Cul-de-Sacs.
1. A maximum number of twenty (20) dwelling units is permitted on a cul-de-sac street
permanently designed as such.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/536
2. The length of the cul-de-sac should not exceed four hundred (400) feet or be less than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet in length. However, density of development, topography, lot sizes and
other significant factors will be weighed in determining the length of a cul-de-sac street.
k. Block Lengths. Residential blocks shall not be longer than one thousand feet. Six hundred (600) feet is the
desirable minimum. Conditions of topography, surrounding platted subdivisions or circulation requirements may
dictate further study of the block length. Extremely short block lengths should be avoided as well to eliminate
the potential for increased traffic congestion created by too many intersections.
l. Dead-End Streets.
1. Dead-end streets shall be permitted only where a future extension or connection is to be made.
Street stubs shall be provided into adjacent property at a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet apart.
If adjacent property is undeveloped and a street must terminate temporarily, the right-of-way must
extend to the boundaries of the plat.
2. Barricades and other traffic controls shall be installed by the developer at dead-ends as required
by the Design Standards.
3. In the event that dead-end streets either dedicated or constructed are not to be extended,
permanent turn-around facilities shall be constructed by the developer not extending such street.
Appropriate provisions shall be made for access to adjoining undeveloped land.
4. Temporary paved turn-arounds which meet the requirements of the Design Standards are to be
provided at ends of streets more than one lot deep that will be extended in the future. The following
note should be placed on the plat:
“Cross-hatched area is temporary easement for turn-around until street is extended (insert
direction) in recorded plat.”
Section 7.05 Deferral of Obligation
a. Generally. Upon request of the applicant, the obligation to dedicate or improve thoroughfare rights-of-way
or to make intersection improvements imposed on a subdivision application may be deferred to a later stage of
the development process. As a condition of deferring the obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for or to improve
thoroughfares, which deferral shall be in the sole discretion of the City, the City shall require the developer to
execute a developer's agreement specifying the amount and timing of the rights-of-way dedication or
improvements to thoroughfares.
b. Options. Whenever the proposed development's share of the costs of a thoroughfare or traffic-control
improvement needed to mitigate traffic generated by the subdivision is less than 100%, the City in its sole
discretion, may participate in the excess costs for one or more improvements, or aggregate the costs of
improving multiple thoroughfares or intersections identified in the traffic impact analysis, and require
improvements to only some of the thoroughfares or intersections affected by the development.
Section 7.06 Paving Requirements
a. Streets. All streets shall be constructed and paved to City standards and within right-of-way as required by
the Thoroughfare Plan and in accordance with the City's Public Works Design Manual, as may be amended from
time to time. All streets, public and private, excluding residential areas where lot size is three-quarters (3/4ths)
of an acre or larger, shall include curb and gutter drainage with enclosed underground conduit and meeting the
following requirements:
1. Local streets shall be minimum of six inches thick and thoroughfares shall be a minimum of
eight inches thick.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/536
2. Where the plasticity index of the natural soil is equal to or exceeds fifteen (15), lime
stabilization will be required.
3. A minimum of six (6%) percent by weight of lime to a depth of six inches shall be required.
4. Soil samples for determining the plasticity of the natural soils will be taken at locations specified
by the City Engineer.
5. The pavement width and materials shall be as required in the Design Standards as may be
adopted and amended from time to time.
b. Parking Lots. Parking lots constructed of concrete shall be a minimum of five (5) inches in thickness and
shall have curbs and adequate outfall for drainage. Parking lots constructed of asphalt shall be a minimum of
four (4) inches in thickness and shall have curbs and adequate outfall for drainage.
Section 7.07 Private Streets
a. Generally. The City shall not approve a development with private streets unless the requirements of this
section are satisfied. If approved, a homeowners' or property owners' association is responsible for the cost of
maintenance of private streets.
b. City Services. The City has no obligation to maintain private streets. Depending on the characteristics of
the subdivision, the City may not provide certain other services, such as routine police patrols, enforcement of
traffic and parking ordinances, and preparation of accident reports.
c. Maintenance Standards. Maintenance, amenities, and landscaping of private streets shall conform to the
same standards regulating the maintenance, amenities, and landscaping of public streets.
d. Retention of Easements. The developer shall dedicate a utility, drainage, and emergency access easement in
private streets for the City and other utility companies for the following purposes:
1. To provide unrestricted use of the property for utilities and their maintenance;
2. To extend easement rights to all utility providers including cable companies operating within the
City;
3. To provide the City with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a
governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police protection, inspection
and code enforcement; and
4. To permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the private street lot that impairs
emergency access.
e. City Assumption of Maintenance. The covenants of the deed restrictions shall provide that if the
homeowners' association, its successors or assigns, fails or refuses to adequately maintain private streets and
related appurtenances, the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, to assume temporarily the duty of
performing the association's maintenance obligations at any time after the expiration of sixty (60) days after
receipt by the association, its successors or assigns of written notice from the City specifying the nature and
extent of the failure to maintain.
1. Upon assuming maintenance obligations, the City shall have the right to collect, when they
become due, the assessments levied by the homeowners' association for the purposes of repairing and
maintaining the private streets and related appurtenances, and if necessary, the City shall have the
right to enforce the payment of delinquent assessments in the manner set forth in the association's
documents.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/536
2. The City shall also have the right to levy an assessment upon each lot on a pro rata basis for the
cost of such maintenance, which assessment shall constitute an assessment lien upon the lot against
which each assessment is made.
3. Under no circumstances shall the City be liable to the association or any lot owner or their
respective heirs, successors or assigns for negligent acts or omissions relating in any manner to
maintaining, improving and preserving the private streets and related appurtenances.
f. Access Restrictions.
1. Each entrance to a private street shall be marked with a sign stating that it is a private street.
2. Either a guard house or an access control device such as a gate or cross-arm shall be constructed
at each entrance.
3. All restricted access entrances shall be manned twenty-four (24) hours every day, or an
alternative means shall be provided of ensuring access to the subdivision by the City and other utility
service providers with appropriate identification.
4. If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required to provide City services, the City
shall have the right to enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to
access at the sole expense of the association.
g. Restricted Access Entrance Design Standards. Private streets which have access controlled by a gate, crossarm,
or other access control device shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The street must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet at the
location of the access control device.
2. If an overhead barrier is used, it shall have a minimum height above the road surface as required
by the Fire Code for fire lanes.
3. The design of all gates, cross-arms and access control devices, including automatic opening
systems and manual backup systems, shall be approved by the Fire Department before installation.
4. The gates, cross-arms, and access control devices shall be tested and accepted by the Fire
Department before being put into operation;
5. Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum width of
twenty-four (24) feet.
6. If the entrance incorporates a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a
divided gate arrangement, the gate and street pavement widths may be reduced if approved by the
Fire Department. This approval shall be contingent upon the subdivision having a second approved
means of access, but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less
than fifteen (15) feet.
h. Visitor Entrance Design Standards. At least one entrance to a subdivision with private streets shall be
equipped for visitor access. In addition to the above Restricted Access Entrance Design Standards, the visitor
entrance shall be equipped with a call or code box located at least fifty (50) feet from the boundary of the
subdivision to provide for visitors calling in an automobile queuing. A turn-around space with a minimum
outside radius of thirty (30) feet shall be located between any call or code box and the access control device to
allow vehicles denied access to safely exit onto public streets in a “head out” position. A sign shall be erected
next to the edge of such turn-around space to prohibit vehicle parking in such space. A residents' entrance used
in combination with a visitor entrance shall comply with the requirements of this subsection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/536
Section 7.08 Sidewalks
a. Requirements Generally. Any new development in the City, excluding residential areas where lot size is
three-quarters (3/4ths) of an acre or larger, shall provide for the location and construction of sidewalks on both
sides of the street. This shall include the dedication of necessary right-of-way or pedestrian access easement and
the construction of sidewalks according to the specifications provided herein.
b. Requirements for Nonresidential Subdivisions.
1. Sidewalks, where required by the Comprehensive Plan, shall be required to be dedicated and
constructed for all nonresidential subdivisions.
2. The developer or builder of a nonresidential subdivision shall install sidewalks along the tract
being developed adjacent to all arterial and collector streets, including all development adjacent to
Highway 199, as per Texas Department of Transportation requirements.
3. Each developer and/or builder of a nonresidential subdivision shall construct sidewalks at the
time of construction of the development. In those circumstances where a sidewalk would impact the
construction of driveways and access walks, the sidewalks shall be constructed before the City's final
building inspection. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until required sidewalks are in
place.
c. Sidewalk Specifications. All sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide within a residential subdivision
and at least five (5) feet wide in a nonresidential subdivision and along thoroughfares and major collectors.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Works Design Manual.
d. Wheelchair Access Ramps.
1. A wheelchair access ramp shall be constructed at any point a proposed sidewalk intersects a
street with the exception of walks leading from the street to the door of a residence. If there is no
sidewalk, provisions shall be made for a wheelchair access ramp at each corner of an intersection.
Access ramps must be constructed with a maximum one (1) inch wide expansion material between
the street and ramp flush with the finish grade.
2. Care shall be taken to ensure a uniform grade meeting ADA requirements on the ramp, free of
sags and short grades.
e. Maintenance.
1. It shall be the duty and obligation of the owners and occupants of real property abutting upon
sidewalks, at their own cost and expense, to maintain and keep the sidewalks bordering their property
level and free of depressions, excavations, elevations, inconsistencies, obstacles, obstructions or
encroachments, natural or artificial, above or below ground level, or which overlap, impinge upon, or
appropriate any part of the sidewalk area or the space eight (8') feet above it.
2. Any damage done to a sidewalk by the City or a City-hired contractor shall be repaired by the
City or contractor.
3. Any damage done to a sidewalk by a utility shall be repaired by the utility.
Section 7.09 Street Appurtenances
a. Generally. The cost and installation of the following items are the responsibility of the developer and are
required at the time the infrastructure improvements are constructed:
1. Streetlights, where required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/536
2. Traffic signals.
3. Traffic signs and street name blades.
4. Pavement markings.
5. Temporary traffic-control devices for use during construction.
b. Streetlights. Any new development in the City, excluding residential areas where lot size is three-quarters
(3/4ths) of an acre or larger, shall provide streetlights. The developer is responsible for engineering, material,
installation, and activation of streetlights as required by the approved street lighting plans. All plan approvals
and construction scheduling must be coordinated through the Administrative Official.
c. Traffic Signals. When the area being platted adds a driveway or street approach to an existing signal, the
signal hardware must be modified to serve the development. The developer is responsible for engineering,
material, and construction of the upgrade to the existing signal.
d. Traffic Signs and Street Name Blades. The developer shall supply, erect, and install all of the required
traffic signs and street name blades as determined by the City Engineer. All signs must be specific to the
neighborhood development, in accordance with the adopted Design Standards. The developer is responsible for
supplying all necessary posts, hardware, and concrete to complete the sign assembly installation.
e. Specialty Signs and Lighting. Specialty lighting and signs shall not be approved unless provision is made
for maintenance by a homeowners' or property owners' association.
f. Pavement Markings. The developer shall install pavement markings necessary to serve the property being
platted in accordance with the approved plans.
g. Traffic Control During Construction. The developer is responsible for installing and maintaining all
necessary barricades, temporary signs, pavement transitions, and pavement markings to safely convey traffic
through the construction area in accordance with the Texas Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual, State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, and the Barricades Manual of the City. The owner is also
responsible for the removal of all barricades, temporary signs, pavement transitions, and pavement markings.
h. Speed Bumps. Speed bumps shall not be permitted on City streets without approval of the City Council.
Section 7.10 Traffic Impact Analysis Required
a. When Required. Every application for a proposed development that generates traffic in excess of 1,000
average daily trips based upon the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip
Generation Manual, or with respect to an application which the City Engineer determines that the characteristics
of the proposed subdivision necessitate analysis, shall be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis based on the
ITE Manual, prepared by the developer at the developer's expense in accordance with standard transportation
engineering practices. The analysis shall be prepared for purposes of determining the adequacy of the road
network to serve the proposed subdivision, and whether off-site road dedication and improvements should be
made to mitigate the effects of the proposed subdivision.
b. Requirement for Update. An updated traffic impact analysis shall be submitted by the applicant with each
final plat submitted for approval and shall be generally consistent with the initial traffic impact analysis.
c. Analysis. The traffic impact analysis shall determine (1) trips to be generated by the proposed subdivision;
(2) assignment of such trips to the road network analyzed; (3) the capacity of affected thoroughfares before and
after the proposed subdivision; (4) specific recommendations for thoroughfare improvements and traffic-control
modifications needed to mitigate the traffic from the proposed subdivision and (5) the subdivision's
proportionate share of the costs of such improvements and modifications.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/536
d. City Evaluation and Action. The City shall evaluate the adequacy of the applicant's traffic impact analysis.
Based upon such evaluation, the City shall determine (1) whether the application may be approved in the
absence of dedication of rights-of-way or construction of improvements to each affected thoroughfare and (2)
the extent of the applicant's obligations to make such dedications or improvements.
Section 7.11 Alleys
Alleys or loading courts are prohibited.
ARTICLE 8 - WATER, SEWER AND DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
Section 8.01 Water and Sewer Improvements
a. Policy. It is the policy of the City that all water and sewer improvements within, adjacent to, servicing, or
being impacted by any proposed subdivision or development be regulated by the City. City sewer and water
services are only provided to properties within the area of the City's certificate of convenience and necessity and
within the City.
b. Controlling Ordinance. All requirements related to water and sewer improvements which are within,
adjacent to, servicing or otherwise being impacted by any proposed development are described in the Public
Works Design Manual.
c. Minimum Size. The minimum pipe size of all water and sewer mains shall be eight (8") inches in diameter
and shall conform to the Public Works Design Manual. Water mains eight inches or larger in diameter shall be
looped.
d. Adequate Water for Domestic Use and Fire Protection.
1. It shall be the policy of the City to ensure that all future developments within the City shall be
provided with the water in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection. Where
the land to be platted lies within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and the City is not the
water supplier, the Council may grant a waiver to the requirement for adequate fire protection if it
finds that (1) the proposed development will meet the land development rules and regulations of the
county in which the property is located; (2) the development is to be served solely by on-site sewage
disposal systems; and (3) water lines and other water facilities serving the site are designed and sized
to carry future fire flows under the City's criteria and meets all City design and construction
standards.
2. Fire Hydrants with valves shall be installed at each street intersection and at a minimum of five
hundred (500) feet spacing in any residential zoning and three hundred (300) feet spacing in all other
zones. Additional fire hydrants shall be placed as necessary such that all ground portions of all
buildings in the subdivision can be reached with a normal 300-foot lay of fire hose. In most instances,
commercial buildings will be required to have fire suppression systems and fire spigots in addition to
the normal fire hydrants.
3. The approval of a plat by the City does not constitute any representation, assurance or guarantee
by the City of the adequacy and availability of water for domestic use and fire protection to the
property within the boundaries of the subdivision.
Section 8.02 Extension of Water and Sanitary Sewer Mains
a. Required Extensions. All new subdivisions and developments shall be required to extend across the full
width of the subdivision or lot in such an alignment that it can be extended to the next property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/536
b. Impact. Properties which are served by water and sanitary sewer at the time of application for plat approval
shall not be required to install additional facilities unless the current lines are not of adequate capacity to serve
the proposed development; in which case the developer will be required to install adequate facilities.
c. Adequate Water System.
1. No application shall be approved unless the developer demonstrates that there will be a
sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection to serve the subdivision
concurrent with development. The water system serving the subdivision must be deemed adequate
under the rules and regulations and the fire flow regulations contained in the Design Standards.
2. The developer shall demonstrate that the water system serving the development, other than
approach mains to connect the development to the water distribution system will be adequate to serve
the development at the time of preliminary plat approval. The approach main shall be extended to
serve the entire subdivision subject to a subdivision prior to the time of final plat approval for the
second phase of the plat unless the extension is part of a funded capital improvement project that the
City has initiated consistent with its adopted capital improvements plan for water facilities.
3. The owner of each lot shown on a plat within the City shall be required to connect to the City's
water system if there is a connection to a main less than two hundred (200) feet from the property
line.
d. Adequate Wastewater System.
1. No application shall be approved unless the developer demonstrates that there will be an
adequate wastewater system to serve the subdivision concurrent with development. The wastewater
system serving the subdivision shall be deemed adequate under the rules and regulations of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, the Texas Department of Health, and City Ordinances, as the
same may be amended from time to time or the City of Sansom Park, as may be applicable.
2. The owner of each lot shown on a plat within the City shall be required to connect to the City's
wastewater system if there is a connection to a main less than 200 feet from the property line.
3. Where the City is not collecting the sewage, the developer shall provide assurances that
wastewater mains shall be extended to serve the subdivision prior to the time of final plat approval
for the second phase of a subdivision.
4. The developer shall demonstrate that the wastewater system serving the development, other than
approach mains to connect the development to the sanitary sewer collection system, will be adequate
at the time of preliminary plat approval. On-site sewage systems shall conform to the rules of the
TCEQ, Texas Department of Health, County of Tarrant, and applicable City Ordinances, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
e. Adequacy Where Utility Connection Not Required. Where the installation of sanitary sewer facilities is not
proposed or required, the size of the subdivided lots shall meet the minimum lot size standards of the zoning
district in which the land is located, and the City's minimum lot size requirements for individual disposal
facilities for land inside City limits, and the minimum lot size requirements for individual disposal facilities for
Tarrant County. The lot shall be of sufficient size for individual disposal facilities, including the necessary lateral
lines, and the developer shall install individual disposal devices for each lot at the same time improvements are
erected thereon. Any such individual sewage disposal system shall be constructed in accordance with the state
health department specifications and subject to the approval of the City.
Section 8.03 Oversized Water and Sanitary Sewer Mains
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/536
In order to provide appropriate capacity for reasonably anticipated development in a drainage basin or service
area, the City Engineer, with the approval of the City Council, may require a developer to install a utility line or
system improvement larger than necessary to support the development. The size of the facilities required to
serve the development shall be determined by the City Engineer. The City may compensate the developer for the
difference in cost mandated by oversizing through the process of allowing the developer credits of up to 50
percent of all development fees charged against any portion or phase of the development, by pro rata agreement
or City participation. Upon written request of the developer, credit for development fees may be transferred from
the current development project to subsequent development projects, subdivisions or phases undertaken by the
developer.
Section 8.04 Drainage Improvements
a. Generally. An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes, channel improvements or grading,
driveway adjustments, or other underground structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where runoff
of stormwater and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities.
Areas subject to flood conditions or inadvertent stormwater retention, such as standing or pooling water, as
established by the City Engineer, will not be considered for development until adequate drainage has been
provided. Drainage systems, including all conveyances, inlets, conduits, structures, basins, or outlets used to
drain stormwater, must be designed and constructed to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the property
owner and the public. Adequate provision must be made for the acceptance, collection, conveyance, detention,
and discharge of stormwater runoff drainage onto, through, and originating within the subdivision. Stormwater
must be discharged in an acceptable form and at a controlled rate so as not to endanger human life or public or
private property. No final plat approval may be issued until proper provision has been made for drainage.
b. Design Criteria. The criteria for use in designing storm sewers, culverts, bridges, drainage channels, and
drainage facilities shall conform to the Design Standards. In no case shall drainage areas be diverted artificially
to adjacent properties or across roadways. All storm drainage facilities must be designed and constructed to
safely drain a 100-year return frequency flood as outlined in the Design Standards. Paved streets and alleys,
ditches, and swales may be used for emergency overflow capacity in parallel with enclosed systems provided the
requirements of the Design Standards. [sic]
c. Lot to Lot Drainage. Stormwater drainage from one lot onto another shall not be allowed unless such does
not pose any harm or inconvenience to the downstream property owner(s), unless specifically approved by the
City Engineer, and unless the necessary off-site drainage easement is procured on the affected properties, or if
applicable, letters of permission from the property owner have been obtained and approved by the City.
d. Developer Responsibilities. The developer shall ensure that all drainage improvements within public
easements or rights-of-way are functioning properly prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. The
developer shall be responsible for removing any significant build-up of sediment or debris from drainage
improvements, with the exception of back-lot and side-lot drainage swales, at the eleventh month of the second
year for the required two-year maintenance bond for the applicable facilities. The City shall inspect the
improvements to determine any maintenance or correction of deficiencies at the conclusion of this period.
e. Layout Requirements. To reduce stormwater runoff, and resulting erosion, sedimentation and conveyance
of nonpoint source pollutants, the layout of the street network, lots and building sites shall, to the greatest extent
possible, be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes
in order to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction. All erosion and sedimentation
controls shall conform to the Design Standards.
f. Runoff. No proposed development shall be constructed which impedes or constricts runoff from an
upstream watershed.
g. Floodplain. Land subject to flooding, as designated in a FEMA 100-year floodplain, shall not be platted for
residential occupancy, nor shall it be platted for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property
or aggravate the flood hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/536
h. Detention and Retention Ponds. The City Engineer may require the installation of a detention or retention
pond if the post-construction 100-year design flow leaving the subdivision or site at any concentrated point is
increased more than 10 cfs from the predesigned condition. The pond shall meet the following requirements:
1. Outlet structures shall be staged to prevent more than 10 cfs difference at the 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-
and 100-year flow levels. Outflow structures should be well maintained and unobstructed. Provisions
for maintenance shall be included with plat or deed covenants.
2. Unless approved by the Council, the pond shall remain the property of the developer or
homeowners' association, and shall not be the direct responsibility of the City.
3. The pond shall be landscaped, designed and constructed to meet the requirements of the Design
Standards. The pond shall be sealed and aerated.
i. Channels. Open ditches may be used to carry surface runoff in areas in which enough width is available to
accommodate the required section. Capacity of ditches shall be calculated by Manning's formula, or other
method approved by the City Engineer. Ditches shall be constructed of sufficient size to carry the intended
runoff. The side slopes of all ditches shall be no steeper than three feet (3') horizontal run to one foot (1') vertical
height, or a three to one (3:1) slope.
j. Finished Floors (Pad Sites). The site grading plan and all construction shall be such that building pads for
structures shall drain away at a minimum of 2% grade in all directions from the structure for at least fifty feet
(50') from the edge of structure, unless proper walls, ditches, or underground drainage systems are used to
capture and convey 100-year runoff away from the building. In any area in which localized building flooding
appears to be a concern, the applicant shall set a minimum finish floor elevation and show such on the grading
plans.
k. Design Methods. The determination of design discharge of storm drainage water shall be accomplished in
accordance with the following criteria:
1. The Rational Method (Q = CIA) shall be used on small watersheds of one thousand acres
(1,000) acres or less.
2. Unit hydrographic techniques shall be used for areas greater than one thousand (1,000) acres.
The City Engineer prior to the completion of calculations shall approve the technique and data to be used for the
determination of the design discharge. A complete set of all detailed calculations must be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval prior to the completion of the plans for the drainage system.
l. Funding. The owner or developer shall fund and construct all storm drainage outfalls necessary to safely and
adequately drain the development.
m. City Participation. The City may provide new public drainage outfalls and public drainage system
upgrades to serve existing and future developments through specific items in the capital improvement bond
programs.
n. Creeks and Drainage Areas. All creeks and drainage areas shall be preserved and protected in their natural
condition wherever possible, unless significant storm drainage improvements are required by the City in these
areas. All development adjacent to creeks and drainage areas shall be in accordance with the City's Design
Standards, and with any other City policies or ordinances related to public access or recreational use of
waterways. Sheet flow into drainage channels or creeks shall be limited to nonerosive velocities as determined in
the Design Standards.
o. Bridges. Bridges or culverts shall be constructed at all street locations where flow patterns cross the street
and are not intercepted by an underground storm sewer system or appropriate concrete valley gutter. (Note:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/536
Valley gutters on public streets shall not be used to convey more than 10 cfs based on a 100-year event.) Bridges
and culverts must accommodate the 100-year design flows based on fully developed upstream conditions and be
designed to accommodate the needed driving lanes for cross traffic along with any safety end treatment,
protective offsets, guardrail, signs and/or lighting.
Section 8.05 Water and Sewer Pro Rata
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish responsibilities for the extension of water and sewer
mains and other public utility improvements into the various drainage basins located within the limits of the City
to provide a procedure for acquiring necessary easements and rights-of-way, and to establish responsibilities for
paying for the cost of constructing the water and sewer improvements, preparing the engineering and survey
work necessary to design and install the water and sewer improvements and the cost of inspecting any and all
construction undertaken pursuant to this section.
b. Developer's Responsibilities.
1. In the event that a development proposal is submitted which will require the use of a public
water and/or sewer system, and no such public system has yet been extended into the area where the
proposed development is located, it will be the responsibility of the developer to comply with the
terms and conditions of this section in order to ensure the immediate availability of service.
2. It is, and shall remain, the responsibility of each developer to tie his or her development project
into the water or sewer main serving that specific drainage basin or service area. Should a lift station
and/or force main be required in order to utilize a proposed off-site service location, such lift station
and/or force main shall be installed at the developer's cost. In order to promote economic
development, the City may participate in construction of water and sewer mains and infrastructure,
provided that the City may share in pro rata reimbursement.
c. Determination of System Availability.
1. When a developer plans to undertake a specific development project within the City and the
development will require service through a public water and/or sewer system, it will be the
responsibility of the developer to contact the City Engineer to determine system availability. The
developer will advise the City Engineer in writing of the specific location of his development, the
total size of the development in acreage, living units and/or square feet of commercial or industrial
space, the type of development and land use to occur within the subdivision, estimated amount of
flows, if available; and the approximate time when public utilities will be required. The information
may be incorporated into a preliminary plat or development plan application submitted to the
Administrative Official.
2. The City Engineer shall review the City's current water and sanitary sewer system and determine
whether service is currently available to the development. If service is available through an existing
main, the City Engineer shall identify the point on that main where the development will be permitted
to tie into the system and will advise the developer in writing of the location where a tie-in will be
permitted. The City Engineer shall support such written notice with such map exhibits as are
necessary to clearly delineate the point of tie-in.
3. In the event that a connection to an existing utility main is possible, the City Engineer will
determine if the utility main has been installed by the City or whether it was installed by a prior
developer under the approach main extension policies of this section. In the event that the utility main
was installed by the City and the City is not entitled to pro rata reimbursement under the terms of this
Section, the developer will be advised that there will be no pro rata reimbursement charge to tie into
the utility main. The developer will be responsible for the entire cost of the service line connecting
his development to the utility main. In the event that the City is due pro rata, the developer shall pay
the pro rata charge into the pro rata escrow account of the City, prior to making a tie-in to the system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/536
4. If the utility main or a portion of the utility system serving the development was installed by a
prior developer under the approach main extension policy outlined in this section, the City Engineer
will advise the developer of his pro rata share of costs for connection to this line. The developer shall
pay the pro rata charge into the pro rata escrow account of the City prior to making a tie-in to the
system.
d. Construction of Approach Mains. If the City Engineer should determine that utility service to a proposed
development is not available he shall notify the developer in writing. In this situation, the developer must select
among the following alternatives:
1. Discontinue his proposed development until such time as a utility system has been installed
within the drainage basin or service area;
2. Petition the City Council to expedite the construction of a utility system capable of serving the
proposed development; or
3. Install the necessary utilities to the point necessary to serve the development. The developer will
be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of necessary utilities, including but not
limited to engineering, attorney's fees, surveying, testing, easement preparation, easement
acquisition, construction and inspection. The public utilities must be designed and constructed to City
standards and specifications as the City Engineer determines to be applicable. The developer may
install the public utilities or may contract with the City to secure construction of the utilities by the
City. All financial arrangements, including any necessary bonding, shall be completed prior to the
execution of a developer agreement. In the event that a developer elects to pursue this alternative, he
will be eligible to receive a pro rata reimbursement, for a period of ten (10) years from the execution
of the pro rata agreement, from developers who tie into these specific utilities.
e. Pro Rata Cost Allocation Where Public Utilities are Financed by Initial Developer.
1. If a public utility system is installed within a service area by a developer, each subsequent
development within the drainage basin or service area which ties into the public utility system shall
pay a pro rata share of the cost of the utility system installed by the initial developer. If the City
installs a public utility system, the City Council may require each subsequent development within the
drainage basin or service area which ties into the public utility system to pay a pro rata share of the
cost of the utility system. The pro rata fee shall be paid prior to connection to the utility system, or
before approval of the final plat, whichever occurs first. The pro rata fee for each subsequent
development seeking service shall be determined on a cost per acre basis by calculating the
proportional area of the new development to the total area within the drainage basin or service area
served by the public utility system, multiplied by the total cost of the public utility system installed
by the initial developer. The total cost of the utilities shall include construction, engineering,
attorney's fees, surveying, testing, easement preparation, easement acquisition, and inspection costs.
2. Provided the City collects the funds, the initial developer shall be entitled to a rebate of the pro
rata charge against subsequent developers for a period of ten years following completion and
acceptance of the utilities. At the expiration of the tenth year, the developer will no longer be entitled
to receive any reimbursement.
f. Management of Escrow Account.
1. The City shall establish an escrow account in the water/sewer fund for the deposit of all pro rata
payments. A separate escrow account shall be established for each public utility system constructed
by an initial developer. All pro rata fees received from subsequent developments or subdivisions in
that drainage basin or service area shall be deposited in that specific escrow account.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/536
2. At least once each year, on or about January 30, the Administrative Official, shall inventory each
escrow account to determine what percentage of those monies is allocable to reimbursable oversizing
costs owed by the City. This allocation shall be determined in the same proportion that the cost of the
oversized line bears to the cost of the line size that is necessary to serve the development. For other
utility system improvements, the allocation shall be determined in the same proportion that the cost
of the oversized improvements bear to the cost of the minimum improvements required by City
ordinances to serve the development, as determined by the City Engineer. Upon completion of such
inventory, the Administrative Official shall transmit all escrow funds due and owing to the initial
developer. Upon payment of these funds, the City will receive a credit for the amount of money
allocable toward its reimbursable oversizing requirements.
3. The developer shall be responsible for providing to the City, and maintaining with the City, an
accurate current address. When escrowed funds are available for disbursement, the City shall notify
the developer at the address on file with the City. If the developer fails to withdraw the funds within
six months, the funds shall be forfeited to the City's water and sewer fund.
4. At no time shall the developer be entitled to receive reimbursement for a sum greater than the
initial cost of the public utilities less the pro rata share of capacity of that utility system that would
have been attributable to the initial development for its proportionate share of capacity in the system.
Section 8.06 Fire Hydrants and Fire Lanes
a. Generally. Fire hydrants with valves shall be installed at each street intersection and at a minimum of five
hundred (500) feet spacing in any residential subdivision and three hundred (300) feet spacing in all other zones.
Additional fire hydrants shall be placed as necessary such that all ground portions of all buildings in the
subdivision can be reached with a normal 300-foot lay of fire hose. In most instances, commercial buildings will
be required to have fire suppression systems and fire spigots in addition to the normal fire hydrants.
b. Specifications.
1. Fire hydrants shall be Mueller, Waterous or other equal model approved by the City Engineer.
All fire hydrants shall include a line valve between the fire hydrant and the water main.
2. Where possible, fire hydrants shall be located not further than 15 feet from a street or fire lane.
3. Fire lanes shall not be narrower than 20 feet.
4. Blue pavement reflectors, meeting the criteria of the fire department, shall be installed at the
center of the street(s) adjacent to each fire hydrant location.
c. Blocking. Fire hydrants, valves and pipe ends shall be blocked with unreinforced concrete (at least 2,500
psi) as shown in the City's standard water details. If blocking for a particular situation is not given in the City
details, then the NCTCOG details shall be met. In no instance shall rocks be in contact with the pipe or fittings.
ARTICLE 9 - ELECTRIC UTILITY REQUIREMENTS
Section 9.01 Underground Installation Required
a. Generally. All electric lateral and service lines throughout the interior of residential subdivisions shall be
placed underground and in dedicated easements. This provision does not require the underground installation of
transmission lines or of feeder lines placed along the perimeter of a subdivision.
b. Appurtenances. Wherever electric lateral and service lines are required to be placed underground, lines
carrying telephone service, data transmission, cable television, and street lighting shall also be placed
underground.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/536
c. Supporting Structures. All electrical, telephone, data transmission, or cable television support equipment
necessary for underground installation, including transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc., shall be
pedestal- or pad-mounted, or shall be placed underground.
Section 9.02 Owner to Bear Cost
a. Responsibility. The developer shall arrange to reimburse the utility company for the difference in cost
between the installation of such service and the installation of equivalent overhead service in accordance with
the provisions of the utility's tariff, if any.
b. Arrangement for Payment. No utility shall be required to begin construction of underground facilities
unless and until the owner has made arrangements satisfactory to the utility company for the payment of the
difference between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities.
Section 9.03 Exceptions to Underground Installation Requirement
a. Temporary Service. Temporary service during construction may be provided by overhead utility lines and
facilities prior to activation of the underground service. Following activation of the underground permanent
service, the temporary overhead service shall be removed within 45 days.
b. Existing Facilities. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require any existing overhead facilities to be
placed underground or to prohibit the upgrading, reconstruction or reconductoring of any existing overhead
facilities with overhead construction.
ARTICLE 10 - MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS
Section 10.01 Lotting Requirements
a. Fronting Street. Each lot shall abut on a public street or a private street. Private streets will be allowed only
if approved by the City Council and if the standards set forth in this Ordinance are met.
b. Minimum Size. All lots shall meet the minimum lot size requirement as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
c. Double Fronted Lots. Double fronted residential lots shall not be allowed. However, lots which are backed
up to an arterial street shall be allowed when there is no access allowed from these lots to the arterial street.
Access may also be limited to collector streets for lots which have double frontage. Where lots have double
frontage, building setback lines shall be established for each street frontage.
d. Side Lot Lines. All side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the right-of-way lines or radial in the case of a
cul-de-sac or curvilinear design.
e. Corner Lots. All corner lots within the City shall have setback lines on both streets as required by the
Zoning Ordinance.
f. Setback. All lots within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City shall have a minimum twenty (20) foot
building setback line from all streets adjacent to the lot.
g. Conformance with Zoning Ordinance. All lots within the City shall meet the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance or where applicable, the requirements in an approved development agreement for a subdivision of the
City.
h. Irregular-Shaped Lots. Irregular-shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet lot width
and frontage requirements, and shall provide a building pad without encroachment into front, side or rear yard
setbacks or into any type of easement. The rear lot width shall be sufficient to provide access for all necessary
utilities, including access for driveways and solid waste collection when alleys are present.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/536
i. Prohibited Lots. Triangular, greatly elongated or tapered, “flag” or “panhandle” lots are prohibited.
j. Lots Backed onto Street. A residential lot shall not back onto any residential street or collector street within
a residential area or neighborhood, and shall not have more than one-half of its perimeter along streets.
Section 10.02 Sight Triangle Requirements
a. Restriction. There shall be no tree, shrub, plant, sign, soil, fence, retainer wall or other view obstruction
having a height greater than two (2') feet within the sight triangle. This height shall be measured above a line
drawn between the top of curb or edge of pavement of both streets at the point where the referenced line
intersects the top of curb or edge of pavement. The sight triangle shall be the triangle made by extending twentyfive
feet along each property line from the property corner at an intersection.
b. Exception. This restriction shall not apply to trees within the triangle having a diameter of less than twelve
(12") inches when such trees are trimmed at all times so that no branch or growth is less than nine (9') feet above
the above-referenced measurement line.
c. Plat Notation. All final plats which depict intersections of public right-of-way shall have the following
statement on the face of the plat prior to filing in the county plat records. “The owners of all corner lots shall
maintain sight triangles in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance.”
Section 10.03 Monuments and Markers
a. Permanent Survey Reference Monuments. Concrete monuments, eight (8") inches in diameter and twelve
(12) inches long, shall be placed on all boundary corners which are along existing dedicated right-of-way at the
perimeter of the subdivision. A five-eighth (5/8) inch diameter iron rod having a minimum length of eighteen
(18) inches shall be placed flush with the top and at the center of the concrete monument. The monuments shall
be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed during construction and the top of the monument shall
be flush with or just below the finished ground elevation.
b. Installation of Monuments. Monuments shall be installed before the recording of the final plat. The
subdivider may install monuments after the recording of the final plat and after completion of improvements
provided the subdivider furnishes the City a letter of assurance certifying the monuments will be installed as
required. All monuments shall be installed prior to acceptance of the subdivision.
c. Monuments in Streets. When placing of monuments in streets is postponed, adequate ties to the boundary
line shall be shown on the plat in order that monuments may be correctly located and installed following the
paving of streets.
d. Benchmark Monuments on Headwalls. A brass cap approximately two (2") inches in diameter shall be
placed on top and at one end of all culvert headwalls within or at the perimeter of the development. Prior to
acceptance of the subdivision, the subdivider's surveyor shall provide a letter certifying the elevation of the brass
cap (NGVD 1929).
e. Monument Verification. Prior to acceptance of public works improvements by the City, the developer's
surveyor or engineer shall certify that all monument and markers are in place and correctly positioned[.]
Section 10.04 Digital Data Requirements
Prior to acceptance of the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide a digital computer file or files of the
subdivision containing the coordinate geometry for the subdivision boundaries, lot lines, right-of-way, street
centerlines and easements in a format and on media compatible with the City system (pdf).
Section 10.05 Homeowners' or Property Owners' Associations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/536
a. Applicability. When a development contains common areas, entry features, screening walls, open space or
other improvements not intended to be dedicated to the City for public use, a homeowners' or property owners'
association shall be created, and the duties and responsibilities shall be established in a declaration consistent
with state laws.
b. Dedication.
1. The common areas shall be shown on the final plat as separate lots, along with an adequate form
for dedication. This dedication form shall include language which saves the title to common area
properties for the benefit of the homeowners' or property owners' association and expresses a definite
undertaking by the developer to convey the common properties to the homeowners' association.
2. All facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds to be operated, maintained
and/or supervised by an association, other than those located in public easements or rights-of-way or
public parks dedicated to the City, shall be dedicated by easement or deeded in a fee simple
ownership interest to such association.
c. Responsibilities. The mandatory property owners' or homeowners' association shall be responsible for the
continuous and perpetual operation, maintenance and/or supervision of landscape systems, features or elements
located in parkways, common areas, between screening walls or living screens and adjacent curbs or street
pavement edges, adjacent to drainage ways or drainage structures, or at subdivision entryways.
d. Legal Requirements. To assure the establishment of a permanent homeowners' or property owners'
association, including its financing and the rights and responsibilities of the owners in relation to the use,
management and ownership of common areas or common property, the plat, dedication documents, covenants,
and other recorded legal agreements must provide for the following:
1. Creation of an automatic membership, nonprofit homeowners' or property owners' association;
2. Placement of title to the common property in the homeowners' or property owners' association
or definite assurance that it automatically will be so placed within a reasonable, definite time;
3. Appropriate limitation of the uses of the common property;
4. Imposition of an association charge or assessment on each lot in a manner which will assure
sufficient association funds to maintain the common property or improvements;
5. The grant to each owner voting rights in the association;
6. Identification of the land area within the association's jurisdiction including, but not limited to,
the following:
a. The property to be transferred to public agencies;
b. The individual lots;
c. The common properties to be transferred by the developer to the association; and
d. Other parcels;
7. Protective covenants which, shall make the association responsible for the maintenance and
operation of all common property, and include provisions for assessments, to be enforced by lien;
8. Definitions of terms;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/536
9. An initial term of the agreements, covenants and restrictions establishing the association for a
25-year period and automatic renewal for successive ten-year periods, and provide that the
association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the City;
10. The amendment of any portion of the association's agreements, covenants or restrictions
pertaining to the use, operation, maintenance and/or supervision of any facilities, structures,
improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are the responsibility of the association only with the
prior written consent of the City; and
11. An indemnification holding the City harmless from any and all costs, expenses, suits, demands,
liabilities or damages, including attorney's fees and costs of suit, incurred or resulting from the City's
removal of any landscape systems, features or elements.
e. Procedure. The developer shall submit the articles of incorporation of the homeowners' or property owners'
association, its bylaws, and the restrictive covenants to the Administrative Official for approval along with the
final plat. Prior to filing the plat, the developer shall create an incorporated nonprofit homeowners' association,
and record covenants which meet the requirements of Subsection d.
Section 10.06 Developer's Agreement
a. When required. A developer's agreement is required to be executed in the event public works improvements
are required, when the developer requests a waiver or credit of fees, credits for prior or proposed improvements
or dedications, requests a pro rata arrangement, or dedicates park land to the City.
b. Generally.
1. No earthwork, grading, utility, street or drainage improvement construction or any public or
private improvements shall be allowed until the developer receives approval of a final plat and the
City executes a developer's agreement with the developer.
2. The City Administrator is authorized to execute a developer's agreement in the form approved
by the City Council unless the agreement provides for one or more of the following:
a. Financial participation by the City;
b. Waiver of fees; or
c. Credits for prior or proposed improvements or dedications.
If the developer's agreement includes any of the foregoing provisions, the agreement must
be approved by City Council.
c. Terms of Agreement. The developer's agreement shall be on a form prepared by the City and shall contain,
at a minimum, the following provisions:
1. Covenants to complete the public improvements in accordance with City ordinances within two
years from final plat approval;
2. Covenants to warranty the improvements for a period of two years following acceptance by the
City;
3. Covenants to provide performance, payment and maintenance bonds;
4. Provisions for participation in the costs of the improvements by the City, if authorization has
been obtained from the City Council, and a performance bond for such improvements from the
contractor, with the City as an obligee;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/536
5. Provisions for securing the obligations of the agreement;
6. Insurance and indemnification requirements; and
7. Such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the developer and City.
d. Cost Estimates. The costs in the developer's agreement shall be based on cost estimates thereof, prepared by
the developer's engineer and reviewed by the City Engineer.
e. Covenants to Run with the Land. The developer's agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in
the agreement run with the land and bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the property owner. All existing
lienholders shall be required to execute the agreement or provide written consent to the covenants contained in
the agreement.
Section 10.07 Variances
a. Generally. The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion,
extraordinary hardship will result from requiring strict compliance.
b. Request. The applicant seeking a variance shall submit to the Administrative Official a written request
stating the justification for such variance, accompanied by engineering data or other evidence supporting the
applicant's request for relief. The City Council may grant a variance in conjunction with the application for
approval of the plat. The applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that a variance to the standards
applicable to a development application should be granted.
c. Evidence. The City Council may require engineering studies and displays from the applicant to support the
request for a variance. The decision of the Council shall be final.
Section 10.08 Factors to Consider
The City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of
land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed development, and the
probable effect of the requested variance upon traffic conditions, City services, and upon the public health,
safety, convenience and welfare, and whether:
1. The requirement places an unreasonable burden on the development and does not bear a rough
proportionality to the requirements necessary to serve the development; or
2. Hardships or practical difficulties will result from strict compliance with these regulations,
and/or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal;
and
3. The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property and are
not applicable to other properties, or the tract has severe topographical conditions or unique
environmental qualities worthy of protection.
Financial hardship, alone, to the applicant shall not be deemed to constitute unreasonable burden or hardship.
Section 10.09 Authority to Impose Conditions
The City Council may impose conditions relating to the variance as well, in its judgment, substantially secure
the objectives of the standards or requirements to which the variance was granted.
Section 10.10 Waivers for Planned Development Districts
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/536
The Council may modify the standards and requirements of this Ordinance in the case of an application
including an approved planned development district. Such departures from the standards specified may be made
only when the Council finds that the plan provides for convenience and safe access, adequate space for
recreation, provision for light and air, and offers all essential utility services and necessary public and other
facilities, and is in conformance with all provisions of any ordinances which specifically apply to a planned
development district.
(Ordinance 490-15 adopted 2/19/15)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAX*
Sec. 11.02.001 Property tax elections
Ordinances calling elections as well as those certifying election results for the imposition of ad valorem taxes are
on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.02.002 Homestead exemptions
(a) The city council does hereby exempt the residence homestead of all persons sixty-five (65) years of age or
older from ad valorem taxes hereafter levied, such exemption being no less than $20,000.00 of the appraised
value of such homestead property. (Ordinance 417-06 adopted 10/5/06)
(b) In order to qualify for this exemption each person holding legal title to such residence homestead must be
over 65 years on January 1st of the year exemption is claimed.
(c) There is hereby created a homestead exemption of 1% of the assessed value and not less than $5,000.00
per residence.
(d) There is hereby created an exemption of $10,000.00 of the assessed value for persons who are 100%
disabled and unemployable.
(e) In order to qualify for such exemption it must be claimed in writing on a form to be provided by the
Tarrant Appraisal District and signed by the person claiming the exemption between January 1st of the
proceeding year and May 1st of the taxing calendar year.
(f) This exemption shall apply to natural persons and not to corporations, partnerships, or associations.
(g) This section shall be in full force and effect for and after taxable year 1984.
(Ordinance 213 adopted 6/14/84)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/536
Sec. 11.02.003 Tax limitation on homestead of disabled or elderly persons
(a) Definitions. The terms “elderly,” “disabled,” and “surviving spouse” shall be defined herein in accordance
with article VIII, section 1-b, subsection (h) of the Texas Constitution.
(b) Tax limitation. A person who is disabled or who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older (“elderly”) shall
receive a residence homestead exemption prescribed or authorized by article VIII, section 1-b, subsection (h) of
the Texas Constitution. For such persons, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed by the city shall not be
increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or
sixty-five (65) years of age or older and receives a residence homestead exemption on the homestead.
(c) Limitation extended to surviving spouse. If a disabled person or an elderly person dies in a year in which
the person received a residence homestead exemption prescribed by this section or any other ordinance, the total
amount of ad valorem taxes imposed by the city may not be increased while it remains the residence homestead
of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is fifty-five (55) years of age or older at the time of the persons
death.
(d) Increase in value due to improvements. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this
section, taxes on the residence homestead may be increased to the extent the value of the homestead is increased
by improvements other than repairs and other improvements made to comply with government requirements.
(e) Limitation made irrevocable. The tax limitation established by this section may not be repealed and is
hereby made irrevocable.
(Ordinance 423-08 adopted 4/17/08)
State law reference–Limitation of municipal tax on homesteads of disabled and elderly, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.261.
Sec. 11.02.004 Tangible personal property in transit
Goods-in-transit, as defined by Texas Tax Code section 11.253(a)(2), as amended by Senate Bill 1 enacted by
the 82nd Texas Legislature in its First Special Session, shall be subject to taxation by the city. (Ordinance 449-1
adopted 12/1/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods-in-transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Sales and use tax elections
Ordinances calling elections as well as those certifying election results for the imposition of sales and use taxes
are on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.03.002 Tax on sale of residential use of gas and electricity
The city council does hereby elect to continue the imposition of the 1% city sales tax on residential use of gas
and electricity within the city. (Ordinance 170 adopted 8/24/78)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 11.03.003 Tax on sale of telecommunication services and gross receipts of telephone and telegraph
companies
(a) The city hereby adopts all taxes authorized by State of Texas House Bill Number 1949, 1985 Texas
Legislative Session, 69th Legislative Session, chapter 206.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/536
(b) The city hereby repeals the application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
321.210(a) effective on the earliest date permitted by said statute.
(Ordinance 240 adopted 6/25/87)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
321.210.
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms or phrases are, for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning, defined as follows:
Consideration. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space, or other facilities in such hotel and
shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning
and readying such room or space for occupancy, nor include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other
governmental agency.
Hotel. Any building or buildings, trailer, railroad pullman not being utilized for the transportation of travelers, or
any other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall
include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses,
trailer motels, railroad pullman cars parked on a siding or other area and used for sleeping accommodations not
involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups,
apartments not occupied by permanent residents as that term is hereinafter defined, and all other facilities where
rooms or sleeping facilities or space is furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to
include hospitals, sanitariums, or convalescent or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, space or sleeping facility
in a hotel for any purpose.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms
or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or
agreement.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms, sleeping
space or facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding
year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of
January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter
being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November
and December.
Tax assessor-collector. The tax assessor-collector or the city secretary or anyone given the authority by the
council to act in such capacity.
(Ordinance 158, sec. 24A-1, adopted 12/7/76)
Sec. 11.04.002 Levy of tax; exceptions; use of revenue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/536
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where
such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent
(7%) of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other
occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. (Ordinance 158, sec. 24A-2, adopted 12/7/76;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) In combination with any other revenues which may be designated for the purposes under the provisions of
V.T.C.A., Tax Code, chapter 351, the tax levied under subsection (a) above is hereby pledged for any one or
more of the following purposes: to establish, acquire, lease as lessee or lessor, purchase, construct, improve,
enlarge, equip, repair, operate or maintain any or all public improvements such as civic centers, civic center
buildings, auditoriums, opera houses, music halls, exhibition halls, coliseums, museums, libraries or other city
buildings; and to establish, acquire, lease as lessee or lessor, purchase, construct, improve, enlarge, equip, repair,
operate or maintain any or all structures, parking areas or facilities located at or in the immediate vicinity of such
public improvements, to be used in connection with such public improvements for off-street parking or storage
of motor vehicles or other conveyances; and such other purposes as may be authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code,
chapter 351.
(c) No tax hereunder shall be imposed upon a permanent resident.
(d) No tax hereunder shall be imposed upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively
for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual.
(Ordinance 158, sec. 24A-2, adopted 12/7/76)
Sec. 11.04.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section
11.04.002 hereof for the city. (Ordinance 158, sec. 24A-3, adopted 12/7/76)
Sec. 11.04.004 Reports
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 11.04.003 hereof
to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the tax assessor-collector showing the consideration paid
for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, a copy of
the report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax and any other
information the tax assessor-collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such
occupancies at the time of filing such report. (Ordinance 158, sec. 24A-4, adopted 12/7/76; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 11.04.005 Rules and regulations
The tax assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively
collect the tax levied herein and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to
enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes
due under the provisions thereof. (Ordinance 158, sec. 24A-5, adopted 12/7/76)
Sec. 11.04.006 Criminal penalty; penalty and interest on delinquent taxes
If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall
fail to pay to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed herein when said report or payment is due, or shall file
a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax
imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit five percent (5%) of the amount due as a penalty,
and after the first thirty (30) days shall forfeit an additional five percent (5%) of such tax; provided, however,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/536
that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum, beginning sixty (60) days for [after] the date due. (Ordinance 158, sec. 24A-6, adopted
12/7/76; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
All ordinances authorizing the placement of traffic-control devices, including stop signs, yield signs, and other
traffic-control signals and markings; the designation of speed zones, no-passing zones, no-parking zones, oneway
streets, and through streets; and other ordinances regulating traffic on specific streets or parts of streets in
the city are not included in this code but are specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of this code. Such
ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.02.001 State manual
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications
adopted by the state transportation commission as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001.
All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city must conform to the manual and specifications
adopted under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All existing traffic-control devices and those
erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section
shall be official traffic-control devices. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 12.02.002–12.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Stop and Yield Signs
Sec. 12.02.031 Placement and maintenance
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets, or other employee of the city, to erect and maintain stop and
yield signs as designated by the ordinances of the city. It shall also be such person's responsibility to assure that
signs are not obstructed by trees, bushes or any other object. (Ordinance 227, sec. 4, adopted 2/27/86)
Sec. 12.02.032 Removal of objects obstructing signs
The city shall have the authority to order any property owner or person in control of a property to remove any
such obstruction. Should a property owner fail to comply with such order, the city shall remove the obstruction,
with all costs of such removal to be paid by the property owner or person in control thereof. (Ordinance 227, sec.
5, adopted 2/27/86)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/536
Sec. 12.02.033 Obedience
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to fail to stop such vehicle at any lawfully erected stop
sign, or to fail to yield the right-of-way to another vehicle at any lawfully erected yield sign, and [such person]
may be fined in accordance with the provisions of the state motor vehicle laws for such violation. (Ordinance
227, sec. 6, adopted 2/27/86)
Sec. 12.02.034 Tampering with or defacing signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, move, alter, deface, damage or willfully obstruct any stop or
yield sign. (Ordinance 227, sec. 7, adopted 2/27/86)
State law reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.005.
Sec. 12.02.035 Specifications
(a) All stop and yield signs erected within the city shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Federal
Highway Safety Act and the state department of transportation regulations on uniform traffic-control devices.
(b) Any stop or yield signs which are presently existing, and not in compliance with the provisions of this
division, shall be brought within compliance, or shall be forthwith removed.
(Ordinance 227, secs. 8, 9, adopted 2/27/86)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.036 Stop at “T” intersection
Traffic on any street within the city which terminates at the intersection of another street or highway, and which
has not been designated as a stop or yield intersection, shall stop and yield to traffic on such street or highway
before entering same. (Ordinance 227, sec. 16, adopted 2/27/86)
Sec. 12.02.037 Penalties
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For
violating the provisions of section 12.02.033 or 12.02.036 the fine shall be not less than $25.00 nor more than
$200.00. For violating section 12.02.034 the fine shall be not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00.
(Ordinance 227, sec. 17, adopted 2/27/86)
ARTICLE 12.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Endangering lives or property of others
Any person or persons who endanger the lives or the property of others by traveling at a high rate of speed,
running someone off the road, whipping in and out of traffic, driving across someone's property, skidding a
motor vehicle around in the street, road or alley, or letting a person or persons ride on the outside of a motor
vehicle while in movement (by riding on the fender, on top of a car, or on the bumper of a motor vehicle) in the
city limits shall be issued a ticket or placed under arrest and brought before the magistrate of the court. Any
person or persons guilty of the above will be subject to a fine not less than $25.00 (twenty-five dollars) nor more
than $200.00 (two hundred dollars). (Ordinance 94, sec. 5, adopted 8/31/61)
Secs. 12.03.002–12.03.040 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/536
Division 2. Speed Limits*
Sec. 12.03.041 School zones
(a) The area within the city limits which is within a distance of 1,500 feet of any school, public or private, is
hereby designated as a school zone.
(b) No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle upon any public street, alley, or highway within any
school zone within the corporate limits of the city at a greater rate of speed than twenty miles per hour.
(c) Subsection (b) of this section shall be applicable and in effect during the morning hours between 7:30 a.m.
and 8:30 a.m.; also during the afternoon hours between 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days and in all school
zones when school is officially in session but shall be of no force or effect at any other time.
(d) The chief of police of the city is hereby directed to erect signs in all school zones to warn the operators of
motor vehicles within such school zones of the speed limits enforced therein.
(Ordinance 522-17 adopted 4/20/17)
ARTICLE 12.04 PARKING†
Sec. 12.04.001 Parking for longer than 24 hours
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any automobile of any kind and
character upon any public right-of-way within the city limits for a period longer than twenty-four hours.
(b) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any portion of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not in excess of $200.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 107 adopted 2/13/64)
Sec. 12.04.002 Parking on residential lots
(a) Restricted. It is hereby enacted by the city council that no automobiles, trucks (or other powered vehicles)
or trailers shall be parked on any area of a residential lot except or [sic] upon properly permitted driveways or
parking areas in any residentially zoned area of the city. This prohibition shall also extend to the side yards of
residences on corner lots which face two (2) or more public streets.
(b) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation is permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner,
occupant, mortgagee or vender in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, or lessee, agent or
another person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land.
(Ordinance 398 adopted 1/15/04)
ARTICLE 12.05 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Sec. 12.05.001 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that such a violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant,
mortgagee or vendor in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/536
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land. (Ordinance 352, sec.
XIV, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.002 Authority to enforce
A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures of this article may enter private property for the
purpose specified herein to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle
or vehicle part, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance as
defined in article 8.07[. The judge of the municipal court of the city] may issue orders necessary to enforce the
procedures of this article. (Ordinance 352, sec. XIII, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.003 Use of designated routes required
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any public street
within the city any commercial motor vehicle, motor bus, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer or any combination
thereof except on such streets as are designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by this
article; such vehicles shall be operated on a truck route whenever capable of being used; they shall be operated
on a commercial delivery route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery
route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being
operated. No hazardous materials, as defined by any applicable local, state or federal law, shall be transported
within the city except as provided herein. (Ordinance 352, sec. I, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.004 Defenses
The following shall be defenses to prosecutions under the provisions of section 12.05.003:
(1) To operate a vehicle to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of repair, place of performing a
service, or place of loading or unloading, over the shortest route to a point on a truck route or
commercial delivery route; any such vehicle shall be permitted to proceed from one such point, not
on a truck route or commercial delivery route, to another such point without returning to a truck route
or commercial delivery route if to so return would increase the distance to be traveled on
nondesignated streets; the operators of any such vehicles shall carry evidence of the location of its
last stop and of its immediate destination in order for this defense to apply;
(2) To operate emergency vehicles in response to any emergency call;
(3) To operate vehicles of a public utility while cruising in an assigned area for the purpose of
inspecting the facilities of such public utility or providing maintenance service to the facilities;
(4) To operate motor buses for the purpose of transporting people for hire upon a regular schedule
over a defined route;
(5) To operate sanitation or public works vehicles as provided by the city council on the
recommendation of the chief of police.
(Ordinance 352, sec. II, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.005 Truck routes designated
TRUCK ROUTES
Name of Street Limits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/536
Arrow Lane From Jacksboro Highway to 3005 Arrow Lane (trucks will have
to exit the same direction as entered)
Azle Avenue Within city limits
Jacksboro Highway Within city limits
Roberts Cut-Off Within city limits
(Ordinance 352, sec. III, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.006 Commercial delivery routes designated
COMMERCIAL DELIVERY ROUTES
Name of Street Limits
Azle Avenue Within city limits
Biway from its intersection with Azle Avenue to its
intersection with Graham
Within city limits
Cheyenne from its intersection with Jacksboro
Highway to its intersection with Buchanan Street
Within city limits
Graham Street from its intersection with Biway to its
intersection with Kaw Street
Within city limits
Jacksboro Highway Within city limits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/536
Kaw Street from its intersection with Graham to its
intersection with Isbell
Within city limits
Kiowa from its intersection with Azle Avenue to its
intersection with Calloway
Within city limits
Scoggins from its intersection with Kaw Street to its
intersection with Biway
Within city limits
Skyline Drive from its intersection with Jacksboro
Highway to its intersection with Azle Avenue
Within city limits
(Ordinance 352, sec. IV, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.007 Hazardous materials route designated
Jacksboro Highway and Azle Avenue, at all points within the city limits, is hereby designated as the hazardous
materials truck route. (Ordinance 352, sec. V, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.008 Placement of signs; designation of alternate routes
(a) The mayor and the chief of police shall cause to be erected appropriate signs and markings to designate the
truck routes, commercial delivery routes, and hazardous material truck routes described herein.
(b) Whenever any street designated as a truck route, commercial delivery route, or hazardous materials truck
route is being repaired or is otherwise temporarily out of use, the chief of police is hereby authorized to
designate alternate truck routes, commercial delivery routes, or hazardous materials truck routes for such period
as may be necessary.
(Ordinance 352, sec. VI, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.009 Oversize and overweight vehicles
(a) Generally. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or
move, and/or cause to move or permit to be driven, operated, or moved, on any public street within the city, any
commercial motor vehicle, with or without load, contrary to any of the provisions of this section.
(b) Size of vehicles.
(1) The limitations as to size of a vehicle stated in this section shall not apply to implements of
machinery used solely for the purpose of drilling water wells, or to highway, street building or
maintenance machinery owned or operated by, or on behalf of, the state or any other political
subdivisions or the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/536
(2) Upon all truck route roadways of this city which are of such width that a motor vehicle, with a
manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of more than 2500 pounds, cannot drive upon the right half of
the roadway without said vehicle's right side wheels driving upon the unpaved portion of the
roadway, said motor vehicle, with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of more than 2500
pounds, shall be operated on the centermost part of the roadway except when it is necessary to pull to
the right-hand side of the roadway to avoid oncoming traffic.
(3) Upon all roadways of the city which are of such width that a motor vehicle, with a
manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of more than 2500 pounds, cannot drive upon the right half of
the roadway without said vehicle's right side wheels driving upon the unpaved portion of said
roadway, said motor vehicle, with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of more than 2500
pounds, shall be driven, operated, and parked in such a way that its right side wheels are no closer
than ten (10) inches to the right side edge of the roadway and that said right side wheels are not upon
the unpaved portion of said roadway, or private property, contiguous to said roadway, except when it
is necessary to pull to the right side of the roadway to avoid oncoming traffic.
(4) No commercial vehicle shall exceed a total outside width, including any load thereon, of
ninety-six (96) inches.
(5) No commercial motor vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed a height of thirteen (13) feet,
six (6) inches, including load.
(6) No commercial motor vehicle, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer, except for pole trailers, shall
exceed a length of thirty-five (35) feet, except when such vehicle is operated in combination and
coupled to another such vehicle and when operated in combination no such combination of vehicles
coupled together shall exceed a total length of fifty (50) feet. The above limitations shall not apply to
any mobile home or combination of mobile home and a motor vehicle, but no mobile home and
motor vehicle combination shall exceed a total length of fifty-five (55) feet.
(7) No vehicle or combination of vehicles, except pole trailers, shall carry any load exceeding
more than three (3) feet beyond the front thereof nor more than four (4) feet beyond the rear thereof.
(c) Weight of commercial vehicles.
(1) Vehicles transporting ready-mix concrete. Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mix
concrete shall be operated in accordance with the following rules and regulations governing the
operation of vehicles to transport ready-mix concrete over public highways maintained by the city:
(A) No single axle load shall exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds.
(B) No tandem axle load shall exceed thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds.
(C) No gross weight shall exceed forty-eight thousand (48,000) pounds.
(D) No such vehicle shall be operated unless it shall be equipped with a functioning device
attached to the concrete chute which is designed to trap concrete and which is in proper position
to trap concrete at all times when said vehicle is operated on a public street within the city.
(2) Vehicles transporting milk. Vehicles used exclusively for transporting milk may be operated if
the distance between the front wheel of the forward tandem axle and the rear wheel of the rear
tandem axle, measured longitudinally, is at least twenty-eight (28) feet, and the maximum load
carried on any group of axles does not exceed sixty-eight thousand (68,000) pounds.
(3) Vehicles transporting solid waste. Vehicles used exclusively to transport solid waste (except
hazardous waste), as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/536
chapter 361, or its successor legislation, may be operated upon the public streets of the city with a
tandem axle gross load not to exceed forty-four thousand (44,000) pounds, a single axle gross load
not to exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds, and a gross load for the vehicle not to exceed sixtyfour
thousand (64,000) pounds; provided that, where the vehicle is to be operated with a tandem axle
load in excess of thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds, the owner shall have first filed with the state
department of transportation a surety bond as required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section
623.163.
(4) General weight limits. No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall have a greater weight than
six hundred (600) pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated upon the surface of the
highway and using high-pressure tires, and a greater weight than six hundred fifty (650) pounds per
inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated upon the surface of the highway and using lowpressure
tires, and no wheel shall carry a load in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds on highpressure
tires and ten thousand (10,000) pounds on low-pressure tires, nor any axle load in excess of
sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds on high-pressure tires, and twenty thousand (20,000) pounds on
low-pressure tires.
(5) Definitions. In this section, an axle load is defined as the total load transmitted to the road by
all wheels whose centers may be included between the two (2) parallel, transverse, vehicle [vertical]
planes forty (40) inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. Tandem axle group is
defined as two (2) or more axles spaced forty (40) inches or more apart from center to center having
at least one (1) common point of weight suspension.
(d) Permit for overweight or oversize equipment; bond.
(1) Permits authorized. Upon written application, timely made, by any person who desires to
operate, or cause to be operated, on public streets within the city, overweight or oversize equipment
for the transportation of such commodities as cannot be reasonably dismantled, where the total gross
weight or size of the vehicle and its load exceed the limits allowed by this article, the police
department, after consulting with the office of the public works director, shall issue a permit for the
operation of such equipment, or fleets of equipment, for a specified period of time, over a route, or
routes, to be designated by the designated city official if such routes can be determined at the time
application for the permit is made.
(2) Application for permit; bond. The application for the permit provided for in this section shall
be in writing and contain the following:
(A) The kind of equipment to be operated, with a complete description of same, and a
statement as to its weight.
(B) The kind of commodity to be transported and a certificate as to its weight.
(C) The street, or streets, over which the equipment is to be operated, the dates and the
approximate time of said operation, and the number of trips to be made, when the nature, route,
time or frequency of operation cannot be determined at the time the permit is issued.
(D) The application shall be dated and signed by the applicant. Before a permit is issued
under this section, the applicant for same shall file with the office of the city secretary a bond in
an amount to be set and approved by the mayor. The amount of such bond shall not exceed the
product of the number of vehicles for which a permit is sought multiplied by ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00). Said bond shall be payable to the city and conditioned that the applicant
will pay to the city the sum of money necessary to repair any damage which might be
occasioned to any public street or publicly owned fixture appurtenant to such street by virtue of
operation of any commercial vehicle under said permit. Venue of any suit for recovery upon
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/536
said bond shall be in this county and any bond issued hereunder shall contain an unambiguous
contractual provision to that effect.
(3) Permit fee. A fee shall be charged for each permit as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A to this code.
(4) Contents of permit. Any permit issued hereunder shall include at least the following:
(A) The name of the applicant, the date, a description of the equipment to be operated and a
description of the commodity to be transported.
(B) The signature of an authorized member of the police department and any other
designated city office.
(C) The time for which the permit is issued.
(D) The specified streets over which the equipment is to be operated, insofar as it can be
determined at the time the permit is issued.
(Ordinance 352, sec. VII, adopted 4/22/99)
State law references–General provisions relating to vehicle size and weight, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 621; municipal
regulation of loads and equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 621.303; vehicles transporting ready-mixed concrete, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, sec. 622.011 et seq.
Sec. 12.05.010 Spillage
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, any commercial motor vehicle on a public
street of the city in such a manner as to permit any portion of its cargo, either liquid or solid, to fall out of, spill
from, or blow out of said vehicle. (Ordinance 352, sec. VIII, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.011 Parking on truck routes, commercial delivery routes and hazardous chemical routes
It shall be unlawful for the driver, or owner, of any vehicle regulated under this article to permit the same to be
parked, stand or remain in the public right-of-way along any of the established routes as described in this article
for more than twenty-four (24) hours at any one time. It shall also be unlawful for any business or residential
occupant to allow the public right-of-way along these routes to be used for display, storage, parking of vehicles
or any other means of blocking or cluttering up of the public right-of-way without first obtaining permission
from the chief of police. (Ordinance 352, sec. IX, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.012 Unlawful parking deemed nuisance; removal of vehicle
Any motor vehicle, trailer or wheeled vehicle found standing or parked in or upon any public road, alley or
public right-of-way within the city in violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a nuisance. Such
vehicle shall be removed by any police officer of the city and taken to the police impound lot and shall be kept in
police custody until application for its redemption shall be made by the owner or his duly authorized agent.
(Ordinance 352, sec. X, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.013 Vehicles with lugs or cleats on tires
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate or run upon any public street in the city any vehicle
which has on its tires any block, lug, stud, cleat, ridge, bead, or any other protuberance of metal that shall project
more than one-fourth of an inch beyond that tread or traction surface of the tires unless said wheels are protected
by bands, wooden blocks, skids or some sufficient device to protect the street against injury by reason thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/536
(b) Nothing herein shall prevent the use of vehicles actually engaged at the time in construction or repair of
streets.
(c) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the use of conventional tire chains during adverse weather
conditions.
(Ordinance 352, sec. XI, adopted 4/22/99)
Sec. 12.05.014 Requirements for vehicles carrying hazardous materials
(a) A vehicle carrying hazardous materials in intra-city travel, which may travel to and from the hazardous
materials truck route by using the shortest practical route to or from the duly licensed place of loading or
unloading such hazardous waste materials. The operator of any vehicle carrying hazardous materials shall carry
evidence of the location of its last stop and of its immediate location, and shall provide such evidence to any
officer authorized to enforce this section upon request from such officer.
(b) All vehicles carrying hazardous materials must label all said vehicles with the proper placards as required
by law for the transportation of hazardous materials.
(c) It shall be unlawful to transport hazardous waste through the city unless otherwise permitted by the proper
state or federal authority who has jurisdiction over such matters.
(Ordinance 352, sec. XII, adopted 4/22/99)
ARTICLE 12.06 OBSTRUCTIONS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sec. 12.06.001 Definitions
Obstruction. Any sign, equipment, building, pole, structure, or extension, thereof, which protrudes, extends or is
located within a right-of-way in the city. This regulation specifically includes, but is not limited to, the
construction, installation, maintenance and/or positioning of a basketball goal in any right-of-way.
Right-of-way. The area in, on, above or below a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley or
easement in which the city has an interest.
Sec. 12.06.002 Obstruction of right-of-way
It shall be illegal for a person/person(s) to place, construct or erect any obstruction within or across any right-ofway.
Sec. 12.06.003 Removal required
Any obstruction prohibited by this article which has been placed or constructed within a right-of-way prior to the
effective date of this article, and which remains in the right-of-way on the effective date of this article, shall be
removed by the owner or other party responsible for the obstruction. The owner or other party responsible for
the obstruction shall be responsible for all costs in connection with the removal of the obstruction.
Sec. 12.06.004 Penalty
A person who violates any provision of this article and is found guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon final
conviction shall be fined an amount not to exceed $200.00 upon the first conviction and an amount not
exceeding $500.00 upon the second and each subsequent conviction.
Sec. 12.06.005 Right of the city to abate unlawful obstruction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/536
(a) The city administrator or the duly appointed representative may remove or cause the removal of an
obstruction necessary to obtain compliance with this article.
(b) Not later than the tenth (10) day after the date the city removes the obstruction under this section; the city
shall give notice by certified mail to the person responsible for the obstruction.
(c) The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, including a legal description of the property or location where violation
occurred.
(2) A description of the violation of this article.
(3) A statement of how the city abated the obstruction.
(4) An itemized statement of the charges necessary to remove the obstruction; if any applies.
(5) Notice of where to reclaim the property must be reclaimed within (10) ten days of notification.
Charges for removal must be paid prior to reclaiming property.
(Ordinance 540-18 adopted 5/3/18)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Applicability of state law; mandatory connection to water and sewer system
Utility services within the city limits shall be regulated according to the requirements set forth in state law with
the additional provisions of requiring mandatory connections to the water and sewer systems of the city.
(Ordinance 431-09, sec. 1, adopted 8/20/09)
Sec. 13.01.002 Free service prohibited
In accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Department of Agriculture, Rural Utility
Service, no free utility services will be provided to any customer. (Ordinance 431-09, sec. 2, adopted 8/20/09)
ARTICLE 13.02 RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING†
Sec. 13.02.001 Water rates
(a) The water rates for the city are as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(Editorially supplied)
(b) All previously enacted ready for service fees for customers whose water service is outside the city limits
shall remain in force and shall be in addition to those rates listed above. (Ordinance 457-12 adopted 9/20/12)
Sec. 13.02.002 Sewer rates
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/536
(a) The sewer rates for the city are as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(Editorially supplied)
(b) All previously enacted ready for service fees for customers whose sewer service is outside the city limits
shall remain in force and shall be in addition to those rates listed above. (Ordinance 461-12 adopted –/–/12)
Sec. 13.02.003 Application for services
Written application shall be made to the city upon forms furnished therefor for water, sewer, garbage collection,
or any other utility service which may be furnished by the city. Such application shall state the name and the
address of the applicant, the type of utility service desired, the purposes for which the application is made and
such other information as the city may require.
Sec. 13.02.004 Deposit
(a) Along with the application for water service, the applicant shall pay to the city a deposit in the amount of
$61.00 for residential and $101.00 for commercial; any future fees shall be set by the city council and shall be
set or changed by resolution and shall not require an amendment to this section.
(b) In the event of discontinuance of service for nonpayment on two consecutive months, an additional deposit
of $61.00 shall be made by residential customers and an additional deposit of $101.00 shall be made by
commercial customers for future water services from the waterworks system.
Sec. 13.02.005 Refund of deposit
Any deposit made to the city by any applicant shall be held by the city until such applicant's utility service for
which the deposit was made shall be terminated. Upon termination of said service, the applicant shall be entitled
to a refund of said deposit, less any amount which is due and owing to the city.
Sec. 13.02.006 Water and sewer tap fees
A fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code shall be collected for a water tap fee
for connecting a residence or commercial venture to the city water system and a fee as provided for in the fee
schedule found in appendix A to this code shall be collected for a sewer tap to tie a residence or commercial
venture on to the city sewer system, and when the property owner fully understands his septic tank cannot be
repaired and when trouble of said septic tank develops he will be required to pay the full fee as provided for in
the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code and tie on to the city sewer system immediately if city sewer
service is available. Providing sewer service is unavailable to a residence, the city will grant permission for
cleaning and/or repairing of said septic tank.
Sec. 13.02.007 Due date for payment of bill; late charge; reconnection fee
(a) Reconnection fee. In the event of discontinuance of service, an additional sum as provided for in the fee
schedule found in appendix A to this code shall be charged for reconnection to the system.
(Ordinance 471-14 adopted 1/16/14)
(b) Due date; late charge. All unpaid balances will receive $10.00 penalty after the 15th day of each month.
(Unless the 15th falls on a weekend, a holiday or an inclement weather day, as declared by the city administrator,
a one-day grace period will apply and the $10.00 penalty will be assessed on the next business day.) (Ordinance
473-14 adopted 2/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.008 Failure to pay bill
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner or agent of any premises located within the
corporate limits of the city, whether occupied or unoccupied, to suffer or permit the nonpayment of a monthly
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/536
water-sewage-garbage statement issued by the city for any residence and/or business establishment located
within the city limits. (Ordinance 131, sec. I, adopted 3/13/69)
Sec. 13.02.009 Special water rates prohibited
(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to receive from the city any free water
from the water system now owned and controlled by the city, or for any person, firm or corporation to receive
any rate other than the regular rate charged or to be hereafter charged for said water furnished them. (Ordinance
64 adopted 4/17/58)
(b) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of same shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than
$500.00. (Ordinance 64 adopted 4/17/58; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Sec. 13.02.010 Deposit for sewer customers who are not water customers
(a) The superintendent of water and sewer shall require a deposit as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A to this code, to be known as “sewer deposit,” from any sewer customer who is not also a water
customer.
(b) Such deposit shall be held in escrow by the city as security for the payment of the depositor's sewer
charges.
(Ordinance 95 adopted 8/31/61)
Sec. 13.02.011 Sewer charges to be based on winter water consumption
Each residential sewer customer of the city who has had water service at his current residence for the December
of the preceding year and for January and February of the current year shall pay monthly beginning October 1st
of each year an amount equal to the current sewer rate for the monthly average number of thousand gallons (or
any fractional part thereof) consumed during the preceding December, January, and February. (Ordinance 203
adopted 9/22/83; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Payment of costs of extension of water or sewer lines
(a) Any contractor, business, individual, etc., that requests the city to extend water or sewer lines to any
business, residential or industrial complex or other facility shall pay to the city all costs which the city shall
incur or be obligated to incur in extending such water and sewer lines to such business, residential or industrial
complex or other facility.
(b) The sole authority to determine the closest existing water or sewer line or both from which an extension is
feasible shall be vested in the city.
(Ordinance 143 adopted 2/10/72)
Secs. 13.03.002–13.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Water
Sec. 13.03.041 Tampering with water meter; unlawful taking of water
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/536
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with a city water meter, meter coupling, water cut-offs and
meter locking devices on the city water system.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to take or receive water from the city water system unless such water is
metered and measured by a city water meter.
(c) In the event that a water meter or appurtenances are tampered with, connected or disconnected, the
occupant of the premises where such occurs shall be presumed to have done such act.
(d) If water is taken or received from the city water system without being measured through a city water
meter, the occupant of the premises where such occurs shall be presumed to have done such act.
(Ordinance 200 adopted 1/28/82)
(e) Any person who violates any portion of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not
in excess of $500.00. (Ordinance 200 adopted 1/28/82; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
(f) There is hereby established a charge as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code to
be assessed against the occupant of any premises where a city water meter or appurtenances are tampered with
or damaged. (Ordinance 200 adopted 1/28/82)
Sec. 13.03.042 Cut-off valve required
(a) If any user of the water services provided by the city requests that the water be interrupted or stopped at
the meter for that house, then the city water department shall not permit water service to be resumed for that
house until a water cut-off valve shall have been installed at the house. The water cut-off valve must be
inspected by the city water department and approved by a properly authorized inspector. The cut-off valve shall
adhere to the standards of the city water department. In the event that a water meter becomes inoperative for any
reason, the city water department shall not install or repair the water meter and resume water service to that
house until there has been a water cut-off valve installed at the house.
(b) The term “house” shall be defined as any building used for dwelling or business purposes.
(Ordinance 147-A adopted –/–/–)
Sec. 13.03.043 Standards for construction of water lines
(a) Specifications. Every person engaged in the business of furnishing water for domestic or industrial use in
the city shall construct and maintain his lines and services as follows:
(1) All pipelines and mains used for the purpose of distributing water for domestic or industrial
purposes shall be constructed and installed in the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of the city at
least 30 inches from the top of the pipe to the improved grade as fixed and established by the city
council, or those employed by the city council to establish a grade.
(2) All pipelines or service lines used for the purpose of conveying the water from the main or
distributing line to the water meter shall be of extra-heavy lead pipe and shall be installed and
constructed at least 30 inches below the established grade to the top of the pipe.
(3) All pipelines or service lines used for the purpose of conveying the water from the meter to the
home or industry shall be constructed at least eighteen inches below the level of the ground.
(4) All water mains in the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares, where permanent or semipermanent
paving is or may be constructed, shall be replaced with cast-iron, class B, AWWA
specifications, or class 150, centrifugal cast-iron pipe.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/536
(5) No pipeline or service line shall be constructed and no repairs shall be made on lines already
installed which require any character of excavation or digging in the streets, alleys and public
thoroughfares of the city without first making application and securing from the city secretary a
permit to do such work.
(6) All pipelines or service lines used for the purpose of conveying water within the city shall be of
such size and diameter as may be hereafter determined by the city council.
(7) All water distribution systems of mains shall be designed to meet all requirements of the state
department of insurance as to adequate capacities for public fire protection and public fire hydrant
spacing, and all water distribution systems of mains shall have a sufficient number and type of fire
hydrant to comply with the minimum regulations of the state department of insurance.
(Ordinance 55 adopted 7/22/57)
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in any
sum of money not to exceed $500.00. (Ordinance 55 adopted 7/22/57; Ordinance 246 adopted 1/28/88)
Secs. 13.03.044–13.03.090 Reserved
Division 3. Sewers*
Sec. 13.03.091 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following words and terms as used herein are defined to mean the following:
Domestic service connection. Service to any dwelling unit occupied as living quarters for one or more persons,
which establishment or unit has sanitary water or sewage facilities.
Fixture connection. Either a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower, commode, washing machine, floor drain,
dishwashing vats and any other plumbing fixture from which wastewater or sewage passes through and into the
house drain and into the house newer, not including wash racks in garages and filling stations; provided that
when three or less dishwashing vats are connected as one unit, with one drain, same shall be considered as one
fixture connection.
House drain. The part of the main horizontal drain and its branches inside the wall of the building and extending
to and connecting with the house sewer.
House sewer. That part of the main drain or sewer extending from a point four feet outside of the outer space of
the outer wall or floor line to a connection with the public sewer.
Sanitary sewage. The waste from water closets, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, urinals, household laundries, cellar
floor drains, garage floor drains, storerooms, soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips, drinking fountains,
stable floors, drains and other fixture connections.
(Ordinance 78, sec. I, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.092 Penalty; additional remedies
(a) Any person, firm or corporation, partnership, association, or any agent or employees thereof who shall
violate any of the rules, regulations or provisions of this division, or any part of it, or portion thereof, by any act,
either of omission or commission, or cause same to be done, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00, nor more than $500.00, for each and every
such violation. Each violation of each part of this division shall be and constitute a separate offense, and where
such violation is a continued act, each day such violation is continued or permitted to continue shall be and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/536
constitute a separate offense and punished accordingly. (Ordinance 78, sec. XXV, adopted 3/23/60; Ordinance
246 adopted 1/28/88)
(b) In case of any willful or continued violation of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this division, the
city, in addition to imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in
any court having jurisdiction to restrain, correct or abate such violation, and the definition of any violation of the
terms, conditions and provisions of this division as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city from invoking the
civil remedies given it by the law of the state, but same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as
hereinabove prescribed for such violation. (Ordinance 78, sec. XXV, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.093 Sewer department
(a) For the purpose of providing for the efficient operation of the sewage disposal system situated in the city,
there is hereby created within the city a department to be known and identified as the sewer department, which
department shall be under the supervision of a superintendent who shall be the administrative officer of the
department and such other employees as the city council may direct. The superintendent of the sewer department
shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, for the term as may be fixed by
the governing body, and is to be paid such salary as the city council may provide. The superintendent of the
sewer department shall have general supervision over all employees of the sewer system and shall make frequent
trips of inspection over all pipelines and other property used in or connected with the sewer system, including
the sewage disposal plant, and shall make all repairs deemed necessary and consistent with his duties; provided
that the city council, when deemed expedient, shall have the right to consolidate the department and/or position
hereinabove created with any other department and/or administrative position, or positions, heretofore and
hereafter created, and assign all of the duties provided for the sewer superintendent and authority herein
conferred upon such officer to the officer in charge of the office with which such consolidation is had.
(b) The superintendent shall also report all violations of this division to the mayor, and shall forthwith proceed
to have prosecuted offenders as set forth in this division.
(c) In the performance of his duties as required by this section, the superintendent shall be subject to all city
ordinances, rules and regulations made pursuant thereto, at all times.
(Ordinance 78, sec. II, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.094 Connection permit required; application
(a) No person, persons, firm or corporation shall have the right to connect any property with the sewer system
of the city, and no connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be made, until the owner of such
property, or his agent duly authorized, shall have received from the city a permit to do so, after having met the
requirements herein specified to obtain such permit. The owner of any property desired to be connected with the
sewer system of the city, or his duly authorized agent, shall first make an application in writing signed by such
owner, or his agent duly authorized in writing to sign such application for and in the name of the owner, upon
blanks furnished by the city and delivered to the officer in charge of the sewer department of the city, for a
permit to connect any such property with the city sewer system; such application shall contain the precise
location of the property to be drained, the type of structure and the purpose for which same is used, and give the
name of the owner of the property and the number and class of plumbing fixture to be contained within the
private system or property to be drained, and the name of the person or firm employed to do the plumbing work
contemplated to be done and connected with the sewer system. Such application shall further contain an
agreement on the part of such applicant owner of the property sought to be connected and drained by the sewer
system of the city that he will promptly pay to the city the rental charges then or thereafter to be prescribed by
the city for the use of the sewer system at the times and in the manner prescribed now or hereafter by the
ordinances of the city, that he will abide by and observe the rules and regulations governing the use of the city
sewer system, and that he will be responsible for the rental charges accruing up to the time that he gives actual
notice, in writing, to the city of a change in ownership of said property, or to discontinue service thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/536
(b) Any such permit issued shall remain in force only so long as the owner of the property, and the applicant
therefor, shall comply with the rules and regulations now or hereafter prescribed for the use of the sewer system,
and shall pay the rental charges as provided, and upon the failure of such property owner in either or any respect
to fully comply with the provisions hereof, said permit shall be subject to cancellation, and the city shall have
the right to discontinue sewer service to such property, and this stipulation shall also be contained in the
application for a permit.
(c) Before any application for a permit shall be received and permit granted there must be paid to the city
inspection fees and one month rental for sewer service in advance, said advance payment to be applied in
payment of the rental and service charge for the first month following commencement of service, if the permit is
issued following the 15th day of any calendar month. If the permit is issued on or prior to such day the charge
for sewer service shall commence on the first day of the month in which the permit is issued.
(d) Whenever any property for which a permit has been issued and sewer service is being furnished changes
ownership, the new owner shall make application for a continuation of sewer service to such property, and such
application shall be made upon the same blanks and be subject to the same terms and conditions and contain the
same stipulations as the original application, and such application shall be marked “application for continuation
of sewer service.”
(e) When any person owning any property served by the sewer system in the city shall change the plumbing in
premises, other than single-family dwellings, used exclusively as such, to be connected with the sewer system so
as to increase the number of plumbing fixtures connected with the city sewer system, such person shall make a
new application, upon the same blanks, terms and conditions as an original application as herein set but.
(f) When sewer service for any property has been discontinued for any reason, same shall not again be
continued until the owner of such property shall have made application as is set out herein for an original
application.
(g) No permit shall be deemed to authorize anything not stated in the application.
(h) A permit to make a connection with the sewer system or for a continuation of sewer service will be issued
only when the plumbing in the structure or property to be connected and drained is in accordance with the
provisions for plumbing as are provided in the plumbing code for the city, now in effect and hereafter adopted,
and has been inspected and approved by the city plumbing inspector.
(i) There shall be no reduction or abatement of the sewer rental charge for any property so long as said
property is connected with the sewer system of the city.
(Ordinance 78, sec. III, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.095 Connection permit fees
Every application for permit filed to connect with the city sewer system shall be accompanied by a fee in the
sum of $65.00 to cover the issuance of said permit, and $10.00 inspection charges, plus one month sewer rental
charge in advance, which sum shall be paid directly to the city secretary, and no permit shall be issued unless
such fee and charge has been so paid. Provided, however, that all owners of property situated within the city who
apply for sewer connection or connections to their respective premises, prior to the initial construction and
installation of sewer mains in the immediate area wherein such property is situated, the city will install a street
service line running from the street sewer main to such owner's curb and gutter or sidewalk line, or to the
owner's property line when no curb and gutter or sidewalk exists, free of any cost to the owner other than the
payment of inspection fees at time of filing application for said sewer connections, and of the rental and service
charge for the first month beginning on the first day of the calendar month after sewer service is made available
to the owner's property, notwithstanding the available sewer service is not being utilized by the owner at such
time. (Ordinance 78, sec. IV, adopted 3/23/60)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/536
Sec. 13.03.096 Sand and grease traps
(a) Residential garages. Before any residential garage may be connected to the city sewer, same shall be
equipped with a cast-iron sand trap provided with a removal receptacle inside of the trap to remove mud, sand
and other refuse washed into same. This provision does not apply where such drain is located in such a manner
as to receive drainage exclusively from a washing machine used for laundry purposes.
(b) Commercial garages and filling stations. Before any wash racks at all commercial garages and filling
stations may be connected to the city sewer system, same shall be equipped so that wastewater therefrom shall
discharge into a two-compartment sand and grease trap made of concrete.
(Ordinance 78, sec. V, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.097 Connection required
(a) At any time after the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or
corporation owning, renting, leasing or controlling, in whole or in part, any premises situated within any section
of the city where sanitary sewer shall exist and where the property line of such premises approaches or extends
to within 100 feet of any such sewer, to construct, use or maintain, or permit to be constructed, used or
maintained, on such premises, any septic tank, privy, cesspool, water closet, urinal basin, slop sink, slop drain,
bathtub, or water waste drain from dwellings, laundries, livery stables, garages, filling stations or other places, or
any receptacles whatever used or to be used for the purpose of receiving or removing sewer matter, or slop of
any kind, unless the same shall be connected with the system of sanitary sewage of the city.
(b) All defective septic tanks, cesspools and other structures, devices or other class outdoor facilities used for
the purpose of receiving human sewage that may be on any premises, as of the effective date of this section, the
property line of which, at any point, extends to within 100 feet of a city sanitary sewer, shall be removed or
abated after the giving of notice as herein provided for removal and abatement of same.
(c) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, within
ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100)
feet of the property line. All connections to the public sewer system shall be made under the supervision of the
city and its representatives.
(Ordinance 78, sec. VI, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.098 Prohibited acts and conditions; prohibited discharges
It shall be unlawful:
(1) To uncover the public sewer or branches thereof unless by consent and under the supervision of
the officer in charge of the sewer department of the city.
(2) For the owner or occupant of any building, located on any lot reaching within 100 feet of any
city sanitary sewer, any portion of which is used for any purpose during any portion of the day, to fail
to have at least one water closet connection with the public sewer.
(3) For the owner or occupant of any building, located on any lot reaching within 100 feet of any
city sanitary sewer, in which food is cooked or clothing is washed, to fail to have a suitable sink, slop
stand or hopper for the reception of water and connected with the city sewer system.
(4) To throw or allow to be thrown or deposited upon the surface of the ground or in any hole or
vault in or under the surface of the ground, on any lot within 100 feet of any city sanitary sewer, any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/536
water which has been used for domestic or manufacturing purposes, or any liquid or any solid filth,
feces or urine.
(5) To throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, in any vessel or receptacle connected
with the city sewer system, any newspaper, garbage, hair, fruit, ashes, vegetable peelings or refuse,
rags, cotton, cinders, or any other matter whatsoever, except feces, urine, the necessary closet paper
or liquid slops.
(6) To fail or refuse to connect with the sanitary sewer all washstands or slop stands, in a house or
yard, where a city sanitary sewer is within 100 feet of the property line, or to allow any slops, wash
or wastewater of any kind to flow over or under the pavement into the streets or alleys.
(7) To enter in or upon the premises of the sewage disposal plant site and to in any wise tamper
with, or injure in any manner whatsoever, the buildings, fixtures and equipment of the sewage
disposal plant, or any fixtures, equipment or supplies that may be stored on said site.
(8) To discharge [to] any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided.
(9) To construct or maintain within the city any septic tank, privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended for the disposal of sewage.
(10) No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
municipal sewage works.
(11) To discharge or cause to be discharged into a public sewer any of the following described
waters or wastes:
(A) Any waste or water which contains more than 75 parts per million by weight of fats, oil
or grease.
(B) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid
or gas.
(C) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(D) Any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
(E) Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(F) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(Ordinance 78, sec. VII, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.099 Responsibility for damage caused in making connection
The property owner, or plumber, or both, shall be held responsible for any injuries the plumber shall cause to the
sewer or street in making such connection. (Ordinance 78, sec. VIII, adopted 3/23/60)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/536
Sec. 13.03.100 Connection of open gutter, septic tank, cesspool, privy or cistern with public sewer
prohibited
No person or corporation shall connect any open gutter, septic tank, cesspool, privy, vault or cistern with any
public sewer or any private sewer connected with the public sewer. (Ordinance 78, sec. IX, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.101 Depositing substance liable to obstruct sewer
No person or corporation shall deposit any garbage, offal, dead animals, filth or any substance having a tendency
to obstruct the flow of sewage in any manhole, flush tank or sewer opening. (Ordinance 78, sec. X, adopted
3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.102 Injuring sewer
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to obstruct or in any way injure any of the pipes, drains,
works, or machinery belonging to or connected with the sewer system of the city or to place any substance
whatever into any sink, water closet, bathtub, vessels, drains, or other receptacles belonging to or connected with
said sewer system which may obstruct or injure same. (Ordinance 78, sec. XI, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.103 Laying pipes in street or alley
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to lay pipes for water, gas, steam or any purpose in any street or alley
where sewers are laid shall give at least twenty-four hours' notice to the city officer in charge of the sewer
department before opening the street or alley, and the manner of excavating the trenches and laying the pipe and
backfilling over the same shall be subject to the approval of the officer in charge of the sewer department. All
such work shall be planned and executed in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing and other
ordinances of the city so that no injury shall occur to any street, public sewer or drain or to any house or other
sewer drain connected therewith. (Ordinance 78, sec. XII, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.104 Guarding of excavations; backfilling
A proper barrier and lights must be maintained on the banks of the house or others sewer trench to guard the
public against accidents during the progress of work. In backfilling, no stone shall be used and the earth shall be
carefully rammed or flooded so as to keep the pipe in proper position and to avoid settling. (Ordinance 78, sec.
XIII, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.105 Connection of buildings outside city
The owner or occupant of any building not located within the city shall be allowed to make connection with the
sewer system after obtaining a permit as provided herein, and such work of connection shall be subject to the
regulations and inspections herein provided for and the owner or occupant of any building thus connected shall
be required to pay the inspection, installation and the service charges herein exacted. (Ordinance 78, sec. XIV,
adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.106 Connection of old house plumbing
It shall be unlawful to connect any old house plumbing to the city sanitary sewer system unless same conforms
in all respects to all requirements of the plumbing code of the city and shall be approved by the plumbing
inspector. (Ordinance 78, sec. XV, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.107 Specifications for connection
All connections of house sewer lines into the main and lateral sewer lines shall be in accordance with the
specification as is provided in the plumbing code of the city. (Ordinance 78, sec. XVI, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.108 Basement drains
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/536
No permit for a basement drain shall be granted until the owner of the building has executed and signed a
written agreement releasing the city from any damage that may result from the basement being flooded by the
stoppage of sewers, which agreement shall be filed with the city secretary. (Ordinance 78, sec. XVII, adopted
3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.109 Connection of downspout pipes or other pipes conveying water
No rainwater or downspout pipes, range boiler pipe, or other pipe used to convey water or other substances of
like character, except the pipes necessary to plumbing systems, shall be connected to the sewer system.
(Ordinance 78, sec. XVIII, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.110 Materials for building drain
All drains from four feet outside of the building to the main sewer must be of vitrified clay or cement pipe with
bells, or extra-heavy cast-iron pipe laid to a uniform grade. Joints of clay pipe shall have bell holes provided or
hemp gaskets put in and joints well cemented with two parts of well-screened sand and one part of best Portland
cement, and cast-iron pipe shall be caulked and molten lead and oakum. No vitrified clay or cement pipe shall be
used for sewer connections unless it is at least 12 inches underground. Extra-heavy cast-iron shall be used where
the depth of such pipes is less than 12 inches underground. (Ordinance 78, sec. XIX, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.111 Slope of building drain
All sewer, soil and waste pipe drains shall have a continuous fall of not less than one-quarter of an inch to the
foot is obtainable [sic]. (Ordinance 78, sec. XX, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.112 Inspections
It shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the sewer department, or his duly authorized agents, to enter all
premises as may be necessary in the enforcement of this division, and he is hereby so empowered, and it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to interfere with any inspection being made by the city plumbing
inspector or the officer in charge of the sewer department, or his authorized agents, in carrying out the provisions
of this division. (Ordinance 78, sec. XXI, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.113 Application for extension; plans and specifications
(a) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct or extend or make any extensions of any main or
sub-lateral lines to be attached to any of the main sewer lines or manholes installed shall be required to file an
application with and to secure a permit from the officer in charge of the city sewer system authorizing said
officer in charge four copies of plans and specifications of the proposed extensions and any subsequent changes
thereto [sic], and before any action is taken thereon, same shall be submitted to the state commission on
environmental quality for its approval, and upon receiving said approval said plans and specifications shall be
approved by the consulting engineer of the city; said application shall contain the provisions that said applicant
agrees that permission is thereby given to the agents of the state commission on environmental quality, and the
city, to inspect all of the work during its progress as often as may be desired; and the applicant further shall
agree that the plumbing work installed in all structures to be connected to said extensions shall comply with all
applicable ordinances of the city and state laws and that the extensions or lines being constructed within all
easements therewith shall after the completion thereof, to be conveyed to the city without cost and without
reservations of any kind.
(b) All plans and specifications for sewer improvements and extensions shall include the following:
(1) Profiles of all sewers proposed.
(2) Details of construction of manholes, flush tanks and substructure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/536
(3) Shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch nor greater than 300 feet to the
inch.
(4) Lines and figures shall be clearly and distinctly made thereon and extensions to be built to be
shown by solid lines: ______. Existing sanitary sewers shall be shown by the following symbol: ......,
and combined sewers by a dot and dash .-.-.-; all topographical symbols to be the same as those of the
United States Geological Survey.
(5) Elevations of the surface of the streets to be placed outside the street lines in the upper right
angle, or opposite their respective positions in the street. The elevations of sewer inverts should be
shown at street intersections, ends of lines and wherever a change of grade occurs. The elevations of
the surface shall be shown to the nearest 1/10 foot; those of the sewer invert to the nearest 1/100 foot.
The sizes and gradients of all proposed and existing sewers shall be marked along the line of the
sewer.
(6) All sewer appurtenances and unusual features, such as manholes, lamp-holes, flush tanks,
siphons, pumps, etc., shall be designated on the plans by suitable symbols and referenced by a legend
near the title.
(7) Profiles of sewer lines shall be prepared and drawn to such a scale as to show clearly the
structural features of the sewer. For ordinary use, the following scales are suggested: vertically, 10
feet to one inch; horizontally, 100 feet to one inch. Both scales must be clearly shown upon each
sheet. Upon these profiles shall be shown all manholes, flush tanks, lamp-holes, siphons and stream
crossings, with elevations of the stream bed and normal water. Figures showing the sizes and
gradients of sewers, surface elevations, sewer inverts, etc., should be shown with the same frequency
as required for the map.
(8) When grades lower than those given in the recommended practice are used, an explanation and
reasons for the use of such grades should be included in the engineer's report. On each sheet of
profiles must be given, under the title, an index of the streets appearing on that sheet. Profile sheets
shall be numbered consecutively.
(9) The detail plans shall be drawn to such a scale as to show suitably and clearly the nature of the
design and all details, such as manholes, frames, covers, iron pipes, valves, gates, etc.
(10) Title: Each drawing shall have legibly printed thereon the name of the town or persons for
whom the drawing is made, the name of the engineer in charge, the date, the scale and such
references and the title as are necessary for the complete understanding of each drawing.
(c) The applicant shall furnish built-in drawings in as many copies as may be required by the city when the
work is completed.
(Ordinance 78, sec. XXII, adopted 3/23/60)
Sec. 13.03.114 Approval of extensions
All new extensions to the city sewer system and appurtenances thereto shall be inspected and approved by the
officer in charge of the sewer system, and the consulting engineer of the city or his duly authorized
representative, before backfilling any part thereof. Any person, firm or corporation violating this provision shall
be subject to the penalty provided for herein, and shall be compelled to uncover said extension of any part
thereof, so that same may be fully inspected as provided herein. (Ordinance 78, sec. XXIII, adopted 3/23/60)
ARTICLE 13.04 SOLID WASTE*
Sec. 13.04.001 Title
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/536
This article shall be known as the city garbage and waste disposal ordinance.
Sec. 13.04.002 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Provide a safe and healthful environment for all citizens within the city limits;
(2) Protect the health, safety and well-being of all citizens by eliminating possible or in-fact germbreeding
materials and conditions which may contribute to the spreading of diseases and infections to
humans and animals;
(3) Provide a means for the orderly and safe handling, storage, collection, transporting and disposal
of solid waste, especially garbage, within the city.
Sec. 13.04.003 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Authorized sanitary landfill. A controlled area of land for which a permit is issued and upon which solid waste is
disposed of in conformance with federal and state law.
Bulky items. Items too large for normal pickup and which cannot be loaded by two workers.
Commercial unit. Any type of business or industry, whether sales, service or storage, or any institution such as
churches, schools or hospitals.
Family unit. One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, whether or not
related to one another by birth, adoption or marriage.
Garbage container. A portable can or similar container constructed of galvanized iron, tin or other substantial
material or a plastic bag or cardboard box designed to store solid waste with sufficient wall strength to maintain
physical integrity when lifted by the top. The maximum capacity of a garbage container shall not exceed thirtythree
(33) gallons and the total weight of a garbage container and its contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds.
Premises. Any property, whether improved or unimproved or occupied or not occupied, within the city limits.
Residence. Any building or structure commonly known as a home, house, mobile home, house trailer, duplex, or
apartment or any other structure which is used for housekeeping by a person or family unit.
Residential unit. Any person or persons occupying a residence.
Solid waste. Any and all waste that is solid, including brush, debris, garbage, yard waste and trash, as solid waste
is defined under federal or state law and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder and that is acceptable for
disposal in a landfill, except for special waste and hazardous waste as defined herein.
(1) Special waste.
(A) Waste defined as such by federal or state law and/or the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(B) Medical waste, including infectious or pathological waste from laboratories, research
facilities, and health and veterinary facilities.
(C) Dead animals and/or slaughterhouse waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/536
(D) Water treatment plant, sewer treatment plant and industrial sludge.
(E) Liquid waste, which means any waste material that is determined to be or contains free
liquid by the paint filter test (EPA Method 9095).
(F) Waste from an industrial process.
(G) Waste from a pollution control process.
(H) Waste transported in a bulk tanker.
(I) Asbestos waste.
(J) Empty containers which have been used for pesticides, herbicides, fungicides or
rodenticides.
(K) Residue or debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of chemical substances or
commercial products.
(L) Soil, water, residue, debris or articles which are contaminated from the cleanup of a site
or facility formerly used for the generation, storage, treatment, recycling, reclamation, or
disposal of waste listed in this definition, including soil contaminated from underground storage
tanks used or formerly used for the storage of petroleum products.
(M) Waste that requires other than normal handling, storage, management or disposal.
(2) Hazardous waste.
(A) As defined by federal or state law and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(B) Because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in the mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
improperly managed.
(C) Is required to be accompanied by a written manifest or shipping document describing the
waste as hazardous pursuant to any state or federal law.
(D) Waste containing polychlorinated biphenyl or any other substance the storage, treatment
or disposal of which is subject to regulation under the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act.
(E) Contains a radioactive material the storage or disposal of which is subject to federal or
state law.
(Ordinance 305, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/93)
Sec. 13.04.004 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 305, sec. 4, adopted 3/10/93)
Sec. 13.04.005 Use of city collection service required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/536
(a) Each and every occupied residence located within the city limits is hereby required to subscribe to the city
garbage service. Each and every occupied commercial unit within the city is hereby required to subscribe to and
use the city garbage service.
(b) Commercial units on the same property shall be deemed to have subscribed to the city garbage service if
that property is served by at least one commercial dumpster of sufficient size to contain all garbage generated on
the property.
Sec. 13.04.006 Disposal of animal manure
Animal manure shall be disposed of at the expense of the property owner and in conformance with federal and
state law.
Sec. 13.04.007 Container requirements; placement for collection
(a) Every person that owns, operates, manages, occupies or controls any residence within the city limits shall
provide and maintain in good order and repair a sufficient number of garbage containers for the accumulation
and disposal of garbage. Containers should be placed for collection within five feet (5') of the curb, or, if no curb
exists, within five feet (5') of the driving surface of the street. Containers may not be placed for collection earlier
than 7:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled day for collection. No waste shall be allowed to accumulate outside
the containers.
(b) Every person that owns, operates, manages, occupies or controls any commercial unit within the city limits
shall provide a commercial container known as a dumpster or front-load dumpster, except for commercial
customers previously approved for commercial hand pickup. All commercial containers shall be placed on
private property.
(c) Commercial units receiving commercial hand pickup shall provide containers as required under residential
pickup.
Sec. 13.04.008 Accumulation of waste prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, controlling or occupying premises within the
city limits to allow the accumulation of any solid waste except in approved garbage containers. Such
accumulation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is unlawful and shall be removed within ten (10) days after
written notice is given.
Sec. 13.04.009 Collection schedule; dumpster service
(a) Residential collection shall be two (2) times per week. Commercial hand pickup customers shall not
exceed ten (10) 33-gallon containers per week. Any commercial hand pickup customer exceeding ten (10) 33-
gallon containers per week shall be required to use a dumpster. Commercial hand pickup customers should place
garbage for pickup in the same manner as residential customers. Containers shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds.
(b) Commercial dumpster service shall be negotiated between the customer and the approved contractor.
Sec. 13.04.010 Collection rates
The city council shall adopt by resolution rates for city garbage collection services.
Sec. 13.04.011 Bulky items
Bulky items shall be collected beginning on a designated Monday of one week of each month. Bulky items
should be placed within five feet (5') of the driving surface of the street. Bulky items should not be placed for
pickup more than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the last Monday of each month. The approved contractor and
the city will designate the particular week for various sectors of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/536
Sec. 13.04.012 Disabled customers
Disabled and/or handicapped residential customers (as certified by the city from a doctor's statement supplied by
the customer, that all occupants of the household are handicapped to the extent they are unable to place garbage
at the curb for pickup) will be allowed to receive pickup at the house, but no farther from the street than the rear
building line. Service will not be provided inside a garage or within a fenced yard. This service will be at the
regular curbside rate.
Sec. 13.04.013 Brush
All brush placed for normal pickup shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet (4') in length or placed in a
container. Such brush shall not exceed two (2) cubic yards per pickup.
Sec. 13.04.014 Hazardous and special waste
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any hazardous waste or special waste except in conformance
with all federal and state laws and regulations. Such disposal shall be at the sole expense and responsibility of
each property owner.
Sec. 13.04.015 Transportation of waste
No person, firm or corporation shall transport any waste or cause waste to be transported over the streets in the
city unless such waste is entirely covered.
Sec. 13.04.016 Private waste disposal services
No person, firm or corporation shall provide any waste disposal services for which a fee is charged within the
city limits without a permit, license or franchise from the city council. Only the city council shall authorize a
private firm or company to provide such service in the city.
Sec. 13.04.017 Burning of waste
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, junk or any other solid waste
within the city limits, except that the city council shall have authority to authorize the burning of waste when it
is deemed to be in the best interest of the city.
Sec. 13.04.018 Disposal by property owner or occupant
This article shall not prohibit a property owner or occupant from transporting solid waste or garbage to an
authorized sanitary landfill if such owner or occupant desires to do so, but this section shall in no way relieve
such person from subscribing to the city garbage service.
Sec. 13.04.019 Using another's container or scattering waste
It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle, pilfer or scatter any garbage, rubbish, trash, junk or any solid
waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any type solid waste in a container belonging to another
person without that person's consent.
(Ordinance 305, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/93)
Sec. 13.04.020 Compliance with regulations; billing and payment of charges
(a) Each subscriber to the city garbage system shall conform to the regulations set out by the city council with
respect to all aspects of the garbage disposal system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/536
(b) Each subscriber to the city garbage system shall pay the monthly fees as prescribed by the city council.
The collection of such fees shall be made a part of the water billing service and the city shall be entitled to
discontinue water service to any person, firm or corporation not paying the city garbage fees.
(Ordinance 129, secs. III, IV, adopted 2/13/69)
ARTICLE 13.05 WATER WELLS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.05.001–13.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Private Wells*
Sec. 13.05.031 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), and each and every day said violation exists shall constitute a new and separate offense. The
city may enforce this division by civil suit. (Ordinance 196, sec. 5, adopted 12/28/81; Ordinance 246 adopted
1/28/88)
Sec. 13.05.032 Applicability
No person, firm or corporation shall, in the city, drill any water well into and remove water from the Paluxy or
Trinity Sands save and except as provided for herein. (Ordinance 196, sec. 1, adopted 12/28/81)
Sec. 13.05.033 Application for permit; hearing
Any person desiring to drill any water well and remove water from the Paluxy or Trinity Sands in the city may
make application to the city council for such permission and the city council shall hold a hearing on said
application. At said hearing the city council shall hear evidence concerning the proximity of the proposed well to
other wells which produce public water for the citizens and residents of the city, and such application shall be
denied if the evidence shows that any city well will be impaired or production curtailed by the drilling of the
proposed well. (Ordinance 196, sec. 2, adopted 12/28/81)
Sec. 13.05.034 Conditions of permit
If said application is granted by the city council, the permit granted by the city will:
(1) Specify that the well shall be located so that there will be no danger of pollution from flooding
or from unsanitary surroundings such as privies, livestock pens or other abandoned or improperly
sealed wells.
(2) Specify that the well cannot be within fifty feet of a tile or concrete sanitary sewer line, septic
tank or storm sewer.
(3) Specify that the well is not within 300 feet of a sewage wet well or sewage pump station.
(4) Specify that the well will not be located within 50 feet of livestock pens or pastures nor within
500 feet of an animal feedlot.
(5) Specify that any abandoned well on the property of the applicant shall be plugged and sealed to
prevent contamination of the fresh water aquifer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/536
(6) Specify that the premises, materials, tools and drilling equipment shall be maintained so as to
minimize contamination of the underground water during the drilling operation.
(A) The water used in the drilling operation must be of safe, sanitary quality.
(B) The slush pit shall be constructed and maintained to minimize contamination of drilling
mud.
(Ordinance 196, sec. 3, adopted 12/28/81)
Sec. 13.05.035 Construction standards
If a permit is granted, the following rules must be followed:
(1) The casing shall extend 18 inches of the finished floor or natural ground surface and a
minimum of 1 inch above the sealing block. The casing shall at least extend to the depth of the
shallowest water formation to be developed, and deeper, if necessary, in order to cut off all water
bearing [sic]
(2) The space between the casing and drill hole shall be sealed by using sufficient cement under
pressure to completely fill and seal the annular space between the casing and drill hole from the top
of the shallowest formation to be developed to the earth surface.
(3) When a gravel pack well is constructed all gravel shall be treated with a 50 mg/l chlorine
solution to insure disinfection as it is added to the well cavity.
(4) In all cases, a concrete sealing block extending at least 2 feet in every direction from the well
casing with a minimum thickness of 6 inches and sloped to drain away shall be provided around the
well head.
(5) Well heads and pump bases shall be sealed by the use of gaskets and sealing compounds and
properly vented to prevent the possibility of contamination of the well water. 16-mesh screen shall be
used on a well casing vent, which should be turned face downward so as to minimize the drawing of
contaminants into the well.
(Ordinance 196, sec. 4, adopted 12/28/81)
Secs. 13.05.036–13.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Sanitation and Pollution Control Near Public Water Supply Wells*
Sec. 13.05.061 Purpose
(a) This division sets forth uniform requirements for the users and the construction of facilities in or on land
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the wells in order to promote sanitary conditions in and around such
wells, to secure all such land from pollution hazards, and to enable the city to comply with all applicable state
and local regulations.
(b) The object of this division is to prevent certain uses and the construction of facilities in or on land
surrounding the wells which might create a danger of pollution to the water produced from such wells.
(Ordinance 420-07, sec. 1, adopted 9/20/07)
Sec. 13.05.062 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/536
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
City council. The city council of the City of Sansom Park, Texas.
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents,
successors, or assigns.
Wells. The water wells owned and operated by the city, which are more specifically identified and described in
exhibit A attached to Ordinance 420-07 and made a part hereof.
(Ordinance 420-07, sec. 2, adopted 9/20/07)
Editor's note–Exhibit A is not printed herein.
Sec. 13.05.063 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ordinance 420-07, sec. 5, adopted 9/20/07)
Sec. 13.05.064 Prohibited activities
The following activities are prohibited within the designated areas of land surrounding the wells:
(1) Construction and/or operation of any underground petroleum and/or chemical storage tank,
liquid transmission pipeline, stock pen, feedlot, dump grounds, privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewage
treatment system, solid waste disposal site, land on which sewage plant or septic tank sludge is
applied, land irrigated by sewage plant effluent, septic tank perforated drainfield, absorption bed,
evapotranspiration bed, area irrigated by a low dosage, low angle spray on-site sewage facility,
military facility, industrial facility, wood treatment facility, liquid petroleum and petrochemical
production, storage, and/or transmission facility, class 1, 2, 3, and/or 4 injection well, improperly
constructed water well of any depth, and all other construction or operations that could create an
unsanitary condition are prohibited within, upon, or across all areas of land within a 150-foot radius
of the wells. For the purposes of this division, improperly constructed water wells are those wells that
do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a public water supply well.
(2) Construction and/or operation of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic
tanks, storm sewers, and cemeteries is specifically prohibited within, upon, or across any area of land
within a 50-foot radius of the wells.
(3) Construction of homes or buildings upon any area of land within a 150-foot radius of the wells
is permitted, provided the restrictions described in subsections (1) and (2) above are met.
(4) Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited by this division; provided,
however, livestock shall not be allowed within a 50-foot radius of the wells.
(Ordinance 420-07, sec. 3, adopted 9/20/07)
Sec. 13.05.065 Right of entry
City employees, or authorized representatives of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to immediately enter upon any premises located within a 150-foot radius of any well to conduct any
inspection or observation necessary to enforce this division. (Ordinance 420-07, sec. 4, adopted 9/20/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/536
Sec. 13.05.066 Removal of prohibited construction or source of contamination
Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be required to remove the prohibited
construction or potential source of contamination within ______ days after notification that they are in violation
of this division. (Ordinance 420-07, sec. 6, adopted 9/20/07)
Sec. 13.05.067 Conflicts with other regulations
Whenever any applicable statute, regulation, or permit of any state, federal, or other agency having jurisdiction
over the subject matter of this division is in conflict herewith, the stricter requirement shall apply, unless
mandated otherwise. (Ordinance 420-07, sec. 7, adopted 9/20/07)
ARTICLE 13.06 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.06.001 Definitions
When used in this article, these terms shall be defined as follows:
Abnormal sewage. Any industrial waste discharged into the authority sanitary sewer which, when analyzed,
shows by weight a daily average total suspended solids (TSS) concentration greater than 240 mg/l or a
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentration greater than 210 mg/l. In addition, the director may judge
independently a waste's suitability for discharge to the POTW that requires additional treatment, based upon
BOD, TSS or other characteristics, as abnormal. Any waste in this classification must be acceptable for
discharge into the POTW as defined in this article.
Act. The Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended.
Approval authority. The executive director of the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) where the
state has been delegated NPDES permit authority and has an approved pretreatment program.
Authority. The City of Sansom Park, Texas.
Authorized representative. Authorized representatives (authorized signatories) for wastewater discharge permit
applications and for reports submitted under section 13.06.094 of this article are:
(1) A responsible corporate officer, if the discharger submitting the application or report is a
corporation. This includes the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation.
(2) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the
manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations, and can ensure that the
necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
individual wastewater discharge permits or any control mechanism requirements, and where authority
to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(3) For a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or the proprietor, respectively.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/536
(4) The principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility if the discharger is a federal, state or local governmental entity, or their agents.
(5) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1), (2) (3) or (4)
above if:
(A) The authorization is made in writing by the individual described above in subsection (1),
(2), (3), or (4);
(B) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates (such as a plant manager),
or a position of equivalent responsibility or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company; and
(C) The written authorization is submitted to the city.
If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility, a new
authorization must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports signed by an authorized
representative.
Best management practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in division 2 of this article (40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b)) and to prevent or reduce pollution. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure, as specified in “Standard Methods,” in five days at twenty (20)
degrees centigrade, expressed as parts per million by weight or in terms of milligrams per liter.
Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams or wastewater from any portion of a discharger's wastewater
treatment equipment or pretreatment facility.
Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical
standard.
Categorical pretreatment standards. Limitations on pollutant discharges to POTWs promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with section 307 of the Clean Water Act that apply to specified process wastewaters of particular
industrial categories (40 CFR 403.6 and parts 405–471).
CFR. Code of Federal Regulations.
Combined waste stream formula (CWF). A procedure found in 40 CFR 403.6(e) for calculating fixed alternative
discharge limits at industrial facilities applicable when regulated process wastewater, subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard, is mixed with nonregulated wastewaters prior to sampling.
Composite sample. A mixture of grab samples collected at the same sample point at different times and
composed of not less than four samples. The series of samples may be collected on a time or flow proportional
basis.
(1) Time proportional composite sample. A sampling method which combines discrete samples of
constant volume collected at constant time intervals (e.g., 200 milliliter samples collected every half
hour for a 24-hour period).
(2) Flow proportional composite sample.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/536
(A) Composed of sampling aliquots collected at consistent time intervals and proportioned in
volume according to stream flow; or
(B) Composed of sampling aliquots of consistent volume that are collected at time intervals
proportioned according to stream flow.
Flow proportional composites will be used only in locations that have the capability to
measure flow during the sampling period.
Contaminated. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Control authority. The City of Fort Worth, Texas, as holder of the respective Texas Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (TPDES) permit.
Cooling water.
(1) Uncontaminated cooling water. Water used for cooling purposes only which has no direct
contact with any raw material, intermediate, or final product and which does not contain a level of
contaminants detectably higher than that of the intake water. Also known as noncontact cooling
water.
(2) Contaminated cooling water. Water used for cooling purposes only which may become
contaminated either through the use of water treatment chemicals used for corrosion inhibitors or
biocides, or by direct contact with process materials and/or wastewater.
Director. The director of the water department of the city, or his authorized representative.
Discharger. Any nonresidential user discharging an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping
stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches and
all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. The term includes owners and occupants of such
premises.
EPA. The Environmental Protection Agency of the federal government.
Garbage. Solid waste from domestic or commercial preparation, cooking or dispensing of food or from the
handling, storage, and sale of produce.
Grab sample. An individual sample which is collected without regard to the flow in the waste stream over a
period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
Industrial user or user. A source of indirect discharge.
Industrial waste. Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business
process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/536
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title III, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Maximum daily average. The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as determined from
a laboratory test of a daily composite sample. The daily composite sample is the concentration of discharge of a
pollutant measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for
purposes of sampling.
Maximum grab. The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as determined from a
laboratory test of a grab sample.
mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
Monthly average limit. The highest allowable average of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as
the sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges”
measured during that month.
New source. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
(1) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is
located;
(2) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(3) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(4) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection (2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment. Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/536
feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with raw materials,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
Nonsignificant categorical industrial user. An industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards
may, at the discretion of the director, be permitted as a nonsignificant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) based
on a finding that the industrial user never discharges categorical wastewater and the following conditions are
met:
(1) The industrial user, prior to the city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable
categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
(2) The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required, together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and
(3) The industrial user never discharges any categorical process wastewater into the sanitary sewer.
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). A system used by the federal government for
collecting and organizing industry-related statistics. The NAICS codes are updated every five years to stay
current with industry developments.
NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the Environmental Protection
Agency.
O&M. Operation and maintenance.
Other wastes. Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, and all other
substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
Owner or occupant. The person, firm, or public or private corporation using the lot, parcel of land, building or
premises connected to and discharging sewage, industrial wastewater or liquid into the sanitary sewage system
of the city and who pays, or is legally responsible for the payment of, water rates or charges made against the lot,
parcel of land, building or premises if connected to the water distribution system of the city, or who would pay
or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected.
Pass-through. The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into navigable waters in quantities or
concentrations which are a cause of or significantly contribute to violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit.
Permit. The wastewater discharge permit issued to nondomestic dischargers of industrial waste into the sanitary
sewer system of the POTW.
Person. Any individual, business entity, partnership, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision, or
any agent or employee thereof.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of
solution, a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid, waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt
and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
POTW (publicly owned treatment works). Any sewage treatment plant owned and operated by the control
authority and the sewers, pipes and conveyances owned in whole or part by the authority that convey wastewater
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/536
to the POTW. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature.
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer.
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a
national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
Pretreatment standard, national pretreatment standard, pretreatment standard, or standard. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the
Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40
CFR part 403.5, including best management practices.
Process wastewater. The water that comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, waste product, or wastewater.
Sanitary sewer. A publicly owned pipe or conduit designed to collect and transport industrial waste and
domestic sewage to the POTW.
Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which
causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can be
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
Sewage. Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other waters as
may be present.
Shall. Is mandatory.
Significant change. An increase or decrease in the volume of wastewater discharged by more than 20 percent
from the data submitted in the permit application, or the deletion or addition of any pollutant regulated by the
authority or by a categorical standard. Volumes are those measured by the water service meter, a verifiable
estimate, or a permanently installed effluent flow meter approved by the authority.
Significant industrial user.
(1) Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this definition, significant industrial user
means:
(A) All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR section
403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; and
(B) Any other industrial user that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000)
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up
five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or is designated as such by the director on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.8(f)(6)).
(2) An industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards may, at the discretion of
the director, be permitted as a nonsignificant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) based on a finding
that the industrial user never discharges categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/536
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard)
and the following conditions are met:
(A) The industrial user, prior to the city's finding, has consistently complied with all
applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
(B) The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in this article
(see 40 CFR 403.12(q)), together with any additional information necessary to support the
certification statement; and
(C) The industrial user never discharges any categorical process wastewater into the sanitary
sewer.
(3) Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)(B) of this definition
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may at any time, on his own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR section
403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
Slug or slug load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards of this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including
but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit
conditions.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. The classification which best describes the activities conducted at
the facility or establishment. SIC codes are 4-digit numbers used by the Bureau of Census as part of a system to
categorize and track the types of business activities conducted in the United States. The first two digits of the
code represent the major industry group and the second two digits represent the specific subset of that group.
Standard Methods. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, a publication prepared and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Waterworks Association and the Water
Environment Federation, as it may be amended from time to time.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation, including snowmelt.
Total suspended solids (TSS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or
other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
Total toxic organics (TTO). The sum of masses or concentration of the toxic organic compounds listed in 40
CFR 122 appendix D, table II, excluding pesticides, found in industrial users' discharges at a concentration
greater than 0.01 mg/l. Only those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the city, if
any, shall be analyzed for with noncategorical industries. With categorical industries, the list of TTOs is specific
for every applicable federal category. TTOs will be sampled for as stipulated in the particular category or those
parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the city, where not stipulated.
TPDES. Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
Unpolluted water or waste. Any water or liquid waste containing none of the following: phenols or other
substances to an extent imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in
suspension, colloidal state or solution; noxious or odorous gases; not more than ten thousand (10,000) parts per
million, by weight, of dissolved solids, of which not more than twenty-five hundred (2500) parts per million are
chloride; not more than ten (10) parts per million each of TSS and BOD; color not exceeding fifty (50) color
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/536
units; nor pH value of less than 5.0 nor higher than 12.0; and any water or waste approved for discharge into a
stream or waterway by the appropriate state authority.
Upset. An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of
noncompliance with the standards established in this article due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the
discharger and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation thereof. Any affirmative defenses to upset only apply to federal court actions as per section
13.06.129(b) of this article.
User. A person who is a source of an indirect discharge.
Wastewater. Industrial waste, sewage or any other waste that has been used by and discharged to the POTW
from an industry, commercial enterprise, household or other water consumer, including that which may be
combined with water [sic] any groundwater, surface water or stormwater.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 1, adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.002 Purpose and policy
(a) This article provides for prohibitions on discharges of certain substances into the public sewer system of
the city from all sources, domestic, commercial, or industrial. A further purpose of this article is to set forth
uniform requirements for industrial dischargers into the POTW authority wastewater collection and treatment
systems, and to enable the authority to protect the health and safety of both POTW personnel and the general
public in conformance with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251
et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403).
(b) All categorical pretreatment standards, lists of toxic pollutants, industrial categories, recordkeeping
requirements and other standards and categories which have been or which will be promulgated by the EPA shall
be incorporated as a part of this article, as will EPA regulations regarding sewage pretreatment established
pursuant to the Act, and amendment of this article to incorporate such changes shall not be necessary. The
authority shall maintain current standards and regulations which shall be available for inspection and copying.
(c) The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the authority wastewater system which will
interfere with the normal operation of the system, including interference with the use or disposal of
sludge, or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the authority wastewater system which do not
receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving
waters or the atmosphere or which are otherwise incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim municipal and industrial wastewaters and
sludges; and
(4) To enable the authority to comply with the control authority's TPDES permit conditions, sludge
and disposal requirements, and any other federal and state laws to which the POTW is subject.
(d) The regulation of discharges into the authority wastewater system under this article shall be accomplished
through the issuance of permits, as specified in division 4 of this article, and by monitoring and inspection of
facilities, according to this article.
(e) The director shall have the authority to promulgate such administrative regulations as are from time to
time necessary for the enforcement of this article. For the purpose of promoting consistency of enforcement
throughout the city's jurisdiction and service area, the director shall promulgate an enforcement response plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/536
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 2, adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.003 Penalty
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with, or who resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation, including, but not limited to, seeking injunctions and civil penalties.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 11, adopted 1/19/12)
Secs. 13.06.004–13.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Discharge Prohibitions and Limitations
Sec. 13.06.031 Discharges to storm drains and watercourses
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater into any storm drain or
watercourse within the city, except for those persons with approved permits for such discharges. (Ordinance
450-12, sec. 3(A), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.032 Discharge of unpolluted water into sanitary sewer
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or drainage from downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds, or lawn sprays into any sanitary
sewer. Water from swimming pools, unpolluted industrial water, or cooling water from various equipment shall
not be discharged into sanitary sewers if an alternate acceptable means of disposal is available. If an alternate
acceptable means of disposal is not available, such water may be discharged into the sanitary sewer provided the
water meets the discharge prohibitions and limitations of this article. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 3(B), adopted
1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.033 Approval of discharge required
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge into the sanitary sewer any wastewater or solid,
including trucked or hauled wastes, unless such deposit or discharge, at a designated discharge point, has been
approved by the authority. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 3(C), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.034 Specific prohibited wastewater constituents
No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly, into any public sanitary sewer, any of
the following described substances, materials, water or waste:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade).
(2) Any water or waste which contains wax, grease, oil, plastic or other substance that will solidify
or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees to one hundred fifty
(150) degrees Fahrenheit, thereby contributing to clogging, plugging or otherwise restricting the flow
of wastewater through the collection system.
(3) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer system or POTW, including but
not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/536
degrees centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR part 261.21. This includes flammable
or explosive liquids, solids or gases such as gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, etc., which by
reason of their chemical properties or quantity may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to
cause fire or explosion.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction in the flow in sewers or
other interference with proper operation of the POTW, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint
residues, or bulk solids.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with
no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substances which can form a gas which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is capable of causing objectionable odors or hazards to life or forms
solids in concentrations exceeding limits established in this article, or creates any other condition
deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or requires unusual provisions, attention or expense
to handle such material.
(7) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction are
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or which may prevent entry into the sewers for
their maintenance and repair.
(8) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or scums
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process as determined
pursuant to criteria in this article. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the
POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use
or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state standards applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
(9) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its TPDES or other disposal system
permits, or the receiving stream water quality standards.
(10) Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(11) Any slugload. Also, oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW.
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
(13) Any dump or slugload of waste containing concentrated organic solvents or mixtures of
solvents which are defined as hazardous by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
(14) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause obstruction of flow in the sewer line, or interference or pass-through.
(15) Deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of
pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/536
pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to
violate its TPDES permit.
(16) Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess of 10 parts per million.
(17) Radioactive wastes or isotopes with a half-life or concentration exceeding limits established
by the authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(18) Toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
or pass through the treatment plant and impair aquatic life in receiving water, as expressed by the
results of acute or chronic toxicity tests of the POTW effluent.
(19) A temperature which inhibits or interferes with biological activity in the POTW treatment
plant. In no case shall wastewater be introduced which would have a temperature exceeding 40°C
(104°F) upon entering the POTW treatment plant.
(20) Pollutants in excess of the limitations established in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard set forth in title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(21) Wastewaters which emanate vapors causing the atmosphere in the sewer system to exceed
20% of the lower explosive limit in the immediate area of the discharge.
(22) BTEX concentration greater than 1.0 mg/l.
(23) Oil and grease.
(A) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or non-polar products of mineral oil origin
in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l.
(B) Visible free floatable polar oils, fats, or grease or a concentration greater than 250 mg/l in
wastewater discharged from industrial or commercial facilities into the POTW.
(C) In no case shall discharges in amounts that cause interference or operational problems
with the POTW be allowed.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 3(D), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.035 Wastewater limitations
No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into any sanitary sewer any
wastewaters containing or having:
(1) Acids or alkalis capable of causing damage to sewage disposal structures or personnel or
having a pH value lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0.
(2) Metals in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding the
following:
Pollutant
Maximum Allowable
Discharge Limit (mg/l)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/536
Arsenic 0.25
Cadmium 0.15
Chromium 5.0
Copper 4.0
Lead 2.9
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 2.0
Silver 1.0
Zinc 5.0
(3) Cyanide or cyanogen compounds (expressed as total CN) in excess of 1.0 mg/l.
(4) The director may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, to help implement local limits and other pretreatment standards and
the requirements of this article.
(5) A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the person processes or stores
pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this article in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 3(E), adopted 1/19/12)
Secs. 13.06.036–13.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Special Rules Relating to Industrial Dischargers
Sec. 13.06.061 Compliance with standards
(a) State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are
subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations or those in this article or any other applicable ordinance.
(b) No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way for the purpose of diluting a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set
forth in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/536
(c) Where deemed appropriate, the authority may apply mass limitations expressed in pounds per day of
pollutant discharged.
(d) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by
the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 4(A), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.062 Accidental discharges
(a) Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or
substances established by this article. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense. When applicable, detailed plans
showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the authority for
review, and shall be approved by the authority before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures by the authority shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify
its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
(b) Dischargers shall notify the authority and the control authority immediately upon the occurrence of a
“slug” or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this article. The notification shall include the location
of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken, and
be signed by the discharger's authorized representative. Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user
shall, unless waived by the director, submit to the director a detailed written report which specifies: a description
and cause of the discharge, including location of the discharge, type, concentration, and volume of water;
duration of noncompliance including exact dates and times of noncompliance and, if the noncompliance is
continuing, an immediate response to cause the noncompliant discharge to cease; and all steps taken or to be
taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent continuation or recurrence of such an upset, slug load, or accidental
discharge, spill, or other conditions of noncompliance. Any discharger discharging slugs of prohibited materials
shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on
the authority under state or federal law.
(c) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in this article. Each employer shall instruct all
applicable employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to the emergency notification
procedure, including the proper telephone number of the authority to be notified.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 4(B), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.063 Wastewater discharges into private sewer systems
All dischargers who discharge wastewater into a private sewer system shall comply with this article, including
section 13.06.091(g); provided, however, that flow measurement may be based on metered water consumption.
Each discharger shall provide an agreement, signed by the owner of the sewer system, which authorizes the
authority's personnel to enter onto the owner's property for purposes of inspection and monitoring of the
discharger's premises, and for enforcement pursuant to the terms of this article. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 4(C),
adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.064 Prohibition of bypass
(a) Bypass of a discharger's treatment equipment or treatment facility is prohibited and the authority may take
enforcement action against the discharger unless:
(1) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/536
(2) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as use of auxiliary treatment facilities,
retention of untreated wastewater, or maintenance during normal periods of downtime. This condition
is not satisfied if, in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment, adequate backup equipment
should have been installed to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or maintenance; and
(3) The discharger submitted advance written notice of the need for a bypass.
(b) The discharger shall submit oral notice to the authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds categorical
standards or other discharge limits within 24 hours of the time the discharger becomes aware of the bypass.
Written notice shall be provided within 5 days of the time the discharger becomes aware of the bypass. The
written notice shall include a description of the bypass and its causes, duration of the bypass, and steps taken to
prevent the reoccurrence of the bypass, and must be signed by the authorized representative of the discharger.
(c) The authority may approve an anticipated bypass after considering its adverse effects, if it determines that
the bypass will meet all of the conditions of subsection (a) above.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 4(D), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.065 Notification of hazardous waste discharges
(a) Pursuant to 40 CFR section 403.12(p), any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the director, the EPA Region VI Waste Management Division Director, and the TCEQ, in writing, of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR part 261.
(1) Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261,
the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
(2) If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month
to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste
stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
(3) All notifications shall take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous
waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions shall be submitted as per this article.
The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of this article.
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) during a calendar month in which they
discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(c) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user shall notify the director, the
EPA Region VI Waste Management Division Director, and the TCEQ, of the discharge of such substance within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/536
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place
to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
(e) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged
by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 4(E), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.066 Accidental discharge/slug control plans
The director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan or other action to control slug discharges at the time of SIU determination, or at least by the first year. All
the activities associated with slug control evaluation and results are to be kept in the industrial user file. The
director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other
action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for
any user. An accidental discharge/slug plan shall address, at the minimum the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as
required by this article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 4(F), adopted 1/19/12)
Secs. 13.06.067–13.06.090 Reserved
Division 4. Permits
Sec. 13.06.091 Classification of dischargers and permits
(a) All nondomestic users which discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the authority shall be grouped
according to the following definitions:
(1) Group I - Significant industrial users.
(2) Group II - Commercial facilities and nonsignificant industrial users (NSIU). Those commercial
facilities and industrial users which are not included in Group I and which do not discharge a
significant amount of regulated pollutants on a regular basis. Examples include automotive service
shops, small food processors and photographic developing shops.
(3) Group III - Classed high strength users. Restaurants, carwashes or other businesses which can
be classed according to an average strength or abnormal strength of their wastewater.
(4) Group IV - Wastewater haulers. Transporters of wastewater desiring to discharge into the
authority's sanitary sewage system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/536
(5) Group V- Groundwater remediation dischargers. Dischargers who are retrieving contaminated
underground water, pretreating such water, and then discharging into the POTW.
(6) Group VI - Nonsignificant categorical industrial user industrial users (NSCIU). Facilities that
never discharge categorical wastewater even though categorical process(es) are located on-site.
(b) When requested by the director, a user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within the time specified within the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
(c) No new Group I, Group IV or Group V or Group VI user shall be allowed to discharge until issued a valid
permit.
(d) The director may require any Group II or Group III user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Within
thirty (30) days after being notified by the director that a wastewater discharge permit is required, the user shall
submit a completed application in compliance with this article. After sixty (60) days from the date a Group II or
Group III user is notified by the director that a permit is required, the user shall cease discharge to the POTW
without a wastewater discharge permit.
(e) The authority will evaluate the completed applications and data furnished by the discharger and may
require additional information. If, after evaluation, the application is deemed satisfactory, then a wastewater
discharge permit shall be issued within 60 days after the evaluation is complete. The wastewater discharge
permit shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified herein and to the regulations of the authority.
(f) If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing within 30 days of the reasons for such
denial. If denial is based on the authority's determination that the applicant cannot meet the wastewater discharge
limitations of this article, the authority may specify that the applicant be required to provide pretreatment of the
waste before it is deemed acceptable for sewer discharge.
(g) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with
this article, pursuant to subsection (f) above, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule
by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implement added operational and
maintenance activities.
(1) The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger
to comply with the requirements of this article, including but not limited to dates relating to hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract(s) for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to
achieve compliance with this article.
(2) The time increments between milestone dates established shall be the shortest practicable for
the completion of the required work. Under no circumstances shall the authority permit a time
increment for a single step in the compliance schedule to exceed nine (9) months. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the completion date established for applicable categorical
pretreatment standards.
(h) Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the
discharger shall submit a progress report to the authority, including a statement as to whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to
return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than 9 months elapse between such
progress reports to the authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/536
(i) Prior to the approval of a permit, unless exempted by the authority, all dischargers shall provide monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement of wastewaters before entering the sanitary
sewer of the authority. Each monitoring facility shall be located on the discharger's premises; provided, however,
where such location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the discharger, the authority may approve
the placement of monitoring facilities in the public street or sidewalk area. All monitoring equipment and
facilities shall be maintained in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger. Failure to
provide proper monitoring facilities shall be grounds for denial of a permit.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(A), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.092 Permit application process
(a) Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, who proposes to begin or recommence
discharging into the POTW, shall obtain such permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. For
significant industrial users, an application shall be filed with the director at least ninety (90) days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. Nonsignificant categorical industrial users (NSCIU)
and nonsignificant industrial users (NSIU) shall be required to submit applications at dates specified by the
director. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
(b) The director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by section 13.06.094 of this article;
(2) Description of activities, structures, equipment and plant processes on the premises, including a
list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor
drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(B), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.093 Permit conditions
Permits are issued to a specific discharger for a specific operation and are not assignable to another discharger or
transferable to any other location without the prior written approval of the authority. Permits shall include, but
are not limited to, the following information:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum amount of certain wastewater constituents to be
discharged; SRI permits must contain effluent limits and best management practices based on
applicable general pretreatment standards in part 40 CFR section 403, categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and state and local law.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits shall also contain the following conditions:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/536
(A) If needed, limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge,
and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(B) If needed, requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control,
or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent
the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(C) If needed, requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or
other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges.
(3) If needed, requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.
(4) Location of approved discharge point(s).
(5) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the city to be necessary.
(6) Compliance schedules (if needed).
(7) Requirements for submission of special technical reports, discharge reports, notifications, and
other documents as required.
(8) Duration of permit. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may
be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the director.
(9) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(10) Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee give advance notice to the director and the director approves the permit transfer. Failure to
provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of
facility transfer. The notice shall include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(A) States that the new owner and/or operator has not immediate intent to change the
facility's operations and processes;
(B) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(C) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge
permit.
(11) Self-monitoring, sampling, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including an
identification of the pollutants to be monitored, and the sampling frequency, and sample type based
on applicable pretreatment standards.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(C), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.094 Reporting requirements for dischargers
(a) Baseline report.
(1) Deadlines for submission of reports.
(A) Existing categorical users. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/536
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report
which contains the information listed in subsection (2) below.
(B) New sources and new categorical users. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement
of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which
contains the information listed in subsection (2). A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall
give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(2) Required information. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(A) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(B) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
(C) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production,
and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes.
(D) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(E) Measurement of pollutants.
(i) The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process.
(ii) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration,
and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set
out in this article. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best
management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to determine compliance
with the standard.
(iii) Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out by this article.
(iv) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data
necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection. However, the city may
allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures. Historical data than can represent the current discharge only can be accepted as
a baseline report [sic].
(v) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods
of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal
work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/536
(F) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(G) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment, best management practice and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section shall meet the
requirements set out in this article.
(H) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports shall be signed and certified
in accordance with this article.
(b) 90-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by the discharger with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or 90 days following the commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
shall submit to the authority a report (in a form provided by the authority and meeting the requirements of 40
CFR part 403.12(b)), indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained
in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
O&M or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. This report shall be signed by an authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional as stated in 40 CFR part 403.12(b)(6).
(c) Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case
less than twice per year (once in January covering the six-month period June 1 through November 30
and once in July covering the six-month period December 1 through May 31), submit a report
containing at a minimum:
(A) The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
pretreatment standards;
(B) The measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period;
(C) In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management
practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the user, and contributing information as is determined necessary to account for water usage,
materials recovery, or disposal practices; and
(D) Contributing information as is determined necessary to account for water usage,
materials recovery, or disposal practices.
(2) All nonsignificant categorical industrial users (NSCIU) shall submit a report annually in the
month specified by the director. The report shall be completed according to the city's current
reporting requirements, including the submittal of any applicable certification statements.
(3) If the director has determined that a nonsignificant industrial user (NSIU) needs a permit, then
the NSIU shall submit a report annually in the month specified by the director. The report shall be
completed according to the city's current reporting requirements, including the submittal of any
applicable certification statements and data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/536
performed during the period covered by the report which data are representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
(4) All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with this article.
(5) All wastewater samples shall be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring equipment in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(6) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in this article, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(d) Analysis and sampling procedures.
(1) All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater
discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR part 136 with
the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. If 40 CFR part 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city in
accordance with procedures approved by the EPA or TCEQ.
(2) If a user's monitoring and wastewater analysis indicates that a violation has occurred, the user
shall:
(A) Inform the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation;
(B) Within thirty (30) days submit to the director a report which addresses:
(i) The time, date, location, processes, and operations associated with the violation, and
the personnel assigned responsibility and/or present during the violation;
(ii) The cause or probable cause of the noncompliance; and
(iii) The actions taken and implemented to meet permit conditions; and
(C) Repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and submit to the director a written report of
the results of this second analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.
The user is not required to resample if the director monitors at the user's facility at least once a
month, or if the director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives
the results of this sampling.
(e) Reporting additional monitoring. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the authority, using the procedures prescribed in
subsection (d) of this section, the results of this monitoring along with chain-of-custody forms shall be included
in the report.
(f) Significant noncategorical industrial user reporting. Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit
to the authority at least once every six months (on dates as specified by the authority) a description of the nature,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/536
concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the authority. These reports shall be based on
sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in subsection (d) of this section. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the
authority in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user.
(g) Notification of changed discharge. Dischargers shall give prior written notification to the authority of any
potential and actual significant change in the volume or character of pollutants in the discharge. Significant
industrial users shall notify the authority and the control authority of changes at its facility that affect the
potential for a slug discharge.
(h) Authority monitoring. Sampling and analysis for the reports required by subsections (a), (b), (c) and (f)
above may be performed by the authority in lieu of the discharger. If all information required for the report,
including flow data, is collected by the authority, the discharger will not be required to submit the report or
certifications.
(i) Signatory requirements; annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users.
(1) Signatory requirements. All applications and compliance reports submitted to the authority
must contain the following certification statement and be signed by the authorized representative:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under
my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of
the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations.
(2) Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A facility determined to be
a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by the director pursuant to section 13.06.001 and this
section must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the
signatory requirements in 40 CFR 403.120(l). This certification must accompany an alternative report
required by the director:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ______, I certify
that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from ____________,
____ to ____________, ____ (month, days, year):
(a) The facility described as ____________ (facility name) met the definition of a
nonsignificant categorical industrial user as described in sections 13.06.001 and 13.06.094;
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during
this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged categorical process wastewater on any given day during this
reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(D), adopted 1/19/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/536
Sec. 13.06.095 Sample collection
(a) Except as indicated in subsections (b) and (c), the user shall collect wastewater samples using 24-hour
flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the
director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the
user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. Using protocols
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab
samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total
phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and
oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters
unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by
the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.
(b) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds
shall be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(c) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports, a minimum of
four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data does not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the city superintendent may authorize a lower minimum.
(d) For the reports required by section 13.06.094(c) (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(E), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.096 Inspection and flow measurement
(a) Inspections and control authority sampling.
(1) At least once a year, the director shall inspect and sample each significant industrial user (SIU),
NSCIU and NSIU. However, the director may inspect and sample each SIU as frequently as needed
during the pretreatment year. At the time of permit application, or at least by the first year, the
director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs a plan to control slug discharges.
(2) The authority shall inspect the facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the
requirements of this article. The discharger shall allow the authority or its representatives to enter
upon the premises of the discharger at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
or examination of records. All reports and records related to the provisions of this article shall be
made available for copying and inspection by the authority. The authority shall have the right to set
upon the discharger's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and metering or measuring operations. The user shall provide ample room in
or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples and analysis
and, whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities should be provided
in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications, and such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such manner so as to enable
the city to perform independent monitoring activities.
(3) The inspectors, agents or representatives of the authority charged with the enforcement of this
section shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit and health and
welfare of the general public, and neither the authority nor any individual inspector, agent or
representative shall be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged
to have been caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function. The failure or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/536
refusal of such owner or discharger to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the
disconnection of water or sewer service to the facility. If entry is denied or a person in control cannot
be located, the director shall have every recourse provided by law to secure entry. Such recourse shall
include the right to obtain a search warrant under the guidelines of the Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure, and, for the purposes of same, any person with enforcement authority under this article is
hereby declared to be a “health officer.”
(4) The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the sanitary sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the authority. Samples
shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the character and concentration of the
waste under operational conditions. The laboratory methods used in the examination of said waste
shall be those set forth in 40 CFR part 136. The determination of the character and concentration of
industrial waste shall be made at such times and on such schedules as may be established by the
authority. Should a discharger desire a determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made
at some time other than that scheduled by the authority, such special determination may be made by
the authority at the expense of the owner or discharger.
(b) Measurement of flow.
(1) The volume of flow used in computing sewage charges shall be based upon metered water
consumption or discharge as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the city water
department.
(2) Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director that a substantial portion of the
metered water does not enter the sanitary sewer, the director may require or permit the installation of
additional approved meters at the owner's expense, to measure the quantity of water actually entering
the sewer system. If approved by the director, the measured quantity of water actually entering the
sewer system will be used to determine the sewer service charge.
(3) Any discharger who procures all or part of its water supply from sources other than the city
water department, all or part of which is subsequently discharged into the sanitary sewer, shall install
and maintain at its expense an effluent meter or flow-measuring device approved by the director for
the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges.
Such meters or measuring devices shall be read monthly.
(4) If the director determines that it is not practicable to measure the quantity or quality of waste
by the aforesaid meters or monitoring devices, the quantity or quality of the waste shall be
determined in any manner or method the director may find practicable in order to arrive at the
percentage of water entering the sanitary sewage system of the authority and/or the quality of the
sewage to be used to determine the sewer service charge.
(c) Right of access. The city and/or the CA shall inspect and sample each SIU at least once a year. The
authority also adopts by reference the minimum required inspection and sampling frequencies of 40 CFR section
8(t)(2)(v) or its successor legislation. Additionally, SIUs may be inspected and sampled as frequently as needed
during the pretreatment year. Furthermore, any right of access to the authority or its inspector shall also apply
towards any federal (EPA) or state (TCEQ) authorities.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(F), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.097 Permit modifications
(a) The authority reserves the right to amend any permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the
authority with applicable laws and regulations. The authority may amend any permit for good cause, including,
but not limited to the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/536
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements;
(2) Material or substantial alterations to [or] additions to the discharger's operation processes, or
discharge volume or character, which were not considered in drafting the effective permit;
(3) A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the authority's collection
and treatment systems, POTW personnel or the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;
(6) Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in
any required reporting;
(7) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
(8) To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator;
(9) Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any
applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations;
(10) To incorporate, revise, or revoke new or existing best management practices.
(b) All categorical pretreatment standards promulgated and adopted by the EPA after the effective date of this
article shall automatically become a part of this article. Where a discharger, subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard, has not previously submitted an application for a permit as required by section 13.06.091(b), the
discharger shall apply for a permit from the authority within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable
categorical pretreatment standard by the EPA. In addition, the discharger with an existing permit shall submit to
the authority, within 180 days after promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, the
information required by section 13.06.093(1). The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in its
permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(G), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.098 Permit reissuance
(a) A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with this article, a minimum of ninety
(90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
(b) If the user submits an application in compliance with subsection (a), and the failure of the director to
reissue a permit prior to the expiration of the previous permit is not due to any act or omission of the user, the
expired permit shall continue to be effective and enforceable until reissued.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(H), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.099 Confidential information
(a) Generally. All information and data submitted by a discharger to the POTW may be submitted to any state
or federal agency governing the POTW. Such information shall be considered subject to public disclosure;
provided, however, that the discharger may request that information not be subject to public disclosure, in
accordance with 40 CFR part 2 as follows: A discharger may assert a business confidentiality claim covering
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/536
part or all of the information in a manner described below, and that information covered by such a claim will be
disclosed only by means of the procedures set forth below. If no claim of business confidentiality is asserted, all
information will be subject to public disclosure without further notice to the discharger.
(b) Method and time of asserting business confidentiality claim. A discharger which is submitting information
to the authority may assert a business confidentiality claim covering the information by placing on or attaching
to the information, at the time it is submitted to the authority, a cover sheet, stamped or typed legend, or other
suitable form of notice employing language such as “trade secret,” “proprietary” or “company confidential.”
Allegedly confidential portions of otherwise nonconfidential documents should be clearly identified by the
discharger, and may be submitted separately to facilitate identification and handling by the authority. If the
discharger desires confidential treatment only until a certain date or until the occurrence of a certain event, the
notice should so state.
(c) State public disclosure requirements. The provisions of this section shall be subject to any public
disclosure requirements which may exist under V.T.C.A., Government Code, chapter 552.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 5(I), adopted 1/19/12)
Secs. 13.06.100–13.06.120 Reserved
Division 5. Enforcement
Sec. 13.06.121 Notice of violation
(a) When a director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, this article or any permit or
order issued hereunder, the director may issue to such person a written notice of violation.
(b) No later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice, the violator shall submit to the issuing director an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of a reoccurrence of the
violation. Such plan shall include specific actions to be taken by the violator.
(c) If the violator denies that any violation occurred, or contends that no corrective action is necessary, he
shall submit to the director, no later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice, a written explanation of the
basis of any such denial or contention.
(d) Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves a violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(e) Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a violator.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(A), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.122 Non-emergency termination of water supply or discharge
(a) A user who violates the following conditions is subject to the termination of its city-provided water supply
and/or its discharge for failure to:
(1) Comply with wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents or characteristics
prior to discharge;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/536
(4) Allow reasonable access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the authority for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(5) Pay sewer charges;
(6) Meet compliance schedules;
(7) Fulfill the conditions of its permit, or this article, or to obey any final judicial order with
respect thereto;
(8) Meet effluent limitations, including best management practices, based on applicable
pretreatment standards;
(9) A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant
to this article or an individual wastewater discharge permit; or
(10) Violation of the pretreatment standards of this article.
(b) (1) Whenever the authority finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct which justifies
revocation of a permit, pursuant to subsection (a) above, the authority shall serve or cause to be
served upon such discharger a written notice, either by personal delivery or by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation.
(2) Within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond in person or in
writing to the authority, advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties
shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and, where necessary, establish a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof.
(c) The user shall not recommence its discharge until the director so authorizes and:
(1) The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the noncomplying discharge has ceased;
(2) The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the conditions creating the threat of
imminent and substantial danger have been eliminated;
(3) The user pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating services.
(d) Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(B), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.123 Administrative orders
(a) Enforcement documents which direct industrial users to undertake or to cease specified activities. Terms
may or may not be negotiated with industrial users. Generally used as a first formal response to significant
noncompliance (unless more severe action is justified) and may incorporate compliance schedules,
administrative penalties, and termination of service.
(b) The authority will utilize the following types of administrative orders:
(1) Consent order. An agreement between the city and the industrial user normally containing three
elements:
(A) Compliance schedules;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/536
(B) Stipulated fines or remedial action; and
(C) Signatures of authority and industry representatives.
(2) Show cause order. An order which directs the user to appear before the authority to explain its
noncompliance, and show cause why more severe enforcement actions against the user should not be
levied. Typically used after informal contacts or NOVs have failed to resolve noncompliance;
however, it can be used at any time.
(3) Compliance order. An order which directs the industrial user to achieve or restore compliance
by a date specified in the order. Terms need not be discussed with the industry in advance. Typically
used when noncompliance cannot be resolved without construction, repair, or process changes, or to
require development of management practices, spill prevention programs, and other pretreatment
program requirements.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(C), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.124 Notice of violation; administrative adjustment
Whenever the authority finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct which justifies revocation of a permit,
pursuant to section 13.06.121 hereof, the authority shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger a
written notice, either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the
nature of the alleged violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall
respond in person or in writing to the authority, advising of its position with respect to the allegations.
Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and, where necessary, establish a
plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(D), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.125 Show cause hearing
Where the violation of section 13.06.121 hereof is not corrected by means of administrative adjustment, the
authority may order any violating discharger to show cause, before the authority or its duly authorized
representative, why the proposed permit revocation action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served
on the discharger by personal service, or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the authority or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons why
the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the discharger to show
cause before the authority or its designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the hearing shall be served no less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent,
officer, or authorized representative of the discharger. The authority shall then enter appropriate orders with
respect to the alleged improper activities if any. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(E), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.126 Right of appeal of administrative ruling
Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the
authority on any matter covered by this article and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that
such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this article or deals
with a permit issued pursuant hereto for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the
subject, receipt of a discharger's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending receipt of the aforesaid
written reply; provided, however, the authority may take any action it deems necessary to protect its wastewater
collection and treatment system or to comply with its NPDES permit or to comply with any contract the
authority has for the treatment of wastewater. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(F), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.127 Judicial proceedings; penalties
The authority, with respect to the conduct of any discharger contrary to the provisions of this article, may
authorize its attorney to commence any legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction for equitable and/or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/536
legal relief.
(1) Injunctive relief. When the authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may petition, pursuant to Local Government
Code, chapter 54, a district court or other court of proper jurisdiction of the county through its
attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or
compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this article on activities of the user. The authority may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user.
(2) Civil penalties. The authority may also seek to recover civil penalties of at least $1,000.00 per
day pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code section 54.017.
(3) Criminal proceedings. Notwithstanding any notice provisions contained in this article, any
person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this article commits an offense. The person shall be fined at
least $1,000.00 for each offense.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(G), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.128 Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits
(a) The authority may, for good cause shown, suspend water or wastewater service to the discharger's facility,
when it appears to the authority that an actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or
substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or substantial danger to the environment, interfere with the
operation of a POTW, or violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this article or any permit issued pursuant to
this article. Any discharger notified of the suspension of the authority's water or wastewater service and/or the
discharger's permit shall, within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the authority, cease all discharges.
In the event of the failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified
time, the authority may commence judicial proceedings to compel the discharger's compliance with such order
or may immediately disconnect such discharger's service line from the city water and sanitary sewer system. In
the case of emergency disconnection of service, the director shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner
or discharger before disconnecting the service line. The party whose service has been disconnected shall have an
opportunity for a hearing on the issue of the illegal discharge and the disconnection as soon as possible after
such disconnection has taken place.
(b) The authority may reinstate the permit and/or the wastewater or water service upon proof by the discharger
of the cessation of the noncomplying discharge or elimination of conditions creating the threat of imminent or
substantial danger as set forth above. The city water and/or wastewater service shall be reconnected at the
discharger's expense.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(H), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.129 Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
(a) Affirmative defenses to discharge violations for action in municipal or state court.
(1) Act of God. In an action brought in municipal or state court, if a person can establish that an
event that would otherwise be a violation of this article or a permit issued under this article was
caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of
this article or the permit. In an enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence
of an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof. In the event that
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/536
an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe has been established, the user shall control
production of all discharges to the extent possible until such time as the reduction, loss or failure of
its treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
(b) Affirmative defenses to upset.
(1) In an action brought in federal court, it is an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards that the noncompliance was
caused by upset, if the user demonstrates, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs
or other relevant evidence that:
(A) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(B) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operating and maintenance procedures; and
(C) The user has submitted the following information to the director within twenty-four (24)
hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written
submission shall be provided within five (5) days:
(i) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; the period of
noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time
the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(ii) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
(c) Affirmative defenses to specific prohibited discharge standards. It is an affirmative defense in federal court
to an enforcement action brought against a user for noncompliance with the general prohibitions of section 86-
88(a) [sic], or a specific prohibition of section 86-88(d)(1), (5), (7), (14), or (17) [sic], that the user did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass-through or interference and that either:
Editor's note–The references to section 86-88 in the subsection (c) above are as set out in Ord. 450-12. There were no provisions with
such numbering in the ordinance.
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each
limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or
(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents
from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit,
and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(I), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.130 Recovery of costs incurred by authority
Any discharger who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or
impairs the authority's wastewater system, shall be liable to the authority for any expense, loss, or damage
caused by such violation or discharge. The authority shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the
authority for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Failure to pay such
bill may result in the termination of water or wastewater service. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 6(J), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.131 Falsifying information
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/536
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or falsifies, tampers
with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $2,000.00. (Ordinance 450-12, sec.
6(K), adopted 1/19/12)
Secs. 13.06.132–13.06.150 Reserved
Division 6. Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 13.06.151 Removal credits
Where applicable, the authority may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of this article to reflect
the POTW's ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR part 403.7. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 7(A),
adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.152 Net/gross calculations
The authority may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the
discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR part 403.15. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 7(B), adopted
1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.153 Preservation of records
All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, and make available
for inspection and copying, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring activities, sampling and chemical
analyses made by or made by or on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge and required by this
article, and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the
user independent of such requirements including documentation associated with best management practices
established under section 13.06.035(4). All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of
administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the authority pursuant
hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all
periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. Records shall include the date, exact
place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 7(C), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.154 Charges for costs of administering program
The authority may make such charges, known as monitoring and pretreatment charges, as are reasonable for
services rendered in administering the programs outlined in this article. Such charges may include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Permitting industrial facilities;
(2) Inspection;
(3) Sample analysis;
(4) Monitoring; and
(5) Enforcement.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 7(D), adopted 1/19/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/536
Sec. 13.06.155 Right of revision
The authority reserves the right to amend this article to provide for more or less stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in
section 13.06.002 of this article. (Ordinance 450-12, sec. 7(E), adopted 1/19/12)
Sec. 13.06.156 Publication of list of significant violators
(a) The authority shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public
notice within the jurisdictions served by the city a list of users that have significantly violated federal
pretreatment requirements during the previous 12 months.
(b) Significant industrial users are subject to the SNC criteria listed in subsections (c)(1) through (8) below.
Group II nonsignificant industrial users that have been issued a permit shall be subject to SNC criteria listed in
subsections (c)(3) through (8) below. Group VI nonsignificant categorical industrial users shall be subject to
SNC criteria listed in subsections (c)(3) through (8) below. All other industrial users are subject to the SNC
criteria listed in subsections (c)(3), (4) and (8) of this section.
(c) Significant noncompliance shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66)
percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a sixmonth
period exceed a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits
for the same pollutant parameter, by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33)
percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR
403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limits, or a narrative standard) that the
director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic reports (such as self-monitoring reports), and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of best management practices, which the
director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ordinance 450-12, sec. 7(F), adopted 1/19/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/536
ARTICLE 13.07 LAWN AND LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION*
Sec. 13.07.001 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 413-06, sec. 6, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 13.07.002 Irrigation restrictions
(a) Except for hand watering and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that person irrigates,
waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises owned,
leased, or managed by that person between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during the period from June 1
through September 30 of any year.
(b) A person commits an offense if he knowingly or recklessly irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the
irrigation or watering of a lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased or managed by the person in a
manner that causes:
(1) A substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas instead of a lawn or landscape,
such that a constant stream of water overflows from the lawn or landscape onto a street or other
drainage area; or
(2) An irrigation system or other lawn or landscape watering device to operate during any form of
precipitation.
(c) A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, he operates a lawn
or landscape irrigation system or device that:
(1) Has any broken or missing sprinkler head; or
(2) Has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the waste of water.
(Ordinance 413-06, sec. 1, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 13.07.003 Rain sensing devices and freeze gauges; backflow prevention
(a) Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system installed within the city on or after June 1,
2006 must be equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
(b) Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system installed before June 1, 2006 may not be
operated after June 1, 2007 without being equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
(c) The potable water supply to a lawn irrigation system shall be protected against backflow in accordance
with the city's backflow and cross-connection control program, article 3.08 of the city code. All rain and freeze
sensors for commercial customer class lawn irrigation systems shall undergo annual inspection and testing
concurrent with schedules associated with article 3.08.
(d) Any residential customer class irrigation installed within the city on or after June 1, 2007 must be
equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly install, operate, or cause or permit the
installation of or the operation of an irrigation system in violation of [subsections (a) through (d)] on premises
owned, leased, or managed by that person.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/536
(Ordinance 413-06, sec. 2, adopted 7/27/06)
Sec. 13.07.004 Variances
(a) The director may grant variances from the provisions of this article to persons demonstrating extreme
hardship and need as determined by the director and only under the following conditions:
(1) The applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by the director, agreeing to
irrigate or water a lawn or landscape only in the amount and manner permitted by the variance.
(2) Granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water
supply.
(3) The extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to the health, safety, or welfare
of the person requesting it.
(4) The health, safety or welfare of other persons must not be adversely affected by granting the
variance.
(b) The director may revoke a variance granted when the director determines that:
(1) The conditions of [subsection (a)] are not being met or are no longer applicable;
(2) The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
(3) The health, safety or welfare of other persons requires revocation.
(Ordinance 413-06, sec. 3, adopted 7/27/06)
ARTICLE 13.08 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.08.001 Penalty
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than one dollar
($1.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each and every violation of the various
provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each day that violation continues. (Ordinance
370, sec. IV, adopted 2/15/01)
Secs. 13.08.002–13.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Drought Contingency Plan
Sec. 13.08.031 Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent
(a) In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with
particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public
health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply
emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and
consumption of water.
(b) Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the “plan”) are considered to be
non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/536
condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in
section 13.08.039 of this plan.
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. I, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.032 Public education
(a) The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about
the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the measures to be
implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by the water department office through ongoing
programs designed to reach a wide variety of customers. These ongoing programs include public outreach to
schools, civic groups, and other adult and child groups. The water department office will distribute conservation
and drought response brochures, and provide them to the general public at the water department and at public
libraries. The water department will also use the city website when available to educate the public on
conservation and drought response, as well as other topics affecting water use practices.
(b) At any time this plan is initiated or terminated, the water department director or his/her designee shall
notify the public by means of publication in a newspaper of general circulation, publication on the city's website,
signs posted in public places, and take-home fliers at schools. Additionally, the water department director or
his/her designee shall directly notify the mayor and members of the city council, the fire chief, the police chief,
major water users, and any critical water users (i.e., hospitals).
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. II, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.033 Coordination with regional water planning groups
The service area of the city is located within the Region C water planning group. A copy of the plan has been
submitted to the Region C Group. Because the water supply is provided by Tarrant Regional Water District
(TRWD), a copy of the plan has been provided to them as well. (Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. III, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.034 Authorization to implement plan
The city administrator or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable
provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety,
and welfare. The mayor or his/her designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other
water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. (Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. IV, adopted
2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.035 Applicability
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided retail by
the city. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, and all other legal entities. (Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. V, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.036 Definitions
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and
water gardens.
City administrator. The city administrator of the City of Sansom Park or his/her duly authorized designee.
Commercial and institutional water use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and
nonprofit establishments and governmental entities, such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants,
and office buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/536
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the
loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so
that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city.
Director. The water department director or his/her duly authorized designee responsible for the city's water.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, or sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
Drought. Is generally a lack of adequate water to supply needs or replenish supplies used.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly
or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way
and medians.
Mayor. The mayor of the City of Sansom Park or his/her duly authorized designee.
Nonessential water use. Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public health, safety,
and welfare, including:
(1) Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except as
otherwise provided by this plan;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced areas;
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type
pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to
support aquatic life;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice
directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(9) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than
firefighting.
Person. Any person, entity, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Rationing. Limits the amount of water that can be used.
Restrictions. Limit how and when water may be used.
Water. Water taken from any city public water supply or distribution system, potable or nonpotable, and means
either raw or potable water delivered to all water connections served by the city whether in the city limits or
outside the city limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/536
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. VI, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.037 Initiation and termination of drought response stages
(a) Monitoring. All relevant components of the city water system will be monitored to ensure timely response
to water situations. The TRWD will monitor water supply and raw water delivery trends and potential system
constraints. The director of the city water department will monitor supply, treatment and distribution system
trends and potential complaints [constraints]. Should trends show that any system is approaching trigger levels,
more detailed monitoring will be implemented. At a minimum, during noncritical water supply periods, the
monitoring and trending will take place monthly. During critical water supply periods, the monitoring and
trending will take place at least weekly, and may be monitored even more frequently.
(b) Initiation of drought response. When emergency or trigger conditions occur, the director of the water
department or his/her designee shall make recommendations to the mayor of the appropriate stage of the plan to
order. The mayor shall have the authority to initiate or terminate the appropriate drought response stage.
Notification of the public will occur as set forth in section 13.08.032(b) above.
(c) Factors in decision. Meeting or exceeding one or more trigger conditions will be sufficient cause to initiate
a corresponding plan stage. The director of the water department or his designee may recommend that a stage
not be initiated under these circumstances. Factors which may influence the recommendation and the mayor's
decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, anticipation of replenished
water supplies, or anticipation that facilities will be placed on-line to serve demand.
(d) Notification of TCEQ. The city will notify the executive director of the state commission on
environmental quality (TCEQ) within 5 business days of the implementation of any mandatory provisions of the
emergency water management plan.
(e) Termination of drought response. Termination of the drought measure will be announced and the public
notified as set forth in section 13.08.032(b) above when the trigger conditions that initiated the drought measures
have subsided, and an emergency situation no longer exists.
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. VII, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.038 Water management stages
(a) Stage 1: Water awareness.
(1) Triggering criteria.
(A) Water storage in TRWD West Fork reservoirs is projected to decline to less than 295,670
acre-feet (50% of capacity) within 2 weeks, based upon projected water demands and inflows;
(B) Water storage in the TRWD reservoirs has declined to 1,426,752 acre-feet (60% of
capacity);
(C) Demand for Sansom Park or TRWD exceeds 90% of deliverable capacity for 3
consecutive days; or
(D) Water demand approaches a reduced delivery capacity for all or part of the system due to
supply or production capacity limitations, including contamination of the system.
(2) Actions available. (Applied locally or to all customers, as necessary; some or all may be
initiated.)
(A) Water customers requested to voluntarily reduce water use, to practice water
conservation and to minimize water use for non-essential purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/536
(B) Accelerate public information efforts to teach and encourage reduced water use.
(C) Staff will begin review of the problems that initiated Stage 1 actions.
(D) Notify major water users and request voluntary water use reduction.
(E) Prohibit city government use of water for street washing, vehicle washing, operation of
ornamental fountains and all other nonessential use.
(F) Request voluntary reduction in landscape watering by city government.
(G) Request voluntary limitation in landscape watering between 10 a.m. and 7 p.m.
Voluntary measures will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered Stage 1 have
been alleviated. If Stage 1 is initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions
will remain in effect through September 30 or until the mayor determines that these
measures are no longer required.
(b) Stage 2: Water watch.
(1) Triggering criteria.
(A) TRWD demands exceed East Texas delivery system capacity for a 24-hour period;
(B) Water storage in TRWD reservoirs has declined to 50% of capacity;
(C) Demand exceeds 95% of deliverable capacity for 2 consecutive days; or
(D) Water demand equals a reduced delivery capacity for all or part of the system due to
supply or production capacity limitations, including contamination of the system.
(2) Actions available. (Applied locally or to all customers, as necessary; some or all may be
initiated.)
(A) Initiate engineering studies to evaluate alternatives should conditions worsen.
(B) Continue public information efforts regarding water supply conditions and conservation
efforts.
(C) Begin mandatory water use restrictions as follows:
(i) Prohibit hosing off of sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, paved areas, or other hardsurfaced
areas;
(ii) Prohibit wash-down of buildings, windows or structures, other than for fire
protection;
(iii) Operation of ornamental fountains;
(iv) Washing or rinsing of vehicles;
(v) Flushing of gutters;
(vi) Using water in such a manner as to allow runoff or other water waste.
(D) Limit landscaping watering at each service address to once every five days based on the
last digit of the address per the schedule below:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/536
Last Digit of Address Allowed Water Dates
0 or 5 5th, 10th, 15th, 20th, 25th, 30th
1 or 6 1st, 6th, 11th, 16th, 21st, 26th
2 or 7 2nd, 7th, 12th, 22nd, 27th
3 or 8 3rd, 8th, 13th, 18th, 23rd, 28th
4 or 9 4th, 9th, 14th, 19th, 24th, 29th
(i) No watering will be allowed on the 31st.
(ii) Require the public not to water between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. for
efficient use of irrigation water.
(iii) The lowest address number will identify apartments, office building complexes or
other property containing multiple addresses. Where there are no numbers, a number will
be assigned by the water department office. These restrictions also apply to government
facilities.
(iv) Exceptions: Foundations, azaleas, and new plantings (first year) of trees and shrubs
may be watered with a hand-held or soaker hose on any day for up to two hours; nurseries
may water plant stock only without restrictions; public gardens may water without
restrictions. Hand-held watering by hose with automatic shut-off valve or by bucket may
be done on any day. Restrictions do not apply to any location using groundwater or
wastewater effluent for irrigation.
(E) Require a reduction by local governments of non-essential water use and a reduction in
landscape watering.
(F) Encourage the public to wait until the emergency water situation has passed to establish
new landscaping.
(G) Prohibit draining and refilling of existing pools and filling of new pools. Existing
commercial, public and private swimming pools that are filled may add water to replace that
lost during daily use.
All initiated measures will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered Stage 2 have
been alleviated. If Stage 2 initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions will
remain in effect through September 30 or until the mayor determines that these measures
are no longer required.
(c) Stage 3: Water warning.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/536
(1) Triggering criteria.
(A) Water storage in TRWD reservoirs has declined to 25% of capacity;
(B) Demand exceeds 95% of deliverable capacity for 5 consecutive days; or
(C) Water demand exceeds a reduced delivery capacity for all or part of the system due to
supply or production capacity limitations, including contamination of the system.
(2) Actions available. (Applied locally or to all customers, as necessary; some or all may be
initiated.)
(A) Implement recommended engineering alternatives.
(B) Continue implementation of all restrictions from previous stages.
(C) Prohibit residential or commercial landscape watering and car washing between the hours
of 10 a.m. and 7 p.m.
(D) Foundations, shrubs, and trees may be watered with a soaker or hand-held hose on the
same five-day rotational basis as landscapes (set forth in subsection (b)(2)(D) of this section)
for up to two hours.
(E) Public gardens may water, but not between the hours of 10 a.m. and 7 p.m.
(F) Nurseries may water plant stock, but not between the hours of 10 a.m. and 7 p.m.
(G) No new landscaping may be established during this period.
(H) No refilling of private pools. Commercial and public pools may refill.
All initiated actions will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered Stage 3 have
been alleviated. If Stage 3 is initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions
will remain in effect through September 30 or until the mayor determines that these
measures are no longer required.
(d) Stage 4: Water emergency.
(1) Triggering criteria.
(A) Water storage in TRWD reservoirs has declined to 20% of capacity;
(B) Demand exceeds 100% of deliverable capacity for 2 consecutive days; or
(C) Water demand seriously exceeds a reduced delivery capacity for all or part of the system
due to supply or production capacity limitations, including contamination of the system.
(2) Actions available. (Applied locally or to all customers, as necessary; some or all may be
initiated.)
(A) Continue implementation of all restrictions from previous stages.
(B) Prohibit residential and commercial landscape watering, with the following exceptions:
(i) Nurseries' plant stock may be watered, but not between the hours of 10 a.m. and 7
p.m. All watering must adhere to the 5-day landscape watering schedule of subsection (b)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/536
(2)(D) of this section.
(ii) Public gardens may water, but not between the hours of 10 a.m. and 7 p.m. All
watering must adhere to the 5-day landscape watering schedule of subsection (b)(2)(D) of
this section.
(iii) Foundations may be watered for a two-hour period, but not between the hours of
10 a.m. and 7 p.m. All watering must adhere to the 5-day landscape watering schedule of
subsection (b)(2)(D) of this section, and must be done with a soaker hose or a hand-held
hose with an automatic shut-off valve.
(iv) Any location using groundwater or wastewater effluent for irrigation.
(C) Any and all washing of vehicles is prohibited, except vehicles that need to be washed for
health, sanitation, or safety reasons, such as food carriers. Any vehicle washing must occur at a
commercial carwash or commercial service station with a recirculating water system.
(D) No new landscaping may be established during this period.
(E) No refilling of private pools. Commercial and public pools may refill water lost to normal
daily use.
(F) All commercial water uses may be required to reduce water consumption by a percentage
determined by the mayor.
All initiated actions will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered Stage 4 have
been alleviated. If Stage 4 is initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions
will remain in effect through September 30 or until the mayor determines that these
measures are no longer required.
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. VIII, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.039 Enforcement
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provisions
of this plan, or an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant
to action taken by the mayor, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan.
(b) Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that one or more of the provisions
in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct
violations of this plan, the city administrator shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue
water service to the premises where the violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall
be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing
service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city administrator that the same action will not be
repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the
district court.
(c) Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the
property where the violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the
violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a reputable [rebuttable] presumption that the person
in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show
he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor
children, and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on the property within the parent's control
shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/536
excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in
violation of this plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation.
(d) Any employee of the city, police officer, or other employee designated by the mayor may issue a citation
to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this plan. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate
and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, and the offense charged, and shall
direct him/her to appear in the municipal court, on the date shown on the citation.
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. IX, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.040 Private water well exception
(a) Any person who maintains or uses a private water well for other than domestic water use (such as
landscape irrigation) is exempt from the requirements, restrictions and limitations of the water management
stages of this plan. Individuals with private water wells are, however, encouraged by the city to abide by the plan
and its water conservation goals in order to protect long-term water supplies.
(b) At any time this plan is initiated, to be entitled to such exemption, any such person shall be required to
post notice of such private water well use. Each person shall pay for an appropriate sign, which will be provided
by the city, indicating a private water well supply. The sign shall be placed in the yard in close proximity to the
city's water meter indicating private water well use until such time as the plan has been terminated.
(c) Private well owners must register their well and type of well with the city inspection department.
(d) Failure to post the required sign or to register any private well during Stage 2 through Stage 4 water
management stages shall result in the loss of the exemption from the landscaping water requirements.
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. X, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.041 Variances
(a) The director of the water department, or his designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for
existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance
would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire [protection] for the public
or the person requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water
supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in
water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this plan shall file a petition for variance with the
city within 5 days after the plan for a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for
variances shall be reviewed by the director of the water department, or his designee, and shall include the
following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use.
(3) Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner
or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if the petitioner complies with this plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/536
(5) Description of the relief requested.
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take
to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date.
(8) Other pertinent information.
(c) Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the
director of the water department:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has
failed to meet specified requirements.
(d) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of the plan occurring prior to the
issuance of the variance.
(Ordinance 370, att. A, sec. XI, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.042 Water wasting
“Water wasting” means to permit or cause water flow, spray, or otherwise move or discharge water from the
premises to or upon the street, alley, or public right-of-way, ditch or drain, or failing to repair a leak in a private
plumbing system or in an irrigation system within five (5) working days of the discovery or notification of such.
Any violation of this section is punishable as set forth in the penalty clause of this article. (Ordinance 370, att. A,
sec. XII, adopted 2/15/01)
Secs. 13.08.043–13.08.070 Reserved
Division 3. Water Conservation Plan
Sec. 13.08.071 Summary
(a) The city water department served approximately 4000 residents in 1999 and is expecting no major increase
in population over the next 5 years. The water department served approximately 1600 connections in 1999. The
service area is currently served by a 1.5 million gallons per day city-owned well system. The water department
also has an emergency water connection with the City of Fort Worth in case of an emergency. However, it is the
responsibility of the water department to examine and control our main source of supply so as to avoid any
necessity to obtain water from an emergency source. Therefore, it is necessary to examine water use practices
and educate the public about ways in which to reduce overall water use. It is also necessary to set goals and
outline methodologies in which to achieve these goals.
(b) This water conservation plan identifies water conservation goals and identifies and explains conservation
practices that will help protect long-term water supplies for the city and its customers. This plan includes
information required by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) for water conservation plans as
well as information specific to the city water supply and treatment system.
(Ordinance 370, att. B, sec. I, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.072 Conservation overview
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/536
The city conservation plan recognizes that the city is under a contract with the City of Fort Worth for an
emergency connection, and that in case of any emergency that arises in the Fort Worth water system will cause
the same rationing and conservation methods as stated in that contract to be placed upon the residents of Sansom
Park. (Ordinance 370, att. B, sec. 2, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.073 Water conservation goals
(a) The average purchased water supply for the year 1999 was 145 million gallons and the amount of water
sold was 144 million gallons, which means that the city had approximately 1 million gallons or 1 percent of
unaccounted water loss for that year. The water department serviced 1,469 connections for that period for an
average consumption of 99,214 gallons per connection per year or 8,268 gallons per connection per month.
Since the city has begun a water line replacement program and a meter change-out program, the unaccounted
water loss has greatly improved over the last 10 years. Also, the city has begun enforcing the International
Plumbing Code, which requires water-saving fixtures. Future goals will center around public awareness on the
conservative use of water. Emphasis will be placed on the control of outside watering, especially during the
hotter months. More conservation steps will be directed toward the conservation of water usage because during
drought times the level of water in the lake drops dramatically and will eventually lead to more stringent control
in order to maintain enough water to meet the water system's demand. Public awareness will include information
contained on the web page, brochures, and periodic presentations by staff representatives at local meeting places
within the city.
(b) The new goals for the city are as follows:
(1) Continue water line and meter change-out programs.
(2) Continue meter calibration programs at the water plant.
(3) Public education.
(4) Reduce peak demands.
(Ordinance 370, att. B, sec. 3, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.074 Water conservation methods
(a) The city water conservation plan includes the following water conservation methods:
(1) Public information and education.
(2) Plumbing code.
(3) Meter testing and upgrades.
(4) Old and deteriorated water line replacement.
(5) Leak detection and repair.
(6) Water conserving landscaping.
(7) Water use auditing.
(8) Certificate of occupancy inspections.
Each method is presented and described in the following subsections.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/536
(b) Public information and education. The most important part of the city's conservation program is public
education. The city staff will present information upon request to the public.
(1) Presentations at community meetings. The staff will present conservation updates in order to
educate the public.
(2) Cable access notifications. The water department uses the public access channel (channel 3)
when possible to notify the public of any special meeting or event in the area of water conservation.
(3) School programs. The city staff will make presentations on water conservation to the schools
upon request.
(c) Plumbing code. The city will adopt the 1997 International Plumbing Code.
(d) Meter testing and upgrades. The meters at the plant are calibrated now semi-annually and the city will
continue to replace any dead meters in the system.
(e) Water line replacement program. The city has implemented a program of replacing old and deteriorated
water mains and the program will continue until all the old mains have been replaced.
(f) Leak detection and repair. All water main leaks are monitored closely and repaired as soon as possible.
The city representatives will notify the residents of any possible leak that they have on their side through the use
of leak detection systems installed on most meters upon request.
(g) Water-conserving landscaping. The water department encourages the planting of water efficient ideas
[species]. The city staff will be happy to assist any resident with questions on this type of program. If necessary
the staff will direct the resident to a local nursery where they can find more information.
(h) Water use auditing. The utility billing manager will monitor the bills on a monthly basis and report any
abnormalities to the distribution department for further investigation. The city annually compares water
purchased against water sold and reports this information to the state water development board.
(i) Certificate of occupancy inspections. All vacant housing must make application and obtain a certificate of
occupancy certificate prior to occupying the house. During this inspection it will be required that any plumbing
fixtures will have to comply with the state code for the installation of water-saving fixtures.
(j) Landscape watering schedule. Though not required on a daily basis, a 5-day watering schedule will be
available upon request at the city hall. It is recommended that residents abstain from watering during peak water
demand times and to control the length of watering to no more than 30 minutes or to the point of runoff in any
one area. For example: Place a small sized tuna can in the area that is being watered; when the can fills up with
water, the area is adequately watered.
(Ordinance 370, att. B, sec. 4, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.075 Coordination with other agencies
This plan will be presented to the Region C Water planning group and also the Tarrant Water District No. 1 as
the supplier. (Ordinance 370, att. B, sec. 5, adopted 2/15/01)
Sec. 13.08.076 Reservoir system operations
Tarrant Regional Water District No. 1 as the city's raw water supplier is responsible for operations of the
reservoir system as described in the summary section of this plan. Tarrant Regional Water District coordinates
this operation plan with all of its water customers and provides recommendations for the operation of regional
water systems as well. (Ordinance 370, att. B, sec. 6, adopted 2/15/01)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/536
ARTICLE 13.09 STORMWATER UTILITY SYSTEM
Sec. 13.09.001 Definitions
The following definitions apply to the establishment and the operation of the stormwater utility system:
Act. Section 552 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
Administrator. The city administrator of the city or his/her designee.
Allocated portion of a parcel. That portion of a parcel which has been allocated to an owner or customer based
on the area utilized by the owner or customer compared to the total area of a parcel.
Benefited property. An improved parcel, lot or tract to which stormwater service is made available.
City. The City of Sansom Park.
Customer. The person(s) or entity(ies) recorded as the customer or user of utility services for a parcel as
recorded in the records of the city's utility billing system.
Disabled person. Any person who suffers from a disability as defined by the Americans with Disability Act of
1990, 42 U.S.C. sections 12101, et seq. as amended.
Dwelling unit. Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by applicable city codes, for not more than one family, or a
congregate residence for 10 or less persons. A dwelling unit may be a single-family house, a town home, a
manufactured home or a portion of a duplex, triplex or quadplex.
Elderly person. Any person who is over sixty-five (65) years of age.
Improved parcel. A lot or parcel that has been changed from its natural state by construction of a structure or
other improvement on it that causes an impervious surface or coverage of the soil on the property.
Nonresidential property. An improved parcel which is not a residential property.
Owner. The person(s) or entity(ies) recorded as the owner of a parcel as recorded in the records of the county
appraisal district.
Parcel. One or more lots or tracts, or portions of lots or tracts.
Residential property. An improved parcel upon which not more than four (4) dwelling units are constructed.
Service area. The area within the boundaries of the city.
Stormwater infrastructure or drainage infrastructure. The property, real, personal or mixed, that is used in
providing stormwater capacity to manage and control stormwater runoff for the stormwater utility system,
including bridges, catchbasins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts, detention ponds, retention ponds, ditches,
draws, flumes, pipes, pumps, sloughs, treatment works, and appurtenances to those items, whether natural or
artificial, or using force or gravity, that are used to draw off surface water from land, carry the stormwater runoff
away, collect, store, or treat the stormwater runoff, or divert the stormwater runoff into natural or artificial
watercourses. Drainage infrastructure has the same meaning as stormwater infrastructure.
Stormwater only account. A utility billing account established for the sole purpose of billing applicable
stormwater utility fees where other utility services are provided privately or through suppliers other than the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/536
Stormwater operations and maintenance expenditures. Any expenditures that are required to finance, operate
and maintain stormwater infrastructure including debt service, equipment, personnel, educational and
administrative expenditures.
Stormwater runoff potential. Relative potential for causing stormwater runoff quantities or velocities from a
parcel based on the type of development or land use on the parcel and the size of the parcel.
Stormwater utility fee or drainage utility fee. The charge, including interest and penalties, paid by the owner or
customer of a benefited property for stormwater services provided by the stormwater utility system, including,
but not limited to, the items described in the definition of “cost-of-service” in section 552.044 of the act.
Stormwater utility fee has the same meaning as the drainage utility fee.
Stormwater utility fee ordinance. The ordinance establishing stormwater fees.
Stormwater utility ordinance. This article, as amended from time to time.
Stormwater utility system or drainage utility system. The stormwater utility system owned or controlled, in
whole or in part by the city, including the city's existing stormwater facilities, materials, and supplies and any
stormwater facilities, materials, and supplies hereafter constructed or utilized, and dedicated to the service of
benefited property, and including provision for additions to the system. The stormwater utility system has the
same meaning as the drainage utility system.
Wholly sufficient and privately owned stormwater system. Land and facilities owned and operated by a person or
entity other than the city and from stormwater does not discharge under any storm frequency event or conditions
into a creek, river, slough, culvert, channel or other infrastructure that is part of the city's stormwater utility
system.
Sec. 13.09.002 Establishment of a stormwater utility
(a) Creation within the meaning of the act. The city hereby adopts the provisions of section 552.045 of the
Texas Local Government Code and hereby creates and establishes a stormwater utility system to serve the city,
whose boundaries shall be the boundaries of the city. The city declares the stormwater utility system(s) to be a
public utility and further finds that the city shall:
(1) Establish a schedule of drainage (stormwater) charges against all real property in the city
subject to charges under section 552.047 of the Texas Local Government Code;
(2) Provide drainage (stormwater) for all real property in the city on payment of drainage charges,
except such real property which may be exempted therefrom as authorized by law; and
(3) Offer such drainage (stormwater) service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms.
(b) Duty of administrator. It shall be the duty of the administrator to administer the stormwater utility system.
The administrator shall keep an accurate record of all properties benefited or served by the stormwater utility
system and the stormwater utility fee charged for each parcel or portion of a parcel. The record may be
maintained within the city's utility billing system or in another recordkeeping system that may be developed.
(c) Program implementation. By the adoption of this article, the city makes no representation that all of the
city's stormwater problems will be remedied; and the city council is given full discretion in establishing the time
and quantitative priorities in expending funds on a reasonable basis as the same become available to meet the
stormwater needs of the city. The adoption of this article shall not be construed to relieve private landowners,
developers or other individuals or entities from providing stormwater improvements pursuant to the ordinances
of the city and the laws of this state which relate to stormwater or stormwater improvements. Further, the city
does not waive any immunity granted under any law.
Sec. 13.09.003 Establishment of a stormwater utility fee and billing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/536
(a) Stormwater utility rate classes. A stormwater utility fee is established, and the fee shall be imposed on
each benefited property within the city for services and facilities provided by the stormwater utility system. For
purposes of imposing the stormwater utility fee, all eligible parcels within the city are classified into the
following categories:
(1) Residential.
(2) Nonresidential.
(b) Responsible party.
(1) The stormwater utility fee shall be billed monthly along with water, wastewater or solid waste
(garbage) billing.
(2) The bill imposing the stormwater utility fee will be mailed to either the owner or customer as is
currently established as the responsible party for water, wastewater and solid waste service for the
parcel; and, the owner or customer recorded in the utility billing system will be responsible for
payment of the fee.
(3) Where an improved parcel is not occupied by a customer that might use water, wastewater,
solid waste or other utility service and considered by the city to be vacant, either on a temporary or
permanent basis, the city may bill the owner of the parcel for the stormwater utility fee.
(4) Where the city does not bill water, wastewater or solid waste service to an owner or customer,
the city is hereby authorized to establish a “stormwater only account” and to bill the stormwater
utility fee to either the owner or customer, as the administrator determines is appropriate.
(c) Revision of rates. The city council shall establish the initial rates for the stormwater utility fee by
ordinance. The city council may review the schedule of rates at any time, and may, by ordinance, increase or
decrease the rates within the schedule, upon a determination that said increase or decrease is warranted.
(d) Billing procedures and policies.
(1) Any partial payment of the stormwater utility fee will be applied against the amount due in
accordance with the policies and procedures established by the city with regard to all utility services
provided by the city.
(2) A late charge may be imposed in accordance with the policies and procedures established by
the city with regard to all utility services.
(e) Nonpayment. The city may file suit to recover any charges due hereunder, together with maximum
interest, attorney fees and other costs and charges that may be allowed by the act or other law, which is not paid
when due. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided at law or in this article, failure of a customer
or owner of the stormwater utility system to pay the charges promptly when due shall subject such customer or
owner to discontinuance of any utility services provided by the city and/or placement of a lien against the
property.
Sec. 13.09.004 Calculation of stormwater utility fees
(a) Rates in accordance with act. The stormwater utility fee shall be established in accordance with the
provisions of the act, including, but not limited to, section 552.047 [of the Texas Local Government Code].
(b) Fee calculation. The stormwater utility fee shall be based on an inventory of parcels within the city which
also evaluates the stormwater runoff potential on those parcels and establishes a rate for each class of property.
The stormwater utility fee shall be set to recover the cost-of-service that has been established for the stormwater
utility system in a fair and equitable manner and if so determined by the city council, an amount to establish one
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/536
or more funds to provide financing for future stormwater system construction and for implementing programs to
improve stormwater quality. The proportional stormwater runoff potential for each class shall be distributed
equitable between classes and among the parcels in each class in proportion to the relative contribution of
stormwater runoff from each class.
(c) Stormwater runoff potential. For purposes of establishing the stormwater runoff potential on parcels
between and within each rate class, the impervious area for parcels shall be inventoried from information
established by the county appraisal district, from geographic information system records, from aerial
photography and from site plans or plats available for properties within the city. The impervious area measured
in square feet as obtained from these database sources, site plans or other survey or engineering calculations
shall be used to establish the relative stormwater runoff potential for each rate class and among parcels within
each rate class.
Sec. 13.09.005 Appeal
(a) Appeal of stormwater utility fees to the administrator. An owner or customer who has been charged a
stormwater utility fee and believes that the calculation or determination of the stormwater utility fee is incorrect
may appeal the fee determination to the administrator. The administrator shall evaluate all appeals based on the
methodologies for calculating the stormwater utility fee set forth in the section 13.09.009.
(b) Process.
(1) The appeal shall be in writing and set forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought.
The administrator shall decide the appeal based upon a preponderance of the evidence.
(2) The administrator shall issue a decision on the appeal within thirty (30) days from the date that
the administrator receives the appeal. An adjustment resulting from such a request shall be
prospective and applied to future billings and may also be retroactive for no more than three (3)
months prior to the receipt of the appeal.
(3) The administrator shall issue a written decision on an appeal.
(c) Supporting information for appeal. The person filing the appeal may be required, at the person's cost, to
provide supplemental information to the administrator, including but not limited to survey data sealed by a statelicensed
professional land surveyor, engineering reports sealed by a state-licensed professional engineer
qualified in civil engineering, or other documentation that the administrator deems necessary to properly
evaluate the appeal. Failure to provide requested information in a timely manner may result in the denial of the
appeal.
(d) Appeal of stormwater utility fees to the city council.
(1) An owner or customer may appeal the following decisions of the administrator to the city
council:
(A) The applicability of a stormwater utility fee to a parcel;
(B) The calculation of applicable stormwater runoff potential for a parcel;
(C) The calculation of the stormwater utility fee for a parcel; or
(D) The discontinuance of utility service, filing of a lien or other legal actions for
nonpayment of stormwater utility fees.
(2) The owner or customer shall file a written appeal to the city council with the city secretary
within thirty (30) days following receipt of the administrator's decision. The city council shall hear
the appeal within sixty (60) days of receipt of the appeal by the city secretary. Notice of the hearing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/536
shall be mailed to the address given in the appeal form or, if no address is given, to the address on the
utility billing statement at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing.
(3) The burden of proof shall be on the owner or customer to demonstrate that the fee is not
applicable or that the determination of the value of the fee was not calculated according to the
applicable stormwater fee schedule or the methodologies established in section 13.09.009. If
applicable, and if not previously submitted to the administrator, the owner or customer shall submit,
with the appeal, a report describing the basis for the appeal. The report shall be prepared by a statelicensed
professional engineer qualified in civil engineering. The failure to submit such a report shall
be considered in determining whether the applicant has met the burden of proof.
(4) If the appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient security satisfactory to the city
attorney in a amount equal to the original determination of the stormwater utility fee due, any
discontinued utility services may be reinstated while the appeal is pending.
(5) At the hearing, the city council shall allow testimony from the applicant, city employees and
other interested persons relevant to the appeal. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
(6) Following the hearing, the city council shall consider all evidence and determine whether the
appeal should be granted (in whole or in part) or denied.
(7) The city council shall complete its review and make a decision about the appeal within thirty
(30) days of the hearing. The city council shall apply the standards and review criteria contained in
this section.
(8) The city council's decision shall be final.
(e) Imposition and appeal of lien.
(1) Before imposing a lien for delinquent stormwater utility charges, the city shall send notice to
the owner of the amount of the charges owed and any penalties or interest accrued, and of the owner's
right to appeal the imposition of the lien. The notice must provide a time, place and means by which
the charges causing the lien may be paid or disputed. The notice shall be sent to the address shown on
the tax rolls if the owner has not notified the city of a different address.
(2) Within ten (10) working days of the postmark of the notice sent to the owner, the owner may
appeal the decision to impose the lien on the property to the administrator.
(3) The owner shall present evidence at a meeting with the administrator. Within five (5) working
days after the date of the meeting, the administrator shall direct that the lien not be filed if he finds
the customer or the owner does not owe a fee, and shall give the owner written notice of the decision.
(4) If warranted, the administrator may modify the lien to reflect the true amount of delinquency in
payment for services to the property.
(5) When a person pays all principal, interest and all other charges allowed by law that are secured
by a lien filed pursuant to this article, the administrator shall execute a release of that lien.
Sec. 13.09.006 Termination of district
If, after at least five (5) years of substantially continuous operation of the stormwater utility system, the city
council determines that the stormwater utility system should be discontinued, the powers under the act should be
revoked, and the provisions for financing municipal stormwater costs should be made by using other revenues,
the city council may adopt an ordinance that in effect, after providing notice and a public hearing as required by
the act, discontinues the stormwater utility system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/536
Sec. 13.09.007 Stormwater utility fund
(a) Stormwater fund. A stormwater utility fund is established and may consist of one or more accounts. All
stormwater utility fees shall be deposited as collected and received into this fund, and shall be used exclusively
for stormwater services as stated in section 552.049 of the act, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) The cost of the acquisition of land, rights-of-way, options to purchase land, easements, and
interests in land relating to structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefited
property;
(2) The cost of the acquisition, construction, repair, and maintenance of structures, equipment, and
facilities used in draining the benefited property;
(3) The cost of architectural, engineering, legal, and related services, plans and specifications,
studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenue, and all other expenses necessary or incident to
planning, designing, providing, or determining the feasibility and capability of structures, equipment,
and facilities used in draining the benefited property;
(4) The cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture, and facilities necessary or incident to the
provision and operation of draining the benefited property;
(5) The prorated cost of funding and financing charges and interest arising from construction
projects and the start-up cost of a stormwater facility used in draining the benefited property;
(6) The prorated cost of debt service and reserve requirements for funding of stormwater
infrastructure paid with revenue bonds or other securities or obligations issued by the city and
supported by pledge of stormwater revenues;
(7) To the extent permitted by law, the cost of constructing, sampling, monitoring, building,
inspecting and maintaining structures needed for the city's regulations and permitting requirements
for stormwater quality; and
(8) The administrative costs of the stormwater utility system.
(b) Stormwater fund accounting.
(1) The city shall clearly account for revenues and expenditures authorized for operation of the
stormwater utility system.
(2) The revenues collected from stormwater utility fees shall be segregated and completely
identifiable from other city funds and accounts.
(3) Funds and revenues in the stormwater utility fund may be transferred to the city's general fund
as allowed by law.
(c) Stormwater service deposit. A deposit shall not be charged for initiation or continuation of stormwater
utility service.
Sec. 13.09.008 Exemptions
(a) The following entities or persons shall be exempt from this article:
(1) Any property to which a mandatory exemption under section 552.053(c) of the act applies,
including without limitation:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/536
(A) Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately
owned stormwater system that does not discharge under any storm frequency events or
conditions to waterways controlled or maintained by the city;
(B) Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is
developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the city for
maintenance; and
(C) A subdivided parcel or lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of
occupancy has been issued, or the city has taken another official action to release the property
for occupancy; and
(2) Any property to which a mandatory exemption under section 430.003 of the Local Government
Code applies;
(3) Any of the following described or identified entities and property owned by such entities:
(A) The county.
(B) A state agency.
(C) A public institution of higher education.
(D) Castleberry Independent School District.
(4) Elderly and disabled individuals residing in the city, provided such residents have a household
income which is less than two hundred percent (200%) of the Federal Poverty Level; and
(5) The city and property owned by the city.
(b) If the owner of property asserts that such property is exempt pursuant to this section or any other
applicable law, such property owner has the burden to assert such exemption by filing notice of eligibility for
such exemption and sufficient evidence of entitlement to such exemption with the administrator. If the
exemption is not granted, the owner may appeal using the procedures for appeal provided in section 13.09.005
above.
(Ordinance 481-14 adopted 11/20/14)
Sec. 13.09.009 Stormwater utility fees
(a) Established. The city council hereby establishes stormwater utility fees as set forth herein. Stormwater
utility fees will be levied against all real property in the established service areas except real property that is
exempted in the article. These fees shall be imposed and issued with utility billing statements issued on and after
January 1, 2015.
(b) Fee calculation.
(1) Stormwater utility fees for residential property, as defined in this article, shall be calculated for
each dwelling unit at the flat rate provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code per
dwelling unit.
(2) Stormwater utility fees for nonresidential property, shall be calculated for each improved parcel
at the flat rate provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code.
(c) Area subject to fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/536
(1) The stormwater utility fee for a parcel will be billed to the owner or customer who receives the
water, sewer or solid waste billing for the parcel, as recorded in the city's utility billing system.
(2) Where an improved parcel is not occupied by a customer that may use water, wastewater, solid
waste or other utility service and considered by the city to be vacant, either on a temporary or
permanent basis, the city may bill the owner of the parcel for the stormwater utility fee.
(3) Where the city does not bill water, wastewater or solid waste service to an owner or customer,
the city is hereby authorized to establish a “stormwater only account” and to bill the stormwater
utility fee to either the owner or customer, as the director determines is appropriate.
(d) Fund. All stormwater utility fees shall be deposited in the stormwater utility fund created under this article.
(e) Uses. The stormwater utility fee will be utilized to fund stormwater projects, equipment, personnel and
other costs authorized in section 552.047, drainage charges, of the Texas Local Government Code and this
article.
(Ordinance 485-14 adopted. 12/18/14)
ARTICLE 13.10 DISCHARGES INTO THE MUNICIPAL STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Sec. 13.10.001 Purpose
The purposes and objectives of this article are as follows:
(1) Maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the city, the North
Central Texas Region and the state.
(2) Prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial,
residential and construction sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural
waters within the city.
(3) Promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous
substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from
construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and other contaminants into the storm sewers and
natural waters of the city.
(4) Encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products.
(5) Facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners and operators of
industrial and construction sites within the city.
(6) Enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to
stormwater discharges.
Sec. 13.10.002 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city engineer, the community development director or whoever
designated shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon the city engineer may be delegated by the city engineer to other city personnel.
Sec. 13.10.003 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BMP - Best Management Practices.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/536
BTEX - Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, and Xylene.
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
HHW - Hazardous household waste.
mg/L - Milligrams per liter.
MS4 - Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.
NOI - Notice of intent.
NOT - Notice of termination.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
ppb - Parts per billion.
PST - Petroleum storage tank.
RLA - Registered landscape architect.
RPE - Registered professional engineer.
RQ - Reportable quantity.
SWPPP - Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
TPH - Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons.
USC - United States Code.
Sec. 13.10.001 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated:
Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, rangelands and
other nonpoint agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined
in 40 CFR section 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40
CFR section 122.24.
Best management practices (BMP). Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and
other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or waste disposal or drainage from raw material storage.
City. The City of Sansom Park, Texas, or the city council of Sansom Park.
City engineer. The person appointed to the position of city engineer by the city council, or his/her duly
authorized representative.
Coal pile runoff. The rainfall runoff from or through any coal storage pile.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/536
Commencement of construction. The disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading or excavating
activities or other construction activities.
Commercial. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry or other activity engaged in for profit.
Community development director. The person appointed to the position of community development director by
the city council, or his/her duly authorized representative.
Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater or any other substance whatsoever into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States.
Discharger. Any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including
without limitation any operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
Domestic sewage. Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing
and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from
the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and
institutions, that is free from industrial waste.
Environmental protection agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional
office thereof, any federal department, agency or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and
any duly authorized official of the EPA or such successor agency.
Extremely hazardous substance. Any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR part 355, Emergency
Planning and Notification.
Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a
pollutant.
Fertilizer. A solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form
available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or
stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. The term
does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of
essential plant nutrients is made.
Final stabilization. The status when all soil-disturbing activities at a site have been completed, and a uniform
perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of
riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
Fire department. The fire department, or any duly authorized representative thereof.
Fire protection water. Any water and any substances or materials contained therein used by any person other
than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire.
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking or
consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of
produce and other food products.
Harmful quantity. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state.
Hazardous household waste (HHW). Any material generated in a household (including single and multiple
residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and
day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR section 261.4(b)
(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/536
Hazardous substance. Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302.
Hazardous waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR part
261.
Hazardous waste treatment, disposal and recovery facility. All contiguous land and structures, other
appurtenances and improvements on the land, used for the treatment, disposal or recovery of hazardous waste.
Herbicide. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth.
Industrial waste. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry,
manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business.
Motor vehicle fuel. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant,
gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
Municipal landfill (or landfill). An area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for
permanent disposal, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well or a pile
(as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the state commission on environmental quality).
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater and which is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage.
Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial,
institutional or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity (or industrial general
permit). The industrial general permit issued by the EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in volume 57 of the
Federal Register at page 41304 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto.
NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (or construction general permit). The
construction general permit issued by the EPA on August 27, 1992 and published in volume 57 of the Federal
Register at page 41217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto.
NPDES permit. A permit issued by the EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC
section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group or general areawide basis.
Nonpoint source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a “point source.”
Notice of intent (NOI). The notice of intent that is required by either the industrial general permit or the
construction general permit.
Notice of termination (NOT). The notice of termination that is required by either the industrial general permit or
the construction general permit.
Oil. Any kind of oil in any form, including but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction
thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with
waste.
Operator. The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet the following two criteria:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/536
(1) They have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make
modifications in specifications); and
(2) They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to
ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions.
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
Pesticide. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel or mitigate any pest, or any
substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant (as these terms are
defined in section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code).
Petroleum product. A petroleum product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is
capable of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline,
gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. The
term does not include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel or a petroleum product destined for use in
chemical manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing.
Petroleum storage tank (PST). Any one, or a combination of, above-ground or underground storage tanks that
contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes.
Point source. Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch,
channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agriculture stormwater runoff.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term “pollutant” does not include
tailwater or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland,
pastureland and farmland.
Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any
water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or
property, or to the public health, safety or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water
for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Qualified personnel. Persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills and ability (as demonstrated by
sufficient education, training, experience, and/or when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to
perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the applicable regulatory
requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity.
Registered landscape architect (RLA). A person who has been duly licensed and registered to practice landscape
architecture by the state board of architectural examiners.
Registered professional engineer (RPE). A person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state board
of professional engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the state.
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the waters of the United States.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/536
Reportable quantity (RQ). For any “hazardous substance” the quantity established and listed in table 302.4 of 40
CFR part 302; for any “extremely hazardous substance,” the quantity established in 40 CFR part 355 and listed
in appendix “A” thereto.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of:
(1) Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber,
plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and
(2) Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal
furniture and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800
degrees Fahrenheit).
Sanitary sewer (or sewer). The system of pipes, conduits and other conveyances which carry industrial waste
and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities,
and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater,
surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
Septic tank waste. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers
and septic tanks.
Service station. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is
dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
Sewage (or sanitary sewage). The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city
sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for
treatment.
Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent
land used in connection with the facility or activity.
Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or
air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid semi-solid or contained gaseous
material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and from
community and institutional activities.
State. The State of Texas
Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity. The discharge from any conveyance which is used for
collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials
storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one of the categories of facilities in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)
(14), and which is not excluded from the EPA's definition of the same term.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan required by either the construction general permit or the
industrial general permit and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to
reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the
facility.
Uncontaminated. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Used oil (or used motor oil). Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result of
use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal
law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/536
Water in the state (or water). Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding
reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the
territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or
salt, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface
water that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Water quality standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and
the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in
chapter 307 of title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code.
Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past or may be susceptible to
use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation or destruction of which
would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as
waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands
adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of “Waters of the
United States” at 40 CFR section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or
lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping
maintenance and land-clearing operations.
Sec. 13.10.005 Discharges to municipal storm sewer system restricted
(a) Discharge other than stormwater prohibited. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(b) Defenses. It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) above that
the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges:
(1) A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES permit (other than the
NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4);
(2) A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire department;
(3) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or
materials (that the fire code in this code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, in
which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to
discharge);
(4) Agricultural stormwater runoff;
(5) A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line
disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless the total residual chlorine (TRC) has been
reduced to contain no harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(6) A discharge or flow from lawn watering or landscape irrigation or other irrigation water;
(7) A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
(8) A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/536
(9) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as 40 CFR section 35.2005(20)) to the
MS4;
(10) Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawlspace pump, footing drain
or sump pump;
(11) A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or
material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container;
(12) A discharge or flow from air-conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a
cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter or any other source of pollutant;
(13) A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing;
(14) A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
(15) A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant or any other harmful cleaning substance;
(16) Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an
emissions scrubber or filter or any other source of pollutant;
(17) Swimming pool water that has been dechlorinated so that total residual chlorine (TRC)
contains no harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or
disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
(18) Foundation and footing drains;
(19) Other allowable nonstormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR section 122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1);
(20) Nonstormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES multi-sector general
permit (MSGP) TXR050000 or the TPDES construction general permit (CGP) TXR150000; or
(21) Other similar occasional incidental nonstormwater discharges such as spray park water, unless
the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing these discharges.
(c) No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) above if the discharge or flow in question
has been determined by the community development director to be a source of pollutant or pollutants to the
waters of the United States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the
discharger and the discharge has occurred more than 15 days beyond such notice. The correctness of the
community development directors' determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be
reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding.
Sec. 13.10.006 Specific prohibitions and requirements
(a) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited
by the general prohibition in section 13.10.005.
(b) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes
to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit or any state-issued discharge
permit for discharges from its MS4.
(c) No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose or otherwise
introduce or cause, allow or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:
(1) Any used motor oil, antifreeze or any other motor vehicle fluid;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/536
(2) Any industrial waste;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste or grit trap waste;
(5) Any garbage, rubbish or yard waste;
(6) Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning or
maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop,
repair shop or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning or maintenance of any business or
commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus or heavy equipment, by a business or
public entity that operates more than two such vehicles;
(7) Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing or other maintenance of aircraft;
(8) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent or any other
harmful cleaning substance;
(9) Any wastewater from floor, rug or carpet cleaning;
(10) Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful
quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant or any other harmful cleaning
substance; or any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill,
leak or other release of oil, motor fuel or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless
all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed;
(11) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions
filter or the blowdown from a boiler;
(12) Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic or asphalt base material or hydromulch material,
or from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying such
material;
(13) Any runoff or washdown water from any animal pen, kennel or fowl or livestock containment
area;
(14) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain or spa;
(15) Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other
chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
(16) Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means if the total
residual chlorine (TRC) contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line
disinfection;
(17) Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code
in this code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to
remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. This prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow
from firefighting by the fire department;
(18) Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(19) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/536
(20) Any substance or material that will damage, block or clog the MS4;
(21) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil
contaminated by a leaking PST or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the
remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria:
(A) Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements;
(B) No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant; and
(C) No discharge containing more than 50 parts per billion of benzene; 500 parts per billion
combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX); or 15 mg/L of
total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH).
(d) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt,
earth, soil or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or
associated with landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock or other earth materials, in excess of what
could be retained on-site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum
extent practicable under prevailing circumstances.
(e) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4 or allow
such a connection to continue.
(f) No person shall cause or allow any pavement washwater from a service station to be discharged into the
MS4 unless such washwater has passed through a properly functioning and maintained grease, oil and sand
interceptor before discharge into the MS4.
(g) Regulation of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers.
(1) Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture, transportation, storage or disposal of
a pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer must comply fully with all state and federal statutes and
regulations, including without limitation the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA) and all federal regulations promulgated pursuant to FIFRA; chapters 63, 75 and 76 of the
Texas Agriculture Code and all state regulations promulgated pursuant thereto; and any other state or
federal requirement.
(2) Any license, permit, registration, certification or evidence of financial responsibility required
by state or federal law for sale, distribution, application, manufacture, transportation, storage or
disposal of a pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer must be presented to the community development
director or his/her delegate and any city law enforcement officer for examination upon request.
(3) No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for
use on any labeling required by state or federal statute or regulation.
(4) No person shall use, or cause to be used, any pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer in any manner
that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is likely to cause or does cause a harmful quantity
of the pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
(5) No person shall dispose of, discard, store or transport a pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer, or a
pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer container, in a manner that the person knows, or reasonably should
know, is likely to cause or does cause a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer to
enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
(6) If provided with a display notice containing the provisions of this section pertaining to the
regulation of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers (or a reasonable description thereof), and the
information that any user of the product may obtain further information from the community
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/536
development director, any person selling pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers at retail or wholesale
shall post the notice prominently where it may be read by purchasers of the product.
(h) Used oil regulation. No person shall:
(1) Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water,
groundwater or watercourse;
(2) Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or
knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill;
(3) Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement or other similar use that
introduces used oil into the environment;
(4) All businesses that change motor oil for the public and municipal waste landfills are
encouraged to serve as public used oil collection centers as provided by state statute in section
371.024 of the Texas Health and Safety Code;
(5) A retail dealer who annually sells directly to the public oil in containers for use off-premises
shall post in a prominent place a sign provided by the city or by the state informing the public that
improper disposal of used oil is prohibited by law. The sign shall prominently display the toll-free
telephone number of the state used oil information center. If a sign is provided by the city, it shall
also prominently display the city telephone number where information concerning the proper
disposal of used oil may be obtained.
(i) Any prohibitions or requirements deemed necessary to carry out any “hazardous household waste”
collection program that the city chooses to adopt (in compliance with the wishes of region 6 expressed in its
draft, draft permit), for example, requirements that household hazardous waste be segregated from other
household waste, be discarded only at certain specified locations and/or be placed at curbside for collection only
at specified times. Certain containers and security measures might also be required. Caution: Any hazardous
household waste program must comply with subchapter L of chapter 330 of title 30 of the TAC.
Sec. 13.10.007 Release reporting and cleanup
(a) The person in charge of any facility, vehicle or other source of any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping, leaching, dumping, disposing or any other release of any of the
following quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach, enter or otherwise be introduced
into the MS4 or waters of the United States shall immediately telephone and notify the community development
director concerning the incident:
(1) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any hazardous substance, as
established under 40 CFR part 302;
(2) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any extremely hazardous substance,
as established under 40 CFR part 355;
(3) An amount of oil that either:
(A) Violates applicable water quality standards; or
(B) Causes a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of the water or an adjoining
shoreline or causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or
upon an adjoining shoreline; or
(4) Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/536
(b) The immediate notification required by subsection (a) shall include the following information:
(1) The identity or chemical name of the substance released and whether the substance is an
extremely hazardous substance;
(2) The exact location of the release, including any known name of the waters involved or
threatened and any other environmental media affected;
(3) The time and duration (thus far) of the release;
(4) An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the substance released;
(5) The source of the release;
(6) Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release and, where appropriate,
advice regarding medical attention that may be necessary for exposed individuals;
(7) Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
(8) Any steps that have been taken to contain and/or clean up the released material and minimize
its impacts; and
(9) The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be contacted for further
information.
(c) Within fifteen (15) days following such release, the responsible person in charge of the facility, vehicle or
other source of the release shall, unless waived by the community development director, submit a written report
containing each of the items of information specified above in subsection (b), as well as the following additional
information:
(1) The ultimate duration, concentration and quantity of the release;
(2) All actions taken to respond to, contain and clean up the released substances, and all
precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
(3) Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated with the release;
(4) Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for exposed individuals;
(5) The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives responding to the release; and
(6) The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible person(s) to prevent similar future
occurrences.
(d) The notifications required by subsections (b) and (c) shall not relieve the responsible person of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the release, including any liability
for damage to the city, to natural resources or to any other person or property, nor shall such notification relieve
the responsible person of any fine, penalty or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article or to
state or federal law.
(e) Any person responsible for any release as described in subsection (a) above shall comply with all state,
federal and any other local laws requiring reporting, cleanup, containment and any other appropriate remedial
action in response to the release.
(f) Any person responsible for a release described in subsection (a) above shall reimburse the city for any cost
incurred by the city in responding to the release.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/536
Sec. 13.10.008 Stormwater discharges from construction activities
(a) General requirements.
(1) All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to control and reduce
the discharge, to the MS4 and to water of the United States, of sediment, silt, earth, soil and other
material associated with the clearing, grading, excavation and other construction activities to the
maximum extent practicable under the circumstances. Such best management practices may include
but not be limited to the following measures:
(A) Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible, and that disturbed portions
of the site are stabilized as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction
activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include
temporary seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative
buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation and other appropriate
measures;
(B) Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise
limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site to the extent feasible;
(C) Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles, the generation of dust and
the escape of other windblown waste from the site;
(D) Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete and
mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States;
(E) Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain spills of paints,
solvents, fuels, septic waste and other hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with
construction, and to assure proper cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with
state, federal and local requirements;
(F) Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including
covering waste materials and minimizing ground contact with hazardous chemicals and trash;
(G) Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other best
management practices in good and effective operating condition; and
(H) Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in
stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed.
Structural measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed
structural measures may include but not be limited to the following: stormwater detention
structures (including wet ponds), stormwater retention structures, flow attenuation by use of
open vegetative swales and natural depressions, other velocity dissipation devices, infiltration
of runoff on-site, and sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of
construction sites are only responsible for the installation and maintenance of stormwater
management measures prior to final stabilization of the site and are not responsible for
maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction activity have terminated.
(2) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed
areas of any construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials
that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures and locations where vehicles enter or
exit the site at least once every seven calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm that is
0.5 inches or greater. All erosion and sediment control measures and other identified best
management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and are
effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the results of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/536
the inspection, best management practices shall be revised as appropriate, and as soon as is
practicable.
(3) The community development director may require any plans and specifications that are
prepared for the construction of site improvements to illustrate and describe the best management
practices required by subsection (a)(1) above that will be implemented at the construction site. The
city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development
plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume
occupancy, on the grounds that the best management practices described in the plans are observed
upon a site inspection by the community development director are determined not to control and
reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with clearing,
grading, excavation and other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable under the
circumstances.
(4) Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and
severally responsible for compliance with the requirements in this subsection.
(5) Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity who is not an owner or
operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract for implementing a best
management practices control measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or
negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure if such failure causes
or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any
state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4.
(b) Five-acre disturbances.
(1) All operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading and excavation
activities, that result in the disturbance of five or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a
common plan of development or sale with five or more acres of total land area are disturbed (or who
are required to obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction
activity), shall comply with the following requirements (in addition to those in subsection (a)):
(A) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharges from a
construction site under the NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction
sites (the construction general permit) shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to
the community development director at least 2 days prior to the commencement of construction
activities. If the construction activity is already underway upon the effective date of this article,
the NOI shall be submitted within thirty (30) days. For stormwater discharges from construction
sites where the operator changes, an NOI shall be submitted at least 2 days prior to when the
operator commences work at this site.
(B) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in
accordance with the requirements of the construction general permit or any individual or group
NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and with any
additional requirement imposed by or under this article and any other city ordinance.
(2) On a site of more than one acre in total land area (or a site which is impacted by off-site
drainage for more than one acre), the SWPPP shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer. The signature and seal of the registered professional engineer shall constitute
his/her attestation that the SWPPP fully complies with the requirements of the construction general
permit, or with any applicable individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges
from the construction site, and with any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. The
SWPPP shall contain the name, title and business address of the registered professional engineer
signing it, and the date that he/she did so.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/536
(3) The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI to the community
development director and for new construction, prior to the commencement of construction activities.
The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the construction general
permit and this article. Any update or modification to the SWPPP shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer, if the original SWPPP was required by subsection (2)
above to have been prepared by a registered professional engineer.
(4) A copy of any NOI that is required by subsection (b)(1)(A) shall be submitted to the city in
conjunction with any application for a building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site
development plan approval, and any other city approval necessary to commence or continue
construction at the site.
(5) The community development director may require any operator who is required by subsection
(b)(1)(B) to prepare a SWPPP to submit the SWPPP, and any modifications thereto, to the
community development director for review. Such submittal and review of the SWPPP may be
required by the community development director prior to commencement of or during construction
activities at the site.
(6) Upon the community development directors' review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that
he/she may conduct, the city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision
plat, site development plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue
construction or to assume occupancy on the grounds that the SWPPP does not comply with the
requirements of the construction general permit, any individual or group NPDES permit issued for
stormwater discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under
this article. Also, if at any time the community development director determines that the SWPPP is
not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any building permit, grading
permit, subdivision plat, site development plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or
continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site.
(7) Any significant modification to the SWPPP for a site of more than one acre of total land area
(or a site which is impacted by off-site drainage from more than one acre) shall be prepared, signed
and sealed by a registered professional engineer as required for the original SWPPP by subsection (b)
(2).
(8) All contractors and subcontractors identified in an SWPPP shall sign a copy of the following
certification statement before conducting any professional service identified in the SWPPP. “I certify
under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit that authorizes the stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this certification, (and that I am
responsible for compliance) with the Stormwater Ordinance of the city of Sansom Park, and with
those provisions of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the construction site for
which I am responsible.”
(9) The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature, the
name, address, and telephone number of the contracting firm, the address (or other identifying
description) of the site and the date the certification is made.
(10) The SWPPP, with the registered professional engineer's signature and seal affixed, and the
certifications of contractors and subcontractors required by subsection (b)(8) above, and with any
modifications attached, shall be retained at the construction site from the date of commencement of
construction through the date of final stabilization.
(11) The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the community
development director upon request as well as to EPA and state inspectors.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/536
(12) The community development director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP
does not meet the requirements of the construction general permit, any applicable individual or group
NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, or any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the
permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP and identify which provisions of the
SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within seven (7) days of such
notification from the community development director (or as otherwise provided by the community
development director), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit
to the community development director a written certification that the requested changes have been
made.
(13) The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction,
operation or maintenance which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, and which has not otherwise been
addressed in the SWPPP, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly
minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of controlling pollutants in
stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. In addition, the SWPPP shall be
amended to identify any new contractor and/or subcontractor that will implement a measure in the
SWPPP.
(14) Qualified personnel provided by the operator of the construction site shall inspect disturbed
areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials
that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or
exit the site at least once every seven calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of the storm that is
0.5 inches or greater. Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to
precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of or the potential for pollutants entering the drainage
system. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP shall be observed to ensure
that they are operating correctly. Where discharge locations or points are accessible, they shall be
inspected to ascertain whether erosion control measures are effective in preventing significant
impacts to receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be
inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.
(15) Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (b)(14) above, the site
description and/or the pollution prevention measures identified in the SWPPP shall be revised as
appropriate, but in no case later than seven calendar days following the inspection. Such
modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within seven
calendar days following the inspection.
(16) A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by subsection (b)(14) above, the
name(s) and qualifications of personnel making the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major
observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP and actions taken in accordance with
subsection (b)(15) above, shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least three years
from the date that the site is finally stabilized. Such report shall identify any incidence of
noncompliance. Where a report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall
contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the facility's NPDES permit
and this article. The report shall be certified and signed by the person responsible for making it.
(17) The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports required by this article or by the
NPDES permit for the site, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of last three
years from the date that the site is finally stabilized.
(18) Where a site has been finally stabilized and all stormwater discharges from construction
activities that are authorized by this article and by the NPDES permit for those construction activities
are eliminated, or where the operator of all stormwater discharges at a facility changes, the operator
of the construction site shall submit to the community development director a notice of termination
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/536
(NOT) that includes the information required for notice of termination by part VII of the construction
general permit.
(19) Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized
representative thereof) shall submit written certification to the community development director that
the site has been finally stabilized. (See the definition of final stabilization in this article). The city
may withhold an occupancy or use permit for any premises constructed on the site until such
certification of final stabilization has been filed and the community development director has
determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has in fact occurred and that
any required permanent structural controls have been completed.
Sec. 13.10.009 Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity
(a) All operators of: (i) municipal landfills, (ii) hazardous waste treatment, disposal and recovery facilities,
(iii) industrial facilities that are subject to section 313 of title III of the Superfund Amendments and
Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) 42, USC section 11023, and (iv) industrial facilities that the community
development director determines are contributing a substantial pollutant loading to the MS4, which are sources
of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharge associated with
industrial activity under the NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity (the industrial general permit) shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent
(NOI) to the community development director at least two (2) days prior to the commencement of the
industrial activity at the facility. If industrial activity is already underway upon the effective date of
this article the NOI shall be submitted within thirty (30) days. Where the operator of a facility with a
stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity which is covered by the industrial general
permit changes, the new operator of the facility shall submit a NOI at least two (2) days prior to the
change.
(2) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in
accordance with the requirements of the industrial general permit or any individual or group NPDES
permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, and with any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article and any other city ordinance.
(3) The SWPPP shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer. The
signature and seal of the registered professional engineer shall constitute his/her attestation that the
SWPPP fully complies with the requirements of the industrial general permit, or with any applicable
individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, and
with any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. The SWPPP shall contain the name,
title and business address of the registered professional engineer signing it and the date that he/she
did so.
(4) The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI to the community
development director and, for a new industrial operation, prior to the commencement of the industrial
activity at the facility. The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by
the industrial general permit and this article. Any update or modification to the SWPPP shall be
prepared, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer.
(5) A copy of any NOI that is required by subsection (a)(1) shall be submitted to the city in
conjunction with any application for a permit or any other city approval necessary to commence or
continue operation of the industrial facility.
(6) The community development director may require any operator who is required by subsection
(a)(2) to prepare a SWPPP to submit the SWPPP and any modifications thereto to the community
development director for review. Such submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required by the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/536
community development director prior to commencement of or during industrial activity at the
facility.
(7) Upon the community development directors' review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that
he/she may conduct, the city many deny approval of any application for a permit or any other city
approval necessary to commence or continue operation of the facility, on the grounds that the SWPPP
does not comply with the requirements of the industrial general permit, any individual or group
NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, or any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article. Also, if at any time the community development
director determines that the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny
approval of any application for a permit or other city approval necessary to commence or continue
operation of the industrial facility.
(8) Any significant modification to the SWPPP shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a
registered professional engineer, as required for the original SWPPP by subsection (a)(3).
(9) The SWPPP, with the registered professional engineer's signature and seal affixed, and with any
modifications attached, shall be retained at the industrial facility from the date of commencement of
operations until all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at the facility are
eliminated and the required notice of termination (NOT) has been submitted.
(10) The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the community
development director upon request as well as to EPA and state inspectors.
(11) The community development director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP
does not meet the requirements of the industrial general permit, any applicable individual or group
NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility or any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the
permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP and identify which provisions of the
SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within thirty (30) days of such
notification from the community development director (or as otherwise provided by the community
development director), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit
to the community development director a written certification that the requested changes have been
made.
(12) The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction,
operation or maintenance which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective
in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective
of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity.
(13) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall inspect equipment and areas of the
facility specified in the SWPPP at appropriate intervals. A set of tracking or follow-up procedures
shall be used to ensure that appropriate actions are taken in response to the inspections. Records of
inspection shall be maintained.
(14) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall conduct comprehensive site compliance
evaluations as required by part IV.D.4 of the industrial general permit at intervals of not less than
once per year. Based on the results of the compliance evaluation, the description of potential pollutant
sources and the pollution prevention measures and controls identified in the SWPPP shall be revised
as appropriate within two weeks of such evaluation and shall provide for implementation of any
changes to the SWPPP in a timely manner, but in no case more than twelve weeks after the
compliance evaluation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/536
(15) A report summarizing the scope of the comprehensive site compliance evaluation required by
subsection (a)(14) above, personnel making the compliance inspection, the date(s) of the inspection,
major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP and actions taken in accordance
with necessary and appropriate plan revisions shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at
least one year after all stormwater discharges from the facility are eliminated and the required NOT
has been submitted. The report shall identify any incidence of noncompliance; or, if the report does
not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall contain a certification that the facility is
in compliance with the SWPPP, the applicable NPDES permit, and this article. The report shall be
signed by the individual responsible for the comprehensive site compliance evaluation and it shall be
submitted to the community development director within ten days of its completion.
(16) If the industrial facility is required by part VI.B.2 of the industrial general permit to conduct
semi-annual monitoring, a signed copy of each semi-annual monitoring report prepared in accordance
with part VI.D shall be submitted to the community development director.
(17) If the industrial facility is required by part VI.B.3 of the industrial general permit to conduct
annual monitoring, records of the monitoring results shall be retained at the facility and made
available to the community development director upon request. If expressly required by the
community development director, a written report of the annual monitoring shall be prepared and
submitted to the community development director.
(18) By written notice, the community development director may require any industrial facility
identified in accordance with this section to implement a monitoring program that includes the
submission of quantitative data on the following constituents: any pollutants limited in effluent
guidelines subcategories, where applicable; any pollutant listed in an existing NPDES permit for the
facility, oil and grease, COD, pH, BOD, TSS, total phosphorus, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, nitrate plus
nitrite nitrogen, and any information on discharges required under 40 CFR 122.21(g)(7)(ii) and (iv).
The community development director may require written reports of any such monitoring to be
submitted to him/her.
(19) By written notice, the community development director may require any industrial facility
identified in this section to conduct semi-annual or annual monitoring of stormwater discharges or the
community development director may specify an alternative monitoring frequency and/or specify
additional parameters to be analyzed. The community development director may require written
reports of any such additional monitoring to be submitted to him/her.
(20) The operator shall retain the SWPPP until at least one year after stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated or that operator is no longer operating
the facility, and a notice of termination (NOT) in compliance with subsection (a)(9) has been
submitted. The operator shall retain all records of all monitoring information, copies of all required
reports and records of all data used to complete the NOI, until at least one year after all stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated, or the operator ceases to
operate that facility and the required notice of termination (NOT) has been submitted.
(21) For discharges subject to the semi-annual or annual monitoring requirements of part VI.B of
the industrial general permit, in addition to the records retention requirements of the subsection
above, operators are required to retain for a six-year period from the date of sample collection records
of all monitoring information collected. Operators must submit such monitoring results, and/or a
summary thereof, to the community development director upon his/her request.
(22) As expeditiously as practicable, but in no case later than October 1, 1995, any discharge
composed of coal pile runoff shall comply with the following limitations: no discharge shall exceed a
maximum concentration for any time of 50 mg/L total suspended solids, nor shall such runoff be
diluted with stormwater or other flows in order to meet this limitation; the pH of such discharges
shall be within the range of 6.0–9.0. Any untreated overflow from facilities designed, constructed and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/536
operated to treat the volume of coal pile runoff which is associated with a ten-year, 24-hour rainfall
event shall not be subject to the 50 mg/L limitation for total suspended solids.
(23) After October 1, 1995, no discharge shall contain any of the following hazardous metals in a
concentration exceeding the maximum allowable concentrations (in mg/L) of each of the hazardous
metals listed below:
Total Metal Monthly Average Daily Composite Single Grab
Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3
Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0
Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0
Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0
Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5
Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0
Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01
Nickel 1.0 0.1 0.2
Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2
Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0
(24) Where all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity that are authorized by this
article and by the NPDES permit for those discharges from industrial activities are eliminated, or
where the operator of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at a facility changes,
the operator of the facility shall submit to the community development director a notice of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/536
termination (NOT) that includes the information required for notices of termination by part IX of the
industrial general permit.
(b) Any owner of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity to which subsection
(a) applies, whether or not he/she is an operator of the facility, is jointly and severally responsible for
compliance with the best management practices (BMP) measures required in the SWPPP for the facility and for
compliance with the effluent limitations for coal pile runoff and hazardous metals specified in subsections (a)
(22) and (a)(23) above.
(c) Upon request by the community development director, all owners and operators of any facility that
experiences a problem complying with the requirements of this article, the industrial general permit or any
applicable individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility shall
consult with the community development director, any other representative of the city and any third party
designated by the city in an attempt to achieve compliance as soon as practicable. If compliance is not achieved
to the city's satisfaction, the city may in its discretion report the noncompliance to the EPA and/or the state,
and/or the city may itself undertake any enforcement action authorized by sections 13.10.012, 13.10.014, or
13.10.015 of this article. Exercise of the city's option for consultation under this subsection shall not be a bar
against or prerequisite for taking any other enforcement action against any owner or operator of the facility.
Sec. 13.10.010 Compliance monitoring
(a) Right of entry; inspection and sampling.
(1) The community development director shall have the right to enter the premises of any person
discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the
United States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article and
with any state or federal discharge permit, limitation or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the
community development director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional
duties. Dischargers shall make available to the community development director, upon request, any
SWPPPs, modification thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations,
notices of intent and any other records, reports and other documents related to compliance with this
article and with any state or federal discharge permit.
(2) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the community development
director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing his/her
responsibilities.
(3) The community development director shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property,
or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the
discharger's operations.
(4) The community development director may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the
United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis and other monitoring of its stormwater
discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring.
(5) The community development director may require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger
at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/536
(6) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the
community development director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the discharger.
(7) Unreasonable delays in allowing the community development director access to the
discharger's premises shall be a violation of this article.
(b) Search warrants. If the community development director has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this article or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation or requirement, or that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed
to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
and welfare of the community, then the community development director may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 13.10.011 Citizen participation; publication of list of dischargers in significant noncompliance
(a) Citizen reports of violations.
(1) All citizens are encouraged to report to the community development director or his/her
designee any spills, releases, illicit connections, other instances of anyone discharging pollutants into
the MS4 or waters of the United States and any other violation of this article of which they become
aware.
(2) The community development director will designate an individual or office within his/her
division, department, etc., to receive all such citizen reports by telephone, in writing and in person. A
written record of each citizen report will be prepared and kept on file for a period of 3 years, and a
copy of the city's record of the report will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon request. Also
upon request, the community development director will inform the reporting citizen of any action
undertaken by the city in response to the citizen's report.
(b) Publication of list of dischargers in significant noncompliance. The community development director may
periodically publish, in a daily newspaper generally distributed within the city, a list of owners and operators of
discharges to the MS4 or waters of the United States from sites of construction and industrial activity which,
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with the requirements of this article. The term
“significant noncompliance” shall mean:
(1) Introducing or causing to be introduced into the waters of the United States any discharge that
violates a water quality standard;
(2) Introducing or causing to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes
to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit or any state-issued
discharge permit for discharges from the city's MS4;
(3) Any connection of a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or
allowing any such connection to continue;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the United States that has caused imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment or has resulted
in the (city engineer's) exercise of his/her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Any violation that has resulted in injunctive relief, civil penalties or criminal fine being
imposed as a judicial remedy under section 13.10.014 of this article;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/536
(6) Any other violation(s) which the community development director determines to be chronic or
especially dangerous to the public or to the environment; or
(7) Any failure to comply with a compliance schedule, whether imposed by the city or by a court.
Sec. 13.10.012 Administrative enforcement remedies
(a) Warning notice. When the community development director finds that any person has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the community development director may
serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred
and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any
offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in
no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning
notice. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the community development director to take any
action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice.
(b) Notice of violation. When the community development director finds that any person has violated any
provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the community development director may serve upon
that person a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the alleged violator to the community development director. If the alleged
violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation
of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the community development director within
ten (10) days of receipt of this notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the alleged
violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of this notice of violation. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the community development director to take any action, including emergency
action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(c) Consent orders. The community development director may enter into consent order, assurances of
voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for
noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such documents may include
specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to
subsections (e), (f) and (g) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
(d) Show cause hearing. The community development director may order any person who has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, to appear before the community
development director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be
served on the alleged violator specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the
reasons for such action, and a request that the alleged violator show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the alleged violator. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures
specified in section 13.10.013(a)(7) of this article. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against or
prerequisite for taking any other action against the alleged violator.
(e) Compliance orders. When the community development director finds that any person has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the community development
director may issue an order to the violator directing that the violator come into compliance within a specified
time limit. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including
additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged
to the MS4 and waters of the United States. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established by a state or federal standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the person of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the violator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/536
(f) Remediation, abatement and restoration orders. When the community development director finds that a
person has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, and that
such violation has adversely affected the MS4, the waters of the United States or any other aspect of the
environment, the community development director may issue an order to the violator directing him/her to
undertake and implement any appropriate action to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation
upon the MS4, the waters of the United States or any other aspect of the environment, and/or to restore any part
of the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment that has been harmed. Such
remedial abatement and restoration action may include but not be limited to monitoring, assessment and
evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement and/or restoration
action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or
contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare or the
environment that may result from the violation; and restoration or replacement of city property or natural
resources damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the remediation, abatement and/or restoration be
accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be completed within a specified period of time. An
order issued under this subsection does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of an order under this subsection shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for
taking any other action against any responsible party.
(g) Emergency cease and desist orders.
(1) When the community development director finds that any person has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations
are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) have caused or contributed to an actual or
threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment,
the community development director may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
(A) Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
(B) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating
the discharge.
(2) Any person notified of any emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall
immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the community development
director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters
of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate
termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connections or other municipal utility services. The
community development director may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the community development director that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger
under this article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting
imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the
harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the community
development director within 3 days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against
the violator.
(h) Red tags. Whenever the community development director finds that any operator of a construction site has
violated or continues to violate any provision of section 13.10.013 of this article, or any order issued thereunder,
the community development director may order that a “red tag” be issued to the operator, posted at the
construction site and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the
site. Unless express written exception is made by the community development director, the “red tag” shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/536
prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city
associated with a building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site development plan approval, or
any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site.
Issuance of a “red tag” order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the
violator.
Sec. 13.10.013 Right to reconsideration; hearing and appeal
(a) Reconsideration and hearing.
(1) Any person subject to a compliance order under section 13.10.012(e), a remediation, abatement
or restoration order under section 13.10.012(f), an emergency cease and desist order under section
13.10.012(g) or a red tag order under section 13.10.012(h) of this article may petition the community
development director to reconsider the basis for his/her order within three (3) days of the affected
person's notice of issuance of such an order.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of
any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order.
(3) In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the
reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's
view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept and whether the
petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition.
(4) The effect of any compliance order under section 13.10.012(e), remediation or restoration order
under section 13.10.012(f), and red tag order under section 13.10.012(h) shall be stayed pending the
city engineer's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the community
development director expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of
any emergency cease and desist order under section 13.10.012(g) shall not be stayed pending the
community development directors' reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless the city engineer
expressly and in writing stays his/her emergency order.
(5) Within fifteen (15) days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the community
development director shall either:
(A) Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly;
(B) Deny the petition without hearing if no material issue of the fact is raised; or
(C) If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing
on the petition.
(6) Written notice of any hearing set by the community development director pursuant to
subsection (5) above shall be served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the petitioning party.
(7) The community development director may himself/herself conduct the hearing and take
evidence, or he/she may designate any employee of the city or any specially designated attorney or
engineer to:
(A) Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony
of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
(B) Take evidence;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/536
(C) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the community development director for action thereon.
(8) At any hearing held pursuant to this subsection, testimony taken shall be under oath and
recorded. Any party is entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence
and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
A transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
(9) After the community development director has reviewed the evidence, he/she shall either:
(A) Grant the petition;
(B) Deny the petition; or
(C) Grant the petition in part and deny it in part.
The community development director may modify his/her order as is appropriate based upon
the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and his/her action on the petition. Further
orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(b) Appeals.
(1) Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the community development director has not
been granted in its entirety and who remains adversely affected by the city engineer's order, or who is
subject to an order of the community development director issued following a show cause hearing
under section 13.10.012(d), may appeal the action of the community development director to the city
council by filing a written appeal with the city council within fifteen (15) days of the person's notice
of the community development directors adverse action on the petition for reconsideration, or within
twenty-one (21) days of the person's notice of the issuance of the order following the show cause
hearing, as the case may be.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the city council shall be deemed to be a waiver of
further administrative review.
(3) In its written appeal to the city council, the appealing party shall indicate the particular
provisions of the order objected to, the particular determinations of the community development
director that are contested, the reasons that the community development director's order and/or
determinations are contested and any alternative order that the appealing party would accept.
(4) The effect of the community development directors' order, as issued or modified, shall not be
stayed pending the appeal to the city council unless the city council expressly so states.
(5) Within twenty-one (21) days of the submittal of a written appeal to the city council, the city
council shall hear and consider the appeal in open meeting. The appellant shall be notified at least
seven (7) days in advance of the date and time of the city council meeting at which the appeal will be
heard and considered.
(6) The appellant shall have the right to public appearance before the city council to present oral
and written statements in support of his/her appeal, if the city council wishes to consider testimony of
witnesses or other evidence beyond that in the record of any hearing before the community
development director, the city council may remand the matter to the community development director
for the taking of additional testimony or other evidence.
(7) Upon consideration of any written and oral statements made to the city council, as well as the
record made before the community development director, the city council shall act on the appeal by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/536
affirming, vacating or modifying the order of the community development director, and/or remanding
the matter to the community development director for further action.
(8) Following final action by the city council on the appeal, and adversely affected party may
challenge such action by the city council in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 13.10.014 Judicial enforcement remedies
(a) Civil remedies.
(1) Whenever it appears that a person has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
article that relates to:
(A) The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used in
construction of any structure or improvement of real property;
(B) The preservation of public health, or to the fire safety of a building or other structure or
improvement;
(C) The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including
street design;
(D) Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
(E) Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates
breeding and living places for insects and rodents; or
(F) Point source effluent limitations on the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a
nonpoint source, into the MS4; The city may invoke section 54.011–54.017 of the Texas Local
Government Code and petition the state district court or the county court at law, through the
city attorney, for either the injunctive relief specified in subsection (a)(2) below or the civil
penalties specified in subsection (a)(3) below, or both the specified injunctive relief and civil
penalties.
(2) Pursuant to section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may obtain against
the owner or the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(A) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified in subsections (a)(1)(A) through (F) above; or
(B) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with
any provisions of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsections (a)(1)(A)
through (F) above.
(3) Pursuant to section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may recover a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this article that
relates to any matter specified in subsections (a)(1)(A) through (E) above, and a civil penalty of not
more than $5,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this article that relates to any
matter specified in subsection (a)(1)(F) above, if the city proves that:
(A) The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this article; and
(B) After the defendant received notice of the article provisions, the defendant committed
acts in violation of the article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the article.
(b) Criminal penalties.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/536
(1) Any person who has violated any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, shall
be strictly liable for such violation regardless of the presence or absence of a culpable mental state
and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant
to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly
rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code.
(3) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent,
negligence, or other state of mind of the violator and any other factor as justice requires.
(c) Civil suit under Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any
provision of section 26.121 of the Texas Water Code, or any rule, permit or order of the state commission on
environmental quality, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, inclusive of its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the state commission on environmental quality, may
have a suit instituted in a state district court through its city attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or
both authorized in chapter 7 of the Texas Water Code against the person who committed or is committing or
threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to chapter 7 of the Texas Water Code. In
any suit brought by the city under this subsection, the state commission on environmental quality is a necessary
and indispensable party.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all or any
combination of these action against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
Sec. 13.10.015 Supplemental enforcement actions
(a) Performance bonds. The community development director may by written notice order any owner or
operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to file a
satisfactory bond payable to the city in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the community development
director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this article, any order issued hereunder, any
required best management practice, and/or any SWPPP provision, and/or to achieve final stabilization of the site.
The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan or
any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or any industrial activity at
the site or to assume occupancy until such a performance bond has been filed.
(b) Liability insurance. The community development director may, by written notice, order any owner or
operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to submit proof
that it has obtained liability insurance, or other financial assurance, in an amount not to exceed a value
determination by the community development director that is sufficient to remediate, restore and abate any
damage to the MS4, the waters of the United States or any other aspect of the environment that is caused by the
discharge.
(c) Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article or any order issued hereunder is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the community development director.
Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/536
nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said
nuisance.
Sec. 13.10.016 Fees and charges
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of constructing, operating and maintaining the
city's MS4, and for reimbursement of costs of implementing its stormwater management program as required by
the EPA or the state and the cost of implementing this article, which costs may include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collecting
and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by dischargers;
(2) Fees for spill and release reports and responding to spills and releases of oil, hazardous and
extremely hazardous substances and other pollutants; and
(3) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this
article. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other
fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city.
(Ordinance 495-15 adopted 6/18/15)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE†
Sec. 14.02.001 Adopted
The zoning ordinance, Ordinance 480-14, adopted by the city on November 20, 2014, as amended, is included at
the end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the zoning ordinance and the technicalities involved in
adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting and
style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and subsections have been retained
as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a history note
following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material is unchanged from the
original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other material added for
purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Editorially supplied)
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF SANSOM PARK, TEXAS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/536
Ordinance No. [480-14]
Adopted By The City Council on November 20, 2014
Repealing Ordinance No. 470-2014 dated March 6, 2014
ARTICLE 1 - AUTHORITY
SECTION 1.1 TITLE AND PURPOSE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City of Sansom Park “Zoning Ordinance.” As authorized
by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, the zoning regulations and districts as herein established
have been made for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, general welfare within the City. They
have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to
ensure adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of
population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater treatment, schools, parks
and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the
character of each zoning district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. The
purpose of these regulations is to aid the City's interest in preserving the quality of urban life by promoting the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its population, and to protect and preserve places and areas of
historical, cultural or of other importance and significance to the community.
SECTION 1.2 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED AND APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the City of Sansom Park, Texas, which
are hereafter occupied, used, constructed, erected, removed, placed, demolished, and/or converted shall be
occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished and/or converted in conformance with the zoning
regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located, as hereinafter provided,
or such shall be subject to penalties as per Section 1.5 of this Ordinance. All of the standards and regulations
prescribed herein shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise.
SECTION 1.3 SEVERABILITY
Should any article, section or any provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the
part so held to be unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION 1.4 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Whenever any provision of this ordinance imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required in
any State or Federal statute or any other City ordinance or regulation, the provision of this ordinance shall
govern. Whenever any provision of any State or Federal statute or other City ordinance or regulation imposes a
greater requirement or a higher standard than is required by this ordinance, the provision of such State or Federal
statute or other City ordinance or regulation shall govern.
SECTION 1.5 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
A. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
liable for a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per offense. Each day of violation constitutes a
separate offense.
B. In addition to pursuing the penalties and fines provided above, the City Manager or his/her designee may
bring additional legal action to insure compliance with this ordinance, including injunction, abatement or other
appropriate action or proceeding.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/536
SECTION 1.6 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Zoning Ordinance was adopted on [November 20, 2014] (date) and became effective as the Samson Park
Zoning Ordinance on ____________ (date). The adoption of this Ordinance effectively repealed the prior
Zoning Ordinance No. 470-2014, which had been adopted on March 6, 2014.
ARTICLE 2 - GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 2.1 PRIOR APPROVALS
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require any change to the plans, plats, lots or buildings previously
approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
SECTION 2.2 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager or his/her designee.
The City Manager or his/her designee and such staff members or committees as may be assigned to or appointed
shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the City to administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance, including the remedying of any condition found in violation of this ordinance, the bringing of legal
action to ensure compliance with this ordinance or other appropriate action or proceeding.
SECTION 2.3 ZONING DISTRICT MAP
A. The City is hereby divided into zones, or districts, and the boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are
delineated upon the Zoning District Map of the City, which may also be cited as the “Zoning Map,” said map
being adopted as a part of this Ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
B. One original of the Zoning District Map shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary and labeled as
“Official Zoning Map of the City of Sansom Park, Texas–Ordinance No. XXXX.” This copy shall be the official
Zoning District Map and shall bear the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Secretary, and shall bear the
seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in
Section 2.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. XXXX of the City of Sansom Park, Texas.” This copy shall
be referred to as the Original Zoning Map as record of history and not be changed in any manner. A second
Official Zoning Map shall be maintained by the City and shall be amended from time to time. In case of any
question, this copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling.
C. A copy of the official Zoning District Map shall be placed in the office of the City Manager or his/her
designee. The map copy shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all
subsequent amendments. Reproductions for informational purposes may only be made of the official Zoning
District Map or this copy.
SECTION 2.4 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
A. The zoning district boundary lines shown on the Zoning District Map are usually along streets, alleys,
property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall
be construed to follow such centerlines.
2. Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following
such lot lines.
3. Boundaries shown as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such
City limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/536
4. Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be located along the
centerline of the railroad right-of-way lines.
5. Boundaries shown as parallel to, or extensions of, features described in Subsections (1) through
(4) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall
be determined by the scale of the Map.
6. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council,
or whenever such area is used for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of
such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such
vacated street, alley or public way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all
regulations of the extended districts.
7. The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the
centerline of the street unless, as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning
classification shall not apply to the street.
8. Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the Zoning
District Map, or if there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such
question cannot be resolved by the application of Subsections (1) through (7) above, then the City
Council shall interpret and recommend to the City Council the appropriate zoning district boundaries.
SECTION 2.5 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW/UNLISTED USES
It is recognized that new types of land use will arise in the future, and forms of land use not presently anticipated
may seek to locate in the City of Sansom Park. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a
determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use in the Principal
Permitted Uses Table shall be made as follows:
A. Standards for new and unlisted uses may be interpreted by the City Manager or his/her designee
as those of a similar use. When a determination of the appropriate zoning district cannot be readily
ascertained, the City Manager or his/her designee shall refer the question concerning any new or
unlisted use to the City Council requesting a recommendation as to the zoning classification into
which such use should be placed.
1. The City Council shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use
and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning
district or districts within which such use is most similar and should be permitted, by right or by
SUP.
2. The City Council shall make such determination concerning the classification of such use
as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. If approved, the new or unlisted use shall
be amended in the use charts of the Zoning Ordinance according to Section 4.12 of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 2.6 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING ON A LOT
In any multifamily residential or nonresidential district, more than one (1) building housing a permitted or
permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard, access and other requirements of
this ordinance shall be met for each building as though it were on an individual lot. For single-family residential
and two-family residential zoning districts, only one (1) building housing a permitted principal use shall be
allowed.
SECTION 2.7 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/536
A. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City of Sansom Park, stating that the building or proposed use of
a building or premises complies with the building code and the provisions of these regulations. A change in use
shall be construed to mean any change in the occupancy of a business.
B. If the provisions of this ordinance are violated, the certificate of use and occupancy shall become null and
void, and a new certificate shall be required for any further use of such building, structure or land.
SECTION 2.8 PLATTING REQUIRED
A. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any new residential or nonresidential structure
within the city, except upon a platted lot. This requirement does not apply to the following:
1. Residentially developed property not exceeding five acres in size may obtain a building permit
for additions to the main structure if such addition does not exceed 50 percent of the main structure;
2. Adding an accessory building or structure on an unplatted residentially developed lot provided a
primary structure exists on the unplatted lot; or
3. Restoring any residential building or structure on an unplatted residentially developed lot,
destroyed by fire, explosion, or any other casualty or an Act of God where the extent of the
destruction is not more than 50 percent of the current value of the structure.
ARTICLE 3 - ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 3.1 CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 3.1.1 - FUNCTION
The City Council shall be designated as the body responsible for the duties of the City Council. In this role the
City Council shall have such powers and authority as granted by State law, the Code of Ordinances, and this
Zoning Ordinance to initiate, undertake, and decide any matters pertaining to the regulation of the use and
development of land as identified in this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 3.2 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION 3.2.1 - CREATED
A. Authority Granted. In accordance with LGC section 221.008(g) [211.008(g)] the City Council is authorized
to serve as the Board of Adjustment (BOA). The Board of Adjustment (BOA) shall have such powers and
authority as granted by State law, the Code of Ordinances, and this Zoning Ordinance to initiate, undertake, and
decide any matters pertaining to the regulation of the use and development of land as identified in this Zoning
Ordinance.
B. Procedure. The Mayor shall serve as Chairman of the BOA and shall preside at all meetings, and may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses, and shall have the same subpoena powers as the
municipal court. The Mayor Pro-Tem shall assist the Mayor/Chairman in directing the affairs of the BOA and
act in the absence of the Chairman. The City Secretary shall keep minutes of the BOA's proceedings, showing
the vote, abstention, or absence of each member upon each question, and shall keep records of its examinations
and other official actions, all of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Secretary and which shall be
public record.
SECTION 3.2.2 - MEETINGS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/536
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may
determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, and minutes shall be kept of all proceedings at
Board meetings. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. All cases
to be heard by the Board shall always be heard by at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the members, which
constitutes four (4) members.
SECTION 3.2.3 - AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. The Board shall have the authority, subject to the standards established in Sections 211.008 through
211.011 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and those established herein, to exercise powers and
to perform duties including the following:
1. Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance;
2. Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance when the Ordinance requires
the Board to do so;
3. Authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the terms of this Ordinance if the variance is not
contrary to the public interest and if, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance
would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Ordinance is observed and
substantial justice is done; and
4. Hear and decide other matters authorized by ordinance.
B. In exercising its authority under Section 3.2.4(A)(1) [3.2.3(A)(1)] above, the Board may reverse or affirm,
in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from
which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination, and for that
purpose the Board has the same authority as the administrative official.
C. The concurring vote of at least seventy-five percent (75%), or four (4) members, of the full Board is
necessary to:
1. Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official;
2. Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to review under this
Zoning Ordinance;
3. Authorize a variance from a provision of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 3.2.4 - LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY
A. The Board may not grant a variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the district for which
the variance is sought.
B. The Board shall have no power to grant or modify Special Exceptions authorized under this Ordinance,
unless provisions for Special Exceptions have been adopted herein, identifying specific criteria for the Special
Exception.
SECTION 3.2.5 - VARIANCES
A. The Board may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result
from requiring strict compliance with the terms of this Ordinance. For example, if the subject property
substantially differs from other similarly zoned land parcels by being of such restricted area, shape or slope so
that it cannot reasonably be developed in the same manner as other similarly zoned land parcels, then a variance
of the building setback, lot width or depth, or parking requirements may be granted. In granting a variance, the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/536
Board shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary for, or desirable to, the public interest. In making
the findings hereinbelow required, the Board shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land
involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work within the
proposed use, and the probable effect such variance will have upon traffic conditions and upon the public health,
safety, convenience and welfare of the community.
B. Conditions Required for Variance. No variance shall be granted without providing public notice and
holding a public hearing on the variance request in accordance with Section 3.2.8 [3.2.7] of this Ordinance and
the Board shall make findings:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict
application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
his/her land;
2. The circumstances or conditions are not economic hardships created by the property owner;
3. That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right
of the applicant;
4. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare,
or injurious to other property within the area; and
5. That the granting of the variance will not have an adverse effect on surrounding properties,
preventing the use and enjoyment of other land within the area in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance. Such findings of the Board, together with the specific facts upon which such findings
are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Board meeting at which such variance
is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and that substantial
justice may be done.
C. Findings of Undue Hardship. In order to grant a variance, the Board must make findings that an undue
hardship exists, using the following criteria:
1. That literal enforcement of the controls will create an unnecessary hardship or practical
difficulty in the development of the affected property;
2. That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally
affecting all or most properties in the same zoning district;
3. That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; and
4. That the granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of the Ordinance.
D. A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or [sic] hardship, nor shall it be based solely upon
economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person the privilege of developing a parcel of land not permitted
by this Ordinance on other parcels of land in the particular zoning district. No variance may be granted which
results in undue hardship upon another parcel of land.
E. The Board shall have no authority to change any provisions of this Ordinance and its jurisdiction is limited
to hardship and borderline cases which may arise from time to time. The Board may not change the district
designation of any land either to a more restrictive or less restrictive zone.
SECTION 3.2.6 - APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. Authority. In addition to the authorization of variances from the terms of this Ordinance, the Board shall
have the authority to hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/536
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance, or other provision of the
Code of Ordinance where authorized. The Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the
administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make
the correct order, requirement, decision or determination, and for that purpose, the Board has the same authority
as the administrative official.
B. Who May Appeal. Any of the following persons may appeal to the Board a decision made by an
administrative official:
1. A person directly aggrieved by the decision; or
2. Any officer, department, board or office of the City affected by the decision.
C. Procedure for Appeal. The appellant must file with the Board and the official from whom the appeal is
taken a written Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Notice of Appeal shall be filed
within fifteen (15) calendar days after the decision has been rendered. Upon receiving the Notice, the official
from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record of
action that is appealed. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed. The Board
may hold an expedited hearing in the event the official, from whom the appeal is taken, certifies in writing to the
Board facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. The
appellant party may appear at the appeal hearing in person, by agent or through an attorney. The Board shall
decide the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days after the written appeal request was received. The Board may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or
determination from which an appeal is taken, and may make the correct order, requirement, decision or
determination.
SECTION 3.2.7 - PROCEDURES
A. Application and Fee. An application for a variance, special exception or appeal by the Board shall be made
in writing using forms prescribed by the City, and shall be accompanied by an application fee, as set forth in the
currently adopted City Fee Schedule, a site plan, and any other additional information as may be requested in
order to properly review the application. Such information may include, but is not limited to, plat plans, site
building plans, photographs, topographic contour maps, and other similar documents. All drawings must be to
scale.
B. Review and Report by the City. The City Manager or his/her designee shall visit the site where the
application for the proposed variance or special exception would apply and the surrounding area, and shall report
his/her findings to the Board.
C. Notice and Public Hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing for consideration of the variance within a
reasonable time after the date the application for action, or an appeal, is filed. Written notice of the public
hearing for a variance shall be provided to all property owners, via U.S. mail, within two hundred feet (200') of
the affected property at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing. Notice shall also be published in
the official local newspaper before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day prior to the public hearing.
D. Action by the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds, based upon
compelling evidence provided by the applicant, that each of the conditions in Section 3.2.6 [3.2.5] has been
satisfied. The Board may impose such conditions, limitations and safeguards as it deems appropriate upon the
granting of any variance or special exception as are necessary to protect the public health, safety, convenience
and welfare. Violation of any such condition, limitation or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance.
E. Burden of Proof. The applicant bears the burden of proof in establishing the facts that may justify a
variance, a special exception, an appeal, or any other action in his/her favor by the Board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/536
F. Waiting Period. No appeal to the Board for the same or a related variance or special exception on the same
piece of property shall be allowed for a period of six (6) months following an unfavorable ruling by the Board
unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the six-month waiting period, been changed or acted
upon by the Board or the City Council so as to alter the facts and conditions upon which the previous
unfavorable Board action was based. Such changes of circumstances shall permit the rehearing of a variance or
special exception request by the Board, but such circumstances shall in no way have any force in law to compel
the Board, after a hearing on the matter, to grant a subsequent variance or special exception request. Any
subsequent variance or special exception request shall be considered entirely on its own merits and on the
specific circumstances related to the subject property.
SECTION 3.2.8 - FINALITY OF DECISIONS; JUDICIAL REVIEW
All decisions of the Board are final and binding. However, any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board may
present a verified petition to a court of record which states that the decision of the Board is illegal, in whole or in
part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented within ten (10) calendar days
after the date the Board's decision is filed in the City Secretary's office. The Board's decision shall be deemed
filed in the office of the Board on the first (1st) business day following the date on which action was taken by the
Board.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
ARTICLE 4 - ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION 4.1 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
The City of Sansom Park, Texas is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The use, height, area
regulations, and other development standards, as set out herein apply to each district. The districts established
herein shall be known as:
Zoning Designation Zoning Districts
SF-10 Single-Family Residential
SF-6 Single-Family Residential
SF-5 Single-Family Residential
D Duplex Two-Family Residential
MF Multifamily
MH Manufactured Housing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/536
O Office Neighborhood Service
C Commercial
I Industrial
PD Planned Development
C-T Commercial-Transition
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14; Ordinance 533-18, att. A, adopted 1/18/18)
SECTION 4.2 SF-10 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.2.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: The purpose of the “SF-10”, Single-Family Residential District, is to allow single- family
detached dwellings on lots of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and dwellings of not less than one
thousand, eight hundred (1,800) square feet, together with the allowed accessory uses, in order to promote low
population densities within integral neighborhood units.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged or maintained, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for uses permitted in the
“SF-10” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“SF-10” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 10,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 70 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 125 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 15 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/536
Minimum Rear Yard 20 ft.
Minimum Dwelling Size 1,800 sq. ft.
Maximum Building Height 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 50%
Minimum Lot Open Space 40%
Minimum Masonry 60%
Minimum Accessory Building Side & Rear Yard 5 ft.
SECTION 4.2.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.2.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/536
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for nonresidential construction shall be
accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.2.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
SECTION 4.2.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.3 SF-6 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.3.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: The purpose of the “SF-6”, Single-Family District, is to allow single-family detached dwellings
on lots of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and dwellings of not less than one thousand, two
hundred (1,200) square feet, together with the allowed accessory uses, in order to promote low population
densities within integral neighborhood units.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged or maintained, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for uses permitted in the
“SF-6” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“SF-6” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 60 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 10 ft.
Minimum Dwelling Size 1,200 sq. ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/536
Maximum Building Height 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 50%
Minimum Lot Open Space 40%
Minimum Masonry 60%
Minimum Accessory Building Side & Rear Yard 5 ft.
*Nonresidential uses permitted within this district shall comply with the property development standards as set
forth in the “C” Commercial District.
SECTION 4.3.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.3.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for nonresidential construction shall be
accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.3.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/536
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
SECTION 4.3.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.4 SF-5 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.4.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: The “SF-5”, Single-Family District, is intended to allow single-family detached dwellings on lots
of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and dwellings of at least one thousand, two hundred (1,200)
square feet together with the allowed accessory uses, in order to promote low population densities within
integral neighborhood units.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged or maintained, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for uses permitted in the
“SF-6” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“SF-5” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 50 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 10 ft.
Minimum Dwelling Size 1,200 sq. ft.
Maximum Building Height 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 50%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/536
Minimum Lot Open Space 40%
Minimum Masonry 60%
Minimum Accessory Building Side & Rear Yard 5 ft.
*Nonresidential uses permitted within this district shall comply with the property development standards as set
forth in the “C” Commercial District.
SECTION 4.4.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.4.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for nonresidential construction shall be
accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.4.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
SECTION 4.4.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/536
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.5 D - DUPLEX TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.5.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: To allow duplex, two-family, residential dwellings on lots of not less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet and no more than two units per lot. Along with the allowed accessory uses, this district's main
purpose is to provide a planned area for two-family residential occupancy.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged or maintained, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for uses permitted in the
“D” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“D” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Area Per Unit 2,500 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 50 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 10 ft.
Minimum Dwelling Size Per Unit 800 sq. ft.
Maximum Building Height 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 50%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/536
Minimum Open Space 40%
Minimum Masonry 60%
Maximum Accessory Structure Per Unit (no more
than one (1) accessory structure per unit)
220 sq. ft.
Minimum Accessory Building Side & Rear Yard 5 ft.
SECTION 4.5.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.5.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for nonresidential construction shall be
accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.5.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
SECTION 4.5.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/536
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.6 MH - MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
SECTION 4.6.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this
section, are the regulations of the MH Manufactured Home Subdivision and Park District. The MH,
Manufactured Home Subdivision and Park, district is a detached residential district establishing standards for the
location of HUD-code manufactured and mobile home units (“manufactured housing”) in developments
specifically designated for manufactured housing parks and subdivisions. Manufactured housing subdivisions
include individually platted lots for sale within the subdivision, for the placement of manufactured housing units.
A manufactured housing park offers spaces for the placement of manufactured housing units on a lease or rental
basis. The Manufactured Housing district establishes area and design requirements for parks and subdivisions, as
well as yard requirements for individual lots. Both parks and subdivisions provide open space and recreational
areas appropriate for the acreage and number of units contained. Areas zoned for the MH district shall have, or
shall make provision for, municipal water and sewer services. They shall be designed to adequately
accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular
circulation patterns which discourage nonlocal traffic; they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses;
and they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental and noise impacts.
SECTION 4.6.2 - LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max 8.0
Lot Dimensions
Lot area, min. (SF)
Manufactured Home 3,000
Manufactured Home Park 5 Acres
Gross living area min (SF)
Manufactured Home 700
Lot width, min (FT)
Manufactured Home 40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/536
Lot depth, min. (FT)
Manufactured Home 90
Setbacks
Front Yard, min. (FT) 25
Side Yard, min (FT)
Adjacent to nonsimilar district 20
Adjacent to manufactured home 5
Adjacent to Street 15
Rear Yard, min (FT) 20
Building Standards
Building height, max (FT), Stories 25, 1.5
Lot coverage, max %
Manufactured home 40
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.6.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.6.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/536
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for nonresidential construction shall be
accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.6.5 - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
A. Definitions
1. Manufactured housing park means a parcel of land not less than five (5) acres nor greater than
thirty-five (35) acres which is designed, improved, or intended to be used for short-term or long-term
occupancy by manufactured or mobile homes, trailers and/or recreational vehicles (including travel
trailers) in designated spaces. The facility may include a residence for the owner/manager of the
premises, utility hookups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas
for pets, and other similar amenities.
2. Manufactured housing space means a plot of ground within a manufactured housing park, or
manufactured housing subdivision which is designed for the accommodation of one manufactured or
mobile home, trailer or RV unit.
3. Manufactured housing subdivision means a parcel of land which is designed, platted, improved
and intended for the long-term placement of individually owned mobile home units or HUD-Code
manufactured homes on platted lots which can be purchased outright by the owners of the mobile
home units. The facility may include a residence for the owner/manager of the premises, utility
hookups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas for pets, and
other similar amenities.
B. Tenant Parking. Each parking space shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete in accordance with City
standards, and shall be located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other
manufactured housing and for public parking in the park.
C. Visitor and Supplemental Parking. In addition to parking spaces required for each manufactured housing
unit, there shall be paved parking provided for the manufactured housing community in general (see Article 4
[6] Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements):
1. Two (2) visitor parking spaces for every three (3) manufactured housing lots.
2. One (1) supplemental parking or vehicle storage space for the parking or storage of boats,
campers and similar vehicles or equipment for every four (4) manufactured housing lots.
3. Supplemental spaces may be located anywhere within the manufactured housing community
provided that no manufactured housing space shall be situated further than one hundred fifty feet
(150') from a visitor space.
4. Each parking space will be not less than nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18'), which is not to be
included in the lot size.
D. Access. Each manufactured housing community shall have direct access from an improved public street or
an internal street. Where an internal private street provides access, the same shall be paved in accordance with
City standards for a public street, and it shall be dedicated to the public as an emergency access/fire lane
easement to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used in providing emergency health or public
safety services. Each emergency access/fire lane easement shall have a clear unobstructed width of twenty-four
feet (24'), shall connect to a dedicated public street, and shall have a turning area and radii of a minimum of fifty
feet (50') to permit free movement of emergency vehicles. Dead-end streets are not allowed. Cul-de-sac streets
shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length. Fire lane easements shall be maintained by the manufactured
housing park.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/536
E. Walkways. Designated concrete walkways four feet (4') in width will be provided on both sides of
roadways or streets.
F. Street Names and Signs. Within each manufactured housing park, all streets shall be named, and
manufactured housing numbered in a logical and orderly fashion. Street signs shall be of a color and size
contrasting with those on public streets and roadways so that there is no confusion regarding which are private
and which are public streets. These signs and numbers shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate
location by emergency vehicles. Street names shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee along
with the construction plat application, reviewed by the appropriate City staff with respect to street naming
procedures set forth within the Subdivision Ordinance and/or the City's Code of Ordinances, and approved by
the City Council on the plat for the subdivision. All dwelling unit address numbering shall be assigned by the
City Manager or his/her designee.
G. Other Signs. Along all sections of emergency access easements, the owner or agent shall erect metal signs
prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and approved by the City.
H. Intersections. Internal streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety degrees (90°)
and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public streets.
I. Street Lighting. Street lighting within the manufactured housing park shall be provided and maintained by
the owners of the manufactured housing park.
J. Utilities. All electrical distribution lines and all telephone/cable and other utility lines shall be underground.
K. Drainage and Soil Protection. The ground surface in all parts of the park shall be graded and equipped to
drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Each manufactured housing space shall provide adequate
drainage for the placement of a manufactured housing [unit]. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every
manufactured housing park shall be paved and/or covered with stone, brick paving, or other similar solid
material, or protected with a vegetative growth (such as grass) capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating
dust.
L. Firefighting.
1. Approaches to all manufactured housing shall be kept clear for firefighting.
2. The owner or agent of a manufactured housing park shall be responsible for the instruction of
any staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of a
fire. Owner shall supply standard City fire hydrants located within three hundred feet (300') of all
manufactured housing spaces, measured along the drive or street.
3. The owner or agent of a manufactured housing park shall be responsible for maintaining the
entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds in excess of twelve inches (12") in height.
M. Refuse Facilities. Every manufactured housing dwelling unit shall be located within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian travel way. A refuse facility shall be a
dumpster or other similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than one dwelling, and all
refuse containers shall be maintained in accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse
containers shall be located no closer than thirty feet (30') to any adjacent single-family property, shall be located
so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be screened in accordance
with Article 7 Development Standards.
N. Anchorage of Manufactured Housing. To insure against natural hazards such as tornados, high winds and
electrical storms, anchorage for each manufactured housing [unit] shall be provided according to the Building
Code and State law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/536
O. Skirting.
1. All manufactured housing units shall provide skirting from the top of the unit's frame to grade.
Skirting shall totally enclose and secure from view the unit's axles and all required anchors, footings,
and piers.
2. All required skirting shall be masonry or metal, and shall be of a color similar to the materials
used in the construction of the manufactured housing unit such that it blends with the overall
appearance of the unit.
P. Maintenance Requirements for Common Areas. A property owners' association is required for continued
maintenance of any common land and facilities provided within the manufactured housing park/subdivision.
SECTION 4.6.6 - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Open storage is prohibited.
B. Usable Open Space Requirements. Except as provided below, any manufactured home development shall
provide usable open space which equals or exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the total land area within the
development.
C. A swimming pool shall be provided in manufactured housing developments of fifty (50) or more units.
D. One playground area containing at least five (5) pieces of play equipment shall be provided for every one
hundred (100) dwelling units, or fraction thereof. The playground equipment shall be of heavy duty
construction, such as is normally used in public parks or on public school playgrounds.
E. Site plan approval shall be required for any manufactured housing park or authorized nonresidential use
allowed in the MH district.
SECTION 4.6.7 - REPLACEMENT OF HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOMES
In the event that a HUD-Code manufactured home occupies a lot in the City, the owner of the HUD-Code
manufactured home may remove the HUD-Code manufactured home from its location and place another HUDCode
manufactured home on the same property, provided that the replacement is a newer HUD-Code
manufactured home, and is at least as large in living space as the prior HUD-Code manufactured home.
SECTION 4.7 MF - MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT
SECTION 4.7.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this
section, are the regulations of the MF Multifamily Residential District. The purpose and intent of the MF
Multifamily Residential District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to
medium density multifamily residential purposes, open space uses, and select community facility uses. The
location and characteristics of this district are generally but not always, found in the inner urbanized developed
core of the City, around shopping centers and neighborhood serving facilities, near employment centers, at the
intersections of major and secondary thoroughfare streets, and as a transitional element between lower density
and more intense nonresidential land uses. Multifamily development including single-family attached dwellings,
and apartment buildings, comprise the principal elements of the district.
SECTION 4.7.2 - LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/536
Dwelling units/acre max 12
Lot Dimensions
Lot area, min. (SF)
Single-family attached 3,000
Multifamily 8,000
Gross living area min (SF)
Single-family attached 800
Multifamily 1 bedroom 750
Multifamily 2 bedroom 900
Lot width, min (FT)
Single-family attached 30
Multifamily 60
Lot depth, min. (FT)
Single-family attached 100
Multifamily 120
Setbacks
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/536
Front Yard, min. (FT) 25
Side Yard, min (FT)
Single-family attached interior 0
Multifamily interior 10
Adjacent to Street 15
Rear Yard, min (FT) 25
Building Standards
Building height, max (FT), Stories 35*
Lot coverage, max %
Single-family attached 35
Multifamily 35
See Article 7 for additional development standards
*Additional Height may be approved upon approval of an SUP
SECTION 4.7.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.7.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for multifamily or nonresidential
construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions
of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.7.5 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/536
SECTION 4.7.6 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.8 O - OFFICE, NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE DISTRICT
SECTION 4.8.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: The purpose of the “O”, Office, Neighborhood Service District is to provide locations for low
intensity professional offices and neighborhood services that can provide transitional uses between more intense
commercial uses and various residential uses. Typically these offices will have less traffic than retail
establishments and not generate the noise or odors that may be associated with major commercial developments.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged or maintained, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for uses permitted in the
“O” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“O” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 60 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 20 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 10 ft.
Maximum Building Height 45 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 60%
Minimum Open Space 20%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/536
Minimum Masonry 60%
Minimum Accessory Building Side & Rear Yard 5 ft.
SECTION 4.8.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.8.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for nonresidential construction shall be
accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.8.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
SECTION 4.8.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.9 C - COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.9.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: The purpose of the “C”, Commercial District, is to provide locations for general commercial uses
representing various types of retail shopping, businesses, and service facilities that serve that community or
regional area.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged or maintained, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for uses permitted in the
“O” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“C” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 60 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 20 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/536
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 15 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 10 ft.
Maximum Building Height 45 ft.*
*Additional height may be approved upon approval of an SUP.
SECTION 4.9.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.9.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for nonresidential construction shall be
accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.9.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
SECTION 4.9.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.10 I - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.10.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: The “I”, Industrial District, is intended to permit a range of assembly, warehousing and service
type manufacturing and wholesale uses.
B. Uses, generally: In the “I” District, no building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter
erected, reconstructed, altered, maintained or enlarged, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for
uses permitted in the “I” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“I” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 50 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/536
Minimum Front Yard 20 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 10 ft.
Maximum Building Height 45 ft.*
*Additional height may be approved upon approval of an SUP.
SECTION 4.10.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.10.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for multifamily or nonresidential
construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions
of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.10.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development Standards.”
SECTION 4.10.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.11 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICTS
SECTION 4.11.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Planned Development District (PD) is intended to provide for flexibility and encourage a more creative,
efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces, and circulation patterns and
to best utilize special site features such as topography, size and shape. It is intended that the flexibility permitted
by this zoning category extends to discretionary approval, through site plan review of items such as parking
space requirements, building line setbacks, square footages of buildings and structures, protective screening, or
sign placement and specifications in order to achieve the purposes and objectives stated in conformance with
good planning practices and land utilization.
A. While great flexibility is given to provide special restrictions which will allow development not
otherwise permitted, procedures are established herein to prevent the misuse of the increased
flexibility.
SECTION 4.11.2 - DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/536
Development requirements for each separate PD district shall be set forth in the ordinance granting the PD
district and shall include but not be limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths,
building size, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening,
landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other requirements as the City
Council may deem appropriate.
A. The PD district shall conform to all other sections of the ordinance unless specifically excluded
in the granting ordinance.
B. The minimum acreage for a PD district request shall be five (5) acres for nonresidential
development and ten (10) acres for residential development.
C. For multifamily uses a common open space shall be designated for the leisure and recreational
use of the occupants. The open space shall be a minimum of ten (10%) percent of the total land area
devoted to the multifamily use. This requirement may be varied downward by the City Council when
a lesser amount of open space would be more appropriate based on the density of the development,
the installation of private recreational amenities, or where the availability and nature of adjacent
public open space is such that a lesser amount would adequately accommodate the development.
SECTION 4.11.3 - APPROVAL PROCESS
In establishing a PD district in accordance with this section, the City Council shall approve as part of the
amending ordinance, appropriate plans and standards for each PD district. During the review and public hearing
process City Council shall require a conceptual plan and/or a detailed plan.
A. Conceptual Plan. This plan shall be submitted by the applicant. The plan shall show the
applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed PD district in a graphic manner and as
may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development.
B. A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use, thoroughfares, and
preliminary lot arrangements. In addition, for residential development which does not propose more
than one (1) platted lot, the conceptual plan shall set forth the size, type and location of buildings and
building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes, screening, parking areas, landscaped areas,
and other pertinent development data.
C. A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a
manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Data which shall be
submitted by the applicant, or required by City Council, shall include but is not limited to the types of
use(s), topography and boundary of PD area, physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys, and
easements, location of future public facilities, building height and location, parking ratios, and other
information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which
is to be used in drafting the final detailed plan.
D. Detailed Plan. This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the PD District and
shall conform to the data presented and approved on the conceptual plan. A detailed plan may be
submitted in lieu of a conceptual plan only if it includes the entire area being proposed as a PD
District. Approval of the detailed plan shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit. The
detailed plan may be submitted for the total area of the PD or for any section or part as approved on
the conceptual plan. The detailed plan must be approved by the City Council.
1. The detailed plan shall include:
a) A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing showing existing vegetation,
natural watercourses, creeks or bodies of water, and an analysis of planned changes in
such natural features as a result of the development; a vicinity map with a north arrow and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/536
scale graphic. This site inventory analysis shall include a delineation of any floodprone
areas.
b) The plan shall also contain the name of the development, legal description, name and
address of property owner, name and address of developer, and name and address of the
preparer of the document.
c) A land use plan delineating the specific areas to be devoted to various uses shall be
required where multiple types of land uses are proposed.
d) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys, building
sites or lots, and areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school
sites, street widening and street changes, the points of ingress and egress from existing
streets, general location and description of existing and proposed utility services including
size of water and sewer mains, the location and width for all curb cuts, and the land area
of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an accurate survey of the tract.
e) A site plan for proposed building complexes showing the location of buildings and
the minimum distance between buildings, and between buildings and property lines, street
lines and alley lines. Also to be included on the site plan is a plan showing the
arrangement and provision of off-street parking.
f) A table shall be shown on the plan indicating the total amount of acreage; square
footage for each building; maximum height of each building or structure; required and
provided parking; maximum impervious surface coverage; maximum building coverage;
and total open space required and provided.
g) A landscape plan showing screening walls, open space, buffer yards and all proposed
landscaping. Said plan shall contain a table indicating required and proposed landscaping
requirements such as number of trees, shrubs, open space, required and proposed buffer
yard, and percentage of landscaping required and provided.
h) An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the
development for all uses except single-family and two-family may be required by the City
Council or City Council, if deemed appropriate. All pedestrian walks, malls, and open
areas for use by tenants or the public; types of surfacing such as paving, or turf to be used
at all locations on the site.
i) The location of all outside facilities for waste disposal; location and orientation for all
external illumination facilities; and location, size, height and orientation of all signs.
j) Any or all of the required information may be incorporated on a single drawing if one
(1) drawing is clear and can be evaluated by the City Manager or his/her designee;
however, topographical information shall be shown on a separate drawing.
E. Supplemental data. All concept or detailed plans may have supplemental data describing
standards, schedules, or other data pertinent to the development of the PD District which is to be
included in the text of the amending ordinance. Additional information needed to adequately analyze
the development may be required by planning staff or the City Council.
SECTION 4.11.4 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT
Procedure for establishing a PD District shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in the
code of ordinances. This procedure is further expanded as follows for approval of conceptual and detailed plans.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/536
A. Separate public hearings shall be held by the City Council for the approval of the conceptual
plan and the detailed plan or any section of the detailed plan unless such requirement is waived by
the City Council when it is determined a single public hearing is adequate. A single public hearing is
adequate when:
1. The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the PD district to fulfill the
requirements for both plans.
2. Information on the concept plan is sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the land
and the detail site plan will not deviate substantially from this plan.
3. The requirement is waived at the time the amending ordinance is approved. If the
requirement is waived, the conditions shall be specifically stated in the amending ordinance.
4. The ordinance establishing the PD District shall not be approved until the conceptual plan
is approved unless the conceptual plan step is bypassed.
5. If the detailed plan is approved in phases a conceptual plan for the entire site shall be
approved by the City Council. When a detailed plan is approved in phases, then separate
approvals by the City Council for the initial and subsequent phases will be required.
SECTION 4.11.5 - STAFF REPORT
When a PD District is being considered, a written staff report shall be submitted to the City Council discussing
the impact on planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building inspection, tax, police, fire,
drainage, and transportation.
SECTION 4.11.6 - ZONING MAP
All PD districts, approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance in its original form, or by
subsequent amendments thereto, shall be referenced on the zoning district map and a list of said PD districts
shall be maintained in the appendix of this Ordinance.
Editor's note–The appendix referred to in section 4.11.6 is not printed herein.
SECTION 4.11.7 - MINOR AMENDMENTS TO A DETAILED PLAN
Upon request of the applicant, the City Manager or his/her designee may authorize minor amendments to a
detailed plan so long as such minor amendments do not change the land use or substantially change the
character, development standards, or design of the development as shown on the approved detailed plan. For
purposes of this provision, a “substantial change” shall mean a change which will increase the number of
proposed dwelling units, increase the floor-to-area ratio, size of structure, height, lot coverage, or number of
stories or buildings, reduce lot, or yard size, decrease the amount of required off-street parking spaces, change
types of buildings, setbacks, street access points, or lots, increase density, change traffic patterns, or alter the
basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent properties. The City Manager or his/her designee
shall make such authorization only in writing and such document shall be placed in the ordinance file governing
the specific plan.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
SECTION 4.11.8 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES CONTINUED
Properties zoned Planned Development District prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be required to meet
the provisions set forth under this Planned Development District Section prior to platting and/or development of
said properties. (Ordinance 494-15, sec. I, adopted 5/21/15)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/536
SECTION 4.12 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE TABLE
A. Use of Land and Buildings. Structures, land or premises shall be used only in accordance with the use
permitted in the following use table subject to compliance with the dimensional and development standards for
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. No principal use shall be permitted in any district unless it appears in the
following permitted use table.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
C. Legend for the Permitted Use Table:
P Permitted Use
S Permitted by Specific Use Permit (SUP)
Not Permitted
Residential Nonresidential
Land Use Designations SF-10 SF-6 SF-5 D MH MF O C I C-T
RESIDENTIAL USES
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P P P P
Dwelling, Two-Family, Duplex P P
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached, Condominium,
Cityhouse P
Dwelling, HUD-Code Manufactured
Home/Park/Subdivision P
Dwelling, Multifamily, Apartment P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/536
Group Home for the Disabled or Disadvantaged P P P P P P
Dwelling, Assisted Living Facility P
Nursing Home P P S
Caretaker, Guard Residence P P P P
Day Care, in the Home P P P P P P
PUBLIC & CIVIC USES
City, County, State or Federal Facilities P P P P P P P P P P
Religious Institution, Church S S S S P P P P P P
Golf Course, Public S S S S P P P S P
Athletic Field or Play Field, Public S S S S P P P S P P
Public Assembly Hall P P P P P
Public Community Center P P P P P P P P P
Cemetery, Mausoleum, Crematorium P
Lodge, Fraternal, Sorority & Clubs P P P P
Private Animal Pound / Shelter S P
UTILITY USES
Electrical Transmission Line or Generating Station P P P P P P P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/536
Radio Transmission or Receiving Facility P P P P P P P P P P
Telephone Exchange, Switching or Relay P P P P P P P P P
EDUCATIONAL USES
School, Business College, Trade or Commercial
Instruction, Vocational P P
School, College or University P P
School, Dance Studio P S P
School, Day Nursery, Home Day S S S S S S S P S
School, Home P P P P P P
School, Institution, Rehabilitation & Training
Center P P P
School, Public Primary or Secondary P P P P P P P P P P
School, Private and Learning Centers P P
AMUSEMENT & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Amusement Center, Indoor P P
Amusement Center, Outdoor P P
Arcade S
Athletic Field or Play Field, Commercial
S P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/536
Country Club S P
Golf Course, Driving Range P P
Golf Course, Miniature P P
Golf Course, Private S P
Gymnasium P P
Private Club P P
Skating Rink P P
Stable, Commercial or Private P
Private Swimming Pool / Water Park P
Theater, Indoor Motion Picture P P
MEDICAL USES
Clinic P P P
Hospital S P P P
Laboratory, Medical and/or Dental P P P
Medical, Dental & Optical Retail Sales P P P
Medical Office P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/536
Medical Equipment Sales, Rental, & Leasing
Service
P P P P
Veterinary Hospital without Outside Pens P S P P
Veterinary Hospital with Outside Pens P
AUTOMOTIVE & TRANSPORTATION USES
Auto Impound Lot / Wrecker Business P
Auto Paint & Body Shop P
Auto Parts & Accessory Sales P P
Auto Rental (Car & Truck) P P
Auto Repair Garage S P
Auto & Motorcycle Sales, New & Used P
Auto Service & Filling Station P P
Bus or Taxi Station or Terminal S P
Carwash, Automated or Self S P
Farm Machinery & Implement Sales & Service S P
Heliport / Helistop S P
Motor Freight Terminal S P
Parking Lot, Commercial (Auto)
S P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/536
Recreational Vehicle Storage (commercial) P
PROFESSIONAL USES
Bank, Savings and Loan Association, Financial
Institution P P P
Non-depository Financial Institution S
Office, Business or Professional P P P P
COMMERCIAL, RETAIL & SERVICE USES
Animal Grooming S S P S
Apparel Alteration and Repair or Tailor Shop P P P P
Bakery, Retail P P
Bar, Lounge or Tavern S S
Barbershop, Beauty Salon, other Personal Services
Shop P P P P
Bicycle Sales & Repair Shop P P
Building Material Sales, Lumber Yard S P
Cabinet &/or Upholstery Shop P
Candy Store or Confectionery P P
Catering Service, Wedding Service
P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/536
Contractor, without Outside Storage P P P P
Contractor, with Outside Storage S P S
Contractor Storage or Equipment Yard S P
Convenience Store with Fuel Sales S P P
Convenience Store without Fuel Sales S
Copy Shop, Blueprinting, Duplicating Service,
Printing P P P P
Cosmetic Tattoo Establishment P P P P
Day Care Center, Child or Adult S P P S
Department Store P P
Dressmaking or Millinery Shops P P P P
Electronic Equipment Sales & Repair, Computers,
TVs, Radios P P S
Exterminating Service P
Factory Outlet, Retail or Wholesale Store P P
Food Truck Park S
Funeral Home, Mortuary S
Furniture, Fixture & Appliance Store (no outside
P P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/536
storage and outside display only during business
hours)
Gift Shop or Florist P P P
Greenhouse or Plant Nursery S P
Grocery Store P P
Hardware Store, Paint & Wallpaper P P
Health Club, Recreation Facility S P
Hotel, Motel P P
Kennel S P
Landscape Service S P
Laundry, Dry Cleaning Full Service S P
Laundry, Dry Cleaning Pickup & Receiving
Station P P P P
Laundry, Washaterias Self-Service P P P P
Liquor Store or Package Store P P
Locksmith Shop P P P P
Machinery Sales or Repair P
Manufactured or Industrialized Home Sales or
Rental P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/536
Music Store, Piano, Instruments & Supplies
P P P P
Office Machinery Sales & Service S P P S
Office Supply Store P P P P
Pawnshop P P
Pet Shop, Bird Store, Aquarium P P P
Pharmacy, Drugstore P P P P
Photographic Equipment Sales & Service P P P P
Plumbing, HVAC Sales & Installation S P S
Print Shop or Lithography S P S
Propane Sales S
Propane Sales as an Accessory Use to a Retail
Facility P P P
Public Entertainment Establishment S
Radio, Television Studio S P S
Recycling Collection Center P
Rental Store S P P S
Retail Sales P P P S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/536
Rental Yard, Commercial & Heavy Equipment P
Restaurant, Deli, Cafe, Cafeteria P P S
Restaurant, Drive-in/Drive-thru P P
Restaurant, Refreshment Stand (Temporary or
Seasonal) S S S
Retail Store with Limited On-Premises Custom
Work/Manufacture P P S
Sexually Oriented Business P
Shoe Repair P P P P
Sign Shop, Painted or Silk-screened P P P
Studio for Artists or Dancing P P P P
Stone Monument Sales P
Tattoo Parlor S
Taxidermist Shop or Studio P
Video / Game Rental S P P
MANUFACTURING & INDUSTRIAL USES
Assembly Plant P
Bottling Works P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/536
Building Materials Manufacturing P
Electronics Manufacturing P* P
Gas Well Drilling & Extraction P
Machine Shop, Metal Fabrication, Stamping,
Dying & Punching P
Manufacturing Facility (Light) P* P
Mini-warehouse, Commercial Self-Storage
Facilities P
Pharmaceutical Plant P
Plastic Products Manufacturing P
Salvage Yard P
Storage and Warehousing Establishment P* P
Storage Yard S P
Textile Manufacturing P
Warehousing, Freight Terminal / Office and/or
Storage P
ACCESSORY USES
Accessory building P P P P P P P P P P
Christmas tree sales (Temporary Use) P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/536
Home Occupation P P P P P P
Temporary Construction Building P P P P P
P* indicates additional standards in Section 4.13 shall apply.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14; Ordinance 494-15, sec. II, adopted 5/21/15; Ordinance 525-17, att. A,
adopted 6/1/17; Ordinance 533-18, att. A, adopted 1/18/18)
SECTION 4.13 C-T COMMERCIAL-TRANSITION DISTRICT
SECTION 4.13.1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Purpose: The purpose of the “C-T,” Commercial-Transition District is to provide locations for low intensity
professional offices, retail, and neighborhood services uses that can provide a transition between more intense
commercial uses and various residential uses. Typically, these uses will have less traffic than commercial
establishments and not generate the noise or odors that may be associated with major commercial developments.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged or maintained, unless otherwise provided in these regulations, except for uses permitted in the
“C-T” district in accordance with the “Permitted Use Table,” Section 4.12.
C. Property Development Standards:
“C-T” District Area Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 40 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 70 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 10 ft.
Minimum Interior Side Yard 5 ft.
Minimum Side Yard adjacent to street (corner lot) 10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 10 ft.
Maximum Building Height 45 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/536
Maximum Building Coverage 75%
Minimum Masonry 60% (for new construction only)
Minimum Accessory Building Side & Rear Yard 5 ft.
SECTION 4.13.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the
provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Existing nonconforming buildings and
sites may be eligible for a 20% reduction in the Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements so long as
adjoining neighborhood streets are not negatively impacted by off-street parking for the specific use.
SECTION 4.13.3 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for new nonresidential construction
shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.13.4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All new construction within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 7 “Development
Standards.” Any change of use in the C-T District shall meet the standards in Screening and Fencing Standards
in Section 7.2.
SECTION 4.13.5 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
All developments within this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 8 “Supplemental Regulations.”
SECTION 4.14 ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN USES
SECTION 4.14.1 - APPLICABILITY
The standards in this section shall apply to any uses proposed on any nonconforming building or site that are
designated with a P* in the Schedule of Uses in Section 4.12.
SECTION 4.14.2 - STANDARDS
A. Standards in Section 5.2 - Site Plan Review Process shall only apply to the extent practically feasible to all
nonconforming buildings and sites. Existing nonconforming buildings and sites may be improved in such a
manner as to not exacerbate any existing nonconformity.
B. Standards in Section 7.1.14 [Section 7.1.4] Nonresidential Zoning District Standards shall apply to street
fronting facades only.
C. All outdoor storage shall be located in the side or rear yards only and screened from view with a minimum
6-foot opaque fence from all adjoining property or streets that meets the standards in Section 7.2 Screening and
Fencing.
D. Loading and unloading shall only occur during normal business hours of 8:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.
E. If loading or unloading facilities are added to existing buildings or sites, they shall be screened from any
adjacent residential uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/536
(Ordinance 533-18, att. A, adopted 1/18/18)
ARTICLE 5 - APPLICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION 5.1 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE AND DISTRICTS, ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURES, AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 5.1.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this Article is to establish application procedures, internal review procedures, public notice and
hearing procedures, and review criteria for the processing of applications and actions that affect the development
and use of property subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Samson Park.
SECTION 5.1.2 - INITIATION OF APPLICATION
A. Application Submittal. All development applications to be considered by the City Council shall be initiated
by the filing of the application by the owner of the property on which the permit is applicable or by the owner's
designated agent. In the event an application is submitted by a designated agent, the application must be
accompanied by a written statement, signed by the owner, authorizing the agent to file the application on the
owner's behalf.
B. Determination of Application Completeness
1. All development applications shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the City
Manager or his/her designee.
2. No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for processing unless it is accompanied
by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance. For a determination of completeness to be issued, an application must include the
following:
a) Payment of the appropriate fee;
b) An accurate metes and bounds description of the subject property (or other suitable legal
description);
c) A survey exhibit and other appropriate exhibits as identified in this Article for the
individual permit; and
d) Any additional documents, forms or other materials required by the City Manager or
his/her designee or identified in this Zoning Ordinance for the processing of a specific
development application.
(1) The City Manager or his/her designee may from time to time identify additional
requirements for a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent
with the application contents and standards set forth in this Zoning Ordinance.
(2) A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance
with the substantive requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Not later than the tenth (10) business day after the date an application is submitted,
the City Manager or his/her designee shall determine if the application is complete. If the
application is incomplete, a written determination shall be mailed to the applicant within
such time period by United States Mail at the address listed on the application. The
determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/536
application and shall state that the application will expire if the documents or other
information are not submitted within forty-five (45) days after the date the application was
submitted.
(4) An application filed on or after the effective date of this amended and restated
Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11) business day after the
application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the
application is incomplete. For purposes of this section, the applicant shall be deemed to
have been notified if the City has mailed a copy of the determination as provided in
section 5.1.2.B.2.d.(3) above.
(5) The processing of an application by any City employee prior to the time the
application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the City as the official
acceptance of the application for filing. However, this application may be denied for
incompleteness within the forty-five (45) day period.
(6) A development application shall be deemed to expire on the forty-fifth (45) day
after the application is submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee for processing if
the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to meet the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance or other requirements as specified in the
determination provided to the applicant. Upon expiration, the application will be returned
to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new
application must be submitted.
(7) No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired
pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently
denied.
C. Application Withdrawal. Any request for withdrawal of an application must be submitted in writing to the
City Manager or his/her designee. If notification is required for the application and has been properly given via
publication in the newspaper and/or written notification to surrounding property owners, such application must
be placed on the agenda. The staff representative shall notify the Board, Commission or City Council of the
request for withdrawal. The Board, Commission or Council may, at its discretion, accept the request for
withdrawal of the application by general consent of the members. Application fees are not refundable unless
reimbursement is otherwise authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee.
SECTION 5.1.3 - NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
A. Published Notice. Whenever published notice of a public hearing before a Board, Commission or the City
Council is required, the City Manager or his/her designee shall prepare a notice to be published in an official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15) day before the date set for
the required hearing. Said notice shall set forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing as required under
LGC section 211.006(a).
B. Written Notice. Whenever written notice of a public hearing before the City Council is required, before the
tenth (10) day before the hearing date, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause written notice to be sent
to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within two
hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundary of the property in question. Said notice shall set forth the date, time,
place and purpose of the hearing as required under LGC section 211.007(c). The notice may be served by its
deposit, properly addressed with postage paid, in the United States mail. Failure of owners to receive notice of
hearing shall in no way affect the validity of the action taken.
SECTION 5.1.4 - PUBLIC HEARINGS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/536
A. Public Hearing Required. Whenever a public hearing is required, the City Secretary or his/her designee
shall establish the date, time and place of the public hearing and shall cause any notice required under section
5.1.3 of this Article to be prepared and made accordingly.
B. Conduct of Hearing. Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually
or as a representative of an organization. Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name,
address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization, state the name and mailing address of the organization for
the record. Subject to the Mayor's inherent authority to conduct meetings, public hearings shall generally be
conducted as follows:
1. The City staff may present a description of the proposed project and a written or oral
recommendation, if required. Any written recommendation shall be available to the public at the time
that the agenda packet for the body conducting the hearing is compiled.
2. The applicant may present any information it deems appropriate.
3. Testimony in support of the application may be presented by any individual who expresses an
interest in the proposed project.
4. Testimony in opposition to the application may be presented by any individual who expresses an
interest in the proposed project.
5. At the discretion of the Mayor, the City staff and the applicant may respond to any statement by
the public.
6. The body conducting the hearing may exclude testimony or evidence that it finds to be
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious.
7. At the sole discretion of the Mayor or chairperson conducting the hearing, an individual may be
permitted to pose relevant questions to staff, the applicant or the body conducting the hearing, as
directed by the Mayor or chairperson.
8. Closure of the Public Hearing. The City Council shall make a decision, or deference of decision
if so desired.
C. Continuance of Hearing. The body conducting the hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any
person, for good cause, continue the hearing to a fixed date, time and place. Except as required by the Texas
Open Meetings Act no notice shall be required if a hearing is continued. If a public hearing is closed, no further
public testimony shall be taken.
D. Additional Rules. The body conducting the hearing may adopt additional rules of procedure and may apply
such additional rules to govern the public hearing which are not inconsistent with this section.
SECTION 5.1.5 - POST-DECISION PROCEDURES
A. Notification Required. Within ten (10) business days following final action on any development
application, the appropriate City Department shall provide written notification to the applicant of the decision of
the City Council considering the request. If an application has been denied, the notification should include the
reasons for denial if identified by Council as well as any information relating to reapplication procedures for the
appropriate application.
B. Reapplication Following Denial. Whenever any development application, with the exception of any plat
application, is denied, the same type of development application for all or a part of the same property shall not
be accepted for filing for a period of six (6) months after the date of denial unless the subsequent application
involves a proposal that is substantially different from the previously denied proposal. For the purpose of this
section, a request may be considered substantially different if the change is to a different zoning classification,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/536
there is a change in conditions relating to zoning principles of the property or surrounding properties or there is a
change in the nature of the development of the property or surrounding properties. The City Manager or his/her
designee shall resolve any questions concerning the similarity of the reapplication. The final decision-maker
may, at its option, waive the six (6) month waiting period if, after due consideration of the matter at a scheduled
and posted meeting, it is determined that denial of the request was based upon erroneous or omitted information,
or if substantial new information pertaining to the request is discovered.
C. Amendments and Revisions to Approved Application. Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Zoning
Ordinance, any request to amend or revise an approved development application shall be considered a new
application, which must be decided in accordance with the procedures governing the original application and the
standards in effect at the time such new application is filed with the City.
D. Amendments Required. Whenever a subsequent development application differs substantially from a
previously approved development application to which the subsequent application must conform, the applicant
shall submit an amended development application for the initial development application, which shall be decided
prior to the subsequent application. The applicant's failure to comply with this section shall result in denial of the
subsequent application.
SECTION 5.1.6 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. The City Manager or his/her authorized representative, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the City Manager or his/her authorized representative finds upon his/her own personal observation,
or upon receipt of a complaint, that the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he/she shall immediately
investigate and, when necessary, give written notice to the person(s) responsible to cease or correct such
violation(s) immediately. Notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail to the violator(s) or to any
person owning or leasing a property where the violation is occurring. The City Manager or his/her authorized
representative shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time in conformance with local
and state laws, for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises that may be necessary to carry out
the duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. Stop Work Orders. Whenever any building or construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of
this Ordinance, the City Manager or his/her authorized representative shall have the authority to order the work
stopped by notice in writing served on the property owner or the contractor doing the work or causing such work
to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized in writing by the City to proceed
with such work. Failure to immediately stop work as provided herein shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance, in accordance with Section 1.5 and may incur penalties for such violation.
SECTION 5.1.7 - SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
A. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
zoning or development application or on any appeal.
SECTION 5.2 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
SECTION 5.2.1 - PURPOSE OF SITE PLANS
This Section establishes a site plan review process for proposed nonresidential, mixed use and multifamily
residential developments. The purpose of the review is to ensure efficient and safe land development,
harmonious use of land, compliance with appropriate design standards, safe and efficient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, adequate parking and loading, and adequate water supply, drainage and stormwater
management, sanitary facilities, coverage, and other utilities and services.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
SECTION 5.2.2 - APPLICABILITY
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/536
A. Site plan review and approval by the City Council shall be required for any Planned Development District
or Specific Use Permit application. New construction or any enlargement of an existing structure exceeding 25%
of the existing building footprint for all nonresidential, mixed use, single-family attached, and multifamily
projects and structures may be approved administratively by the City Manager or his/her designee. (Ordinance
494-15, sec. III, adopted 5/21/15)
B. No building permit shall be issued for any of the above developments until a site plan and all other required
engineering/construction plans are first approved by the City. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all
construction and development conforms to the site plan and engineering/construction plans, as approved by the
City.
SECTION 5.2.3 - EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
Site plan review shall not be required for single-family detached residential developments.
SECTION 5.2.4 - SITE PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
A. All required items and/or information for an application for a site plan must be received by the City
Manager or his/her designee in order for the application to be considered complete, pursuant to Section 5.2.5.
Incomplete submissions will not be reviewed until all deficient items and information have been received. The
City will provide to the applicant not later than the 10th business day after the date the application is filed
written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the
application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided. The site plan shall be prepared by a
professional engineer (P.E.), land planner, architect or surveyor, at a scale no smaller than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), and it shall clearly show in detail how the site will be constructed. The site plan shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
1. An application form, provided by the City, with notarized signatures of the owner or his/her
designated representative if the applicant is not the owner of the subject property.
2. Appropriate filing fee, as set forth in the currently adopted City Fee Schedule.
3. Verification that all taxes and assessments on the subject property have been paid.
4. Plans submitted shall be on sheets twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36") or, if
approved by the City Manager or his/her designee, eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17").
5. A title block within the lower right-hand corner of the site plan with the proposed name of the
project/subdivision, the name and address of the owner/developer and the land planner, engineer[,]
architect or surveyor responsible for the plan, the scale of the drawing (both written and graphic
scale), the date the drawing was prepared, total site acreage, and the location of the property
according to the abstract and survey records of Tarrant County, Texas;
6. A vicinity or location map that shows the location of the proposed development within the City,
and in relationship to existing roadways;
7. The boundary survey limits of the tract and each proposed lot and scale distances with north
clearly indicated;
8. The names of adjacent additions or subdivisions or the name of the owners of record and
recording information for adjacent parcels of unplatted land, including parcels on the other sides of
roads, creeks, etc.;
9. The existing zoning and existing/proposed uses on adjacent land; the location, width and names
of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract; any existing
easements, with recording information; existing buildings; railroad rights-of-way; topography
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/536
(contours at two-foot intervals) with existing drainage channels or creeks, including the 100-year
floodplain, if applicable; any other important natural features, such as rock outcroppings, caves,
wildlife habitats, etc.; and all substantial natural vegetation;
10. Proposed strategies for tree preservation including showing individual trees or tree masses that
will be preserved, and the techniques that will be used to protect them during construction;
11. The layout and width (right-of-way lines and curb lines) of existing and proposed
thoroughfares, collector streets and/or intersections, and specific configuration of proposed streets,
lots and blocks, proposed driveways including driveway widths and distances between driveways,
proposed median openings and left turn lanes on future divided roadways and existing and planned
driveways on the opposite side of divided roadways must also be shown for coordination and sharing
of future median openings;
12. Specific locations and footprints of buildings, including but not limited to proposed
nonresidential and residential densities; building heights, square footages (for multi-tenant or multipurpose
buildings, show square footage for each intended use), massing, orientation, loading/service
areas (including proposed screening), recycling containers, compactors and dumpster enclosures
(including proposed screening), pedestrian walkways, and parking areas (including parking ratio
calculations); any proposed sites for parks, schools, public facilities, public or private open space;
floodplains/drainageways; all proposed and existing utilities and easements; drainage structures;
retention/detention ponds with proposed aesthetic treatments; screening walls; fences; signage; fire
lanes and fire hydrants; lighting; visibility easements; and other pertinent development-related
features;
13. A landscape plan showing turf areas, tree types and sizes, screening walls, ornamental
plantings, planting schedule (including species, planted height, spacing, container/caliper size,
numbers of each plant material, etc.) any existing wooded areas, trees to be planted, and irrigation
plans, if required; and
14. Color building facade (elevation) plans showing elevations with any attached (wall-mounted)
signage to be used, as determined appropriate by the City Manager or his/her designee.
15. General layout for the required public improvements, such as water, wastewater, grading/storm
drainage, water quality, fire lanes and hydrants, screening and landscaping, the quantity of which
shall be determined by the City Manager or his/her designee.
16. Reduced copies (11" x 17") of the site plan as required by the City Manager or his/her
designee.
17. One set of all site plan pages submitted to the City in a readily readable digital format.
18. Any additional information/materials, such as plans, maps, exhibits, legal description of
property, information about proposed uses, and other information deemed necessary by the City
Manager or his/her designee in order to ensure that the development request is understood.
B. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the City is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute
a separate list of specific requirements for site plan review applications. Upon periodic review, the City Manager
or his/her designee shall have the authority to update such requirements for site plan and development review
applications. It is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, these requirements.
C. Extent of Area that should be Included in a Site Plan. When the overall development project is to be
developed in phases, the site plan area shall include only the portion of the overall property that is to be
developed/constructed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/536
SECTION 5.2.5 - LAPSE OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL
The approval of a site plan shall be effective for a period of two (2) years and shall thereafter lapse unless
progress has been made on the construction of the project in accordance with the provisions of Section 245.005
of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
SECTION 5.2.6 - EXTENSION AND REINSTATEMENT PROCEDURE
A. Before a site plan expires, the applicant may submit to the City a request to extend the time period of the
site plan. The request will be considered by the City Council.
B. If no request for extension for a site plan is received, then the site plan will be considered null and void.
Any new request for site plan approval shall be deemed a “new project”; shall be submitted with a new
application form, with a new filing fee, and with new plans and materials in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this Ordinance.
C. In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the City Council shall take into account the
reasons for the lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original
approval, and the extent to which development regulations would apply to the site plan at that point in time.
SECTION 5.3 SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
SECTION 5.3.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Nature of Specific Use. A specific use is a land use which, because of its unique nature, is compatible with
the permitted land uses in a given zoning district only upon a determination that the external effects of the use in
relation to the existing and planned uses of adjoining property and the neighborhood can be mitigated through
imposition of certain standards and conditions. This Section sets forth the standards used to evaluate proposed
special uses and the procedures for approving Specific Use Permit applications.
B. Permit Required. No specific use shall be established and no building permit shall be issued for any use
designated as a specific use within any zoning district until a Specific Use Permit (SUP) is issued in accordance
with the provisions of this Ordinance. An application for an SUP shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan
prepared in the manner described in Section 5.2 of this Ordinance. The site plan shall illustrate the proposed use
to be established, its relationship to adjoining properties, and how it meets the approval standards set forth in
Section 5.2.
SECTION 5.3.2 - STATUS OF SPECIALLY PERMITTED USES
The following general rules apply to all special uses:
A. The designation of a use in a zoning district as may be permitted by SUP in Section 4.12 of this
Ordinance does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use will be approved.
B. Approval of an SUP shall authorize only the particular use for which the SUP is issued.
C. No use authorized by an SUP shall be enlarged, extended or relocated, nor may the number of
dwelling units be increased, unless an application is made for approval of a new Specific Use Permit.
D. Development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all the permits
and approvals required by these zoning regulations, the City Code of Ordinances, and any permits
that may be required by regional, State or Federal agencies.
SECTION 5.3.3 - APPLICATION FOR SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/536
A. Application Requirements. An application for a Specific Use Permit may be submitted by the property
owner or by the property owner's designated representative to the City. The application shall be accompanied by
a site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.2 of this Ordinance. If a base zoning
district amendment is required or requested, such rezoning application shall accompany the application for a
Specific Use Permit.
B. Subdivision Approval. If the proposed use requires a division of or the platting of land, an application for
the first step in subdivision approval shall be submitted in conjunction with the application for a Specific Use
Permit. Approval of the Specific Use Permit shall not become effective until final approval of the subdivision
application provided that, if the land is to be divided and developed in phases, the approval of the Specific Use
Permit shall take effect upon final plat approval of the phase of the subdivision containing the property on which
the special use is to be located.
SECTION 5.3.4 - PROCEDURES FOR SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
A. City Council Action. The City Council shall be the final decision-maker on applications for Specific Use
Permits. Following a public hearing, the City Council shall approve, modify or deny the proposal for a Specific
Use Permit in accordance with Section 5.1 of this Ordinance. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured
at the location, the application for Specific Use Permit shall be denied as being incompatible with existing uses
or with other uses permitted by right in the district.
SECTION 5.3.5 - STANDARDS
A. Factors for Consideration. When considering applications for a Specific Use Permit, the City Council, in
rendering its decision on the application shall, on the basis of the concept plan/site plan and other information
submitted, evaluate the impact of the special use on, and the compatibility of the use with, surrounding
properties and neighborhoods to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. The City Council
shall specifically consider the extent to which:
1. The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies
contained in the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
2. The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning
district regulations;
3. The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent
development and neighborhoods and, as required by the particular circumstances, includes
improvements or modifications either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate
development-related adverse impacts, including but not limited to:
a) Adequate ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular
reference to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, and access in case of fire;
b) Off-street parking and loading areas;
c) Refuse and service areas;
d) Utilities with reference to location, availability, and compatibility;
e) Screening and buffering features to minimize visual impacts, and/or setbacks from
adjacent uses;
f) Control of signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic
safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district;
g) Required yards and open space;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/536
h) Height and bulk of structures;
i) Hours of operation;
j) Exterior construction material and building design; and
k) Roadway adjustments, traffic-control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to
control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate developmentgenerated
traffic on neighborhood streets.
4. The proposed use is not materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and
welfare, or results in material damage or prejudice to other property in the vicinity.
B. Conditions. In approving the application the City Council may impose such additional conditions as are
reasonably necessary to assure compliance with these standards and the purpose and intent of this Section, in
accordance with the procedures in Section 5.1 of this Ordinance. Such additional conditions shall exceed the
minimum standards contained herein or in any other applicable City Code or Ordinance, and they cannot relax
or grant relief from any of the City's minimum standards. Any conditions imposed shall be set forth in the
ordinance approving the specific use, and shall be incorporated into or noted on the concept plan or site plan for
final approval. The City Manager or his/her designee shall verify that the plan incorporates all conditions set
forth in the ordinance authorizing the special use, and shall sign the plan to indicate final approval. The City
shall maintain a record of such approved special uses and the site plans and conditions attached thereto.
C. Prohibition on Waivers and Variances. The foregoing additional conditions shall not be subject to variances
that otherwise could be granted by the Board of Adjustment nor may conditions imposed by the City Council
subsequently be waived or varied by the BOA. In conformity with the authority of the City Council to authorize
special uses, the City Council may waive or modify specific standards otherwise made applicable to the use by
this Ordinance, to secure the general objectives of this Section.
SECTION 5.3.6 - EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION
A Specific Use Permit shall automatically expire if a building permit is not issued and construction begun within
180 days of the granting of the Specific Use Permit; [or] the use has not begun operation (if no construction is
required) within 180 days of the granting of the specific use permit.
The City Council may extend the specific use permit for a period of 180 days if the applicant requests the
extension prior to the expiration of the specific use permit.
SECTION 5.3.7 - MINOR AMENDMENTS
Upon request of the applicant, the City Manager or his/her designee may authorize minor amendments to a
Specific Use Permit so long as such minor amendments do not change the land use or substantially change the
character, development standards, or design of the development as shown on the approved detailed plan. For
purposes of this provision, a “substantial change” shall mean a change which will increase the number of
proposed dwelling units, increase the floor-to-area ratio, size of structure, height, lot coverage, or number of
stories or buildings, reduce lot, or yard size, decrease the amount of required off-street parking spaces, change
types of buildings, setbacks, street access points, or lots, increase density, change traffic patterns, or alter the
basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent properties. The City Manager or his/her designee
shall make such authorization only in writing and such document shall be placed in the ordinance file governing
the specific plan.
SECTION 5.3.8 - USE REGULATIONS
Uses allowed by SUP are specified in Section 4.12 Principal Permitted Uses.
SECTION 5.4 NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/536
SECTION 5.4.1 - GENERALLY
Within the districts established by this ordinance, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exists lots and
uses of land, buildings and structures, uses of land and buildings in combination, and characteristics of use
which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or
restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendments. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit
these nonconformities to continue under regulations contained herein until they are removed, but not to
encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that such nonconformities shall not be enlarged
upon, expanded, or extended, not be used as grounds for adding other buildings and structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district.
SECTION 5.4.2 - REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS
Nonconforming uses are incompatible with permitted uses. Therefore, no nonconforming use of land or
building, nonconforming lot or yard, or any nonconforming structure shall be enlarged, changed, altered or
repaired except in conformance with the regulations contained in this article.
Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming structure, provided that no structural alterations shall
be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the structure is changed to a conforming use and
provided that no additional dwelling units shall be added where the nonconforming use results from there being
more dwelling units on the lot than is permissible in the district in which the building is located. The Board of
Adjustment shall have the authority after a hearing to grant extension of a building nonconforming as to uses not
to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground area of the same in case of evident hardship, subject to the
yard restrictions herein provided.
SECTION 5.4.3 - USE
The lawful use of “land” existing at the time of the passing of this Ordinance, although such does not conform to
the provisions hereof, may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued, any future use of said
premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5.4.4 - CHANGE OF USE
A nonconforming use, if changed to conforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming
use. A nonconforming use, may not thereafter be changed unless to an equal or to a more restricted use.
SECTION 5.4.5 - DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT
A. If, at the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereof, a lawful use of land exists which would not
be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, the use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, provided:
1. The legal nonconforming use does not cease due to discontinuance or abandonment;
2. The legal nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance, unless provided for herein; or
3. The legal nonconforming use shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to any portion of the same
lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this ordinance.
B. For the purpose of this section, “abandonment” shall be defined as intent by the owner to permanently
close or cease the use, coupled with any act or statement by the owner that manifests such intent. The following
conditions, events or conduct shall be presumed to constitute intent to abandon a legal nonconforming use:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/536
1. the closure or cessation of the nonconforming use for a period of one hundred twenty (120)
consecutive days; or
2. the failure of the owner to repair the structure or property used to operate the nonconforming use
within thirty (30) days after the chief building official or code enforcement officer has given the
owner written notice that the building, structure or property is:
a) in an advanced stage of dilapidation, as determined by the City Manager or his/her
designee;
b) in violation of one or more applicable health and safety codes adopted by the City that
govern the use or condition of structures designed for human occupancy, as amended, including
but not limited to the applicable building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, and life safety
codes as adopted by the City; or
c) otherwise unsafe for the continuation of the current use or occupancy.
C. For the purpose of this section, “discontinuance” shall be defined as follows:
1. When a legal nonconforming use has historically been operated on a continuous basis, a closure
or cessation of a use for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, irrespective of
whether the owner has actual intent to abandon the use; or
2. When a legal nonconforming use has historically been operated only on a seasonal basis, such
use shall be deemed to have been discontinued, regardless of whether the owner has actual intent to
abandon the use, if either:
a) the structure or property upon or in which the use has been operated is closed or the
nonconforming use ceases to operate for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
or
b) the structure or property upon or in which the use has been operated is closed or the
nonconforming use ceases to operate in a bona-fide manner during one or more normal and
customary seasons or periods of operation during which the nonconforming use has historically
been operated.
SECTION 5.4.6 - EXTENSION
Upon evidence of hardship, the Board of Adjustment shall have the power to extend the time limits in Section
5.4.5 above not to exceed six (6) months.
SECTION 5.4.7 - DESTRUCTION
A building occupied by a nonconforming use that is destroyed by fire or the elements may not be reconstructed
or rebuilt except to conform to provisions of this Ordinance. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other
causes, not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its value, the Building Official may issue a permit for
reconstruction. If greater than fifty percent (50%) and less than total, the Board of Adjustment may grant permit
for repair after public hearing, having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered
in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and
the conservation and preservation of property.
SECTION 5.4.8 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for all nonconforming uses.
SECTION 5.4.9 - CONSTRUCTION COMPLETION REQUIREMENT
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/536
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for
which a legal building permit has been heretofore issued, provided such construction shall have been started and
shall be diligently prosecuted to completion.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
SECTION 5.4.10 - NONCONFORMITY OF RECORD
All legally conforming platted lots and all legally constructed structures existing prior to the effective date of
this ordinance shall be deemed to continue to be legally nonconforming as of the effective date of this ordinance.
This provision shall apply even though such lot or structure fails to meet the minimum requirements for area,
width, or both, as governed by the applicable area regulations for that particular zoning district; however, all
other provisions of the applicable zoning district area regulations, such as setback distances, heights, and percent
of lot coverage shall apply. Any voluntary change, alteration, or modification decreasing the area of any said lot
or structure shall conform to these zoning regulations contained herein or be authorized by variance granted by
the Board of Adjustment. A single-family residential nonconformity of record that is destroyed by fire or other
natural disaster may be rebuilt to the original footprint by right. (Ordinance 539-18, att. A, adopted 3/1/18)
SECTION 5.4.11 - CONDITIONS FOR CONTINUATION
Any nonconforming use, structure or lot which lawfully existed as of the effective date of this ordinance and
which remains nonconforming; any use, structure or lot which has become nonconforming due to the acquisition
of property for the purposes of right-of-way use by a governmental agency as part of an approved project; and
any use, structure or lot which has become nonconforming as a result of the adoption of this ordinance or any
subsequent reclassification of zoning districts or other amendment to this ordinance, may be continued or
maintained only in accordance with the terms of this Section.
SECTION 5.4.12 - RIGHT TO PROCEED PRESERVED
Nothing contained in this Section is intended to alter any rights that may have accrued under prior regulations,
pursuant to sections 43.002, and 245.001 to 245.007 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
SECTION 5.4.13 - AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING LAND USES AND STRUCTURES
A. The City Council may initiate the process to amortize a nonconforming land use or structure by filing an
application to the Board of Adjustment. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land and structure
shall be taken with due regard for the investment of the persons affected when considered in the light of the
public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation
and preservation of property.
B. The City Council may require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structure under a plan
whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking
into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the
regulations of this Subchapter.
1. Criteria for determining amortization period. Before the Board of Adjustment may determine an
amortization period, it must consider the following factors:
a) The owner's capital investment in the structures on the property at the time the use became
nonconforming;
b) The amount of the investment realized to date and the amount remaining, if any, to be
recovered during the amortization period;
c) The life expectancy of the investment;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/536
d) The existence or nonexistence of lease obligations, as well as any contingency clauses
therein permitting termination of such leases;
e) Removal costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date; and
f) Other costs and expenses that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination
date.
C. If the City Council establishes a termination date for a nonconforming use, the use must cease operations
on that date and the owner may not operate it after that date unless it becomes a conforming use.
ARTICLE 6 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 6.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose and intent of these regulations are to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen
congestion in the streets and alleys; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation and circulation; to
conserve the value of building and land uses; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. To this end, in
all zoned districts, there shall be provided at the time any use is established or expanded, or any building is
erected or structurally altered (except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this section) minimum off-street
parking in conformance with the requirements established herein.
SECTION 6.2 LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except that
where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces
are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be
located and maintained not to exceed three hundred (300') feet from an institutional or other nonresidential
building served.
A. Up to fifty (50%) percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, public auditoriums,
bowling alleys, dance halls, nightclubs or cafes, and up to one hundred (100%) percent of the parking
spaces required for a church or school auditorium, may be provided and used jointly by banks,
offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or
operated during the same hours; provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly
executed and filed as specified below.
B. In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building
or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement
assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties
concerned, approved as to form and execution by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the
application for a building permit.
C. No required off-street parking space shall be located within any public highway, street or alley
right-of-way.
SECTION 6.3 COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACE SIZES AND PARKING AREAS
In computing the minimum size and area of parking spaces and parking areas the following rules shall govern:
A. Parking Space Size: No parking space shall be less than ten (10') feet in width by twenty (20')
feet in length.
SECTION 6.4 RULES FOR THE COMPUTATION OF THE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/536
In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
A. Floor Area shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
B. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest
whole number.
C. The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as
required for a use of similar nature as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee; or in the
case where the City Manager is not able to make this determination, then the City Council shall make
the determination.
D. Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this ordinance
is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating
capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10%) percent or more in the number of
existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change.
Whenever a conforming building or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance is
enlarged to the extent of fifty (50%) percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or
use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
E. In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
SECTION 6.5 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for residential and nonresidential uses shall be in
conformance with the following:
A. Residential Uses
1. Single-Family Detached Dwellings: two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
2. Duplex Dwelling: two (2) spaces per dwelling unit plus one (1) additional space for guest
parking (total of five (5) spaces required)
3. Multifamily Dwelling (Apartments, Condominiums, Apartment Hotels, Single-Family
Attached, etc.);
a) 1 Bedroom - 1.50 spaces
b) 2 Bedroom - 1.75 spaces
c) 3 Bedroom - 2.00 spaces
d) Greater than 3 Bedroom - 1 space per bedroom
Guest Parking:
(1) 0 - 30 spaces: 1 space per 5 required spaces
(2) 31 - 60 spaces: 5 spaces + 1 per 10 required spaces
(3) Over 60 spaces: 8 spaces + 1 per each 15 required spaces over 60
4. Boarding House or Rooming House: one (1) space per each bed or individual sleeping
room.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/536
5. Nursing, Rest or Convalescent Home, Assisted Living, Senior Citizens Apartment
Dwelling, or other similar dwelling or institution: one (1) space per each three (3) beds or one
(1) space per individual sleeping unit, whichever is greater.
B. Nonresidential Uses:
1. Schools:
a) Elementary: one (1) space for each classroom or teaching station, plus one (1)
additional space for each four (4) seats in any auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of
assembly, whichever is greater.
b) Junior High/Middle School: Same requirements as for elementary schools.
c) High School: one (1) space for each classroom or teaching station, plus one (1)
additional space for each three (3) students accommodated in the school.
d) College or University: Same requirements as for high schools.
e) Day Care Centers or Kindergarten: one (1) space per each five (5) pupils
accommodated, plus sufficient space to accommodate off-street circulation for pickup and
delivery of children by auto.
2. Churches and Places of Worship: one (1) space for each three (3) seats in the main
sanctuary or auditorium.
3. Other Institutions and Special Uses:
a) Hospital, General Acute Care: one (1) space per each bed.
b) Hospital, Chronic Care: one (1) space per each three (3) beds.
c) Institution for Alcoholic, Narcotic or Psychiatric Patients: one (1) space for each two
(2) employees or attendants.
d) Health or Fitness Center: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF) square feet of
floor area.
e) Institutions of a Philanthropic Nature: ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each
employee.
4. Community Facilities.
a) Art Gallery or Museum: one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF) square feet
of floor area.
b) Library: one (1) space per each five hundred (500 SF) square feet of floor area.
c) Community Center (public or private): one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF)
square feet of floor area.
d) Meeting Rooms and Places of Public Assembly: one (1) space per each three (3)
seats or one (1) space per each 100 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
e) Lodge or Fraternal Organization: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF)
square feet of floor area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/536
5. Personal Service (including, but not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, and nail salons)
and Retail uses.
a) Personal Service Shop or Establishment: one (1) space per each two hundred (200
SF) square feet of floor area.
b) Mortuary/Funeral Home: one (1) space per each fifty (50 SF) square feet of floor
area in slumber rooms, parlors, and individual service rooms, or one (1) space per each
two (2) seats accommodated in a chapel area, whichever is greater.
c) Furniture Stores and Appliance Stores: one (1) space per each four hundred (400 SF)
square feet of floor area.
d) Gasoline Service Stations: Minimum of six (6) spaces. (For Gasoline sales in
combination with convenience stores - both gasoline service station and retail store
calculations must be used)
e) Retail Stores or Shops: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF) square feet of
floor area.
f) Open (outdoor) Retail Sales: one (1) space per each six hundred (600 SF) square feet
of open site area utilized, exclusive of buildings.
6. Office, Professional or Financial Uses.
a) Banks, Savings and Loan or other similar financial establishments: one (1) space per
each three hundred (300 SF) square feet of floor area.
b) Doctor's Offices and Medical Clinics: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF)
square feet of floor area.
c) Veterinarian Offices or Clinics: one (1) space per each three hundred (300 SF) square
feet of floor area.
d) Offices, General: one (1) space per each three hundred (300 sq. ft.) square feet of
floor area.
e) Dance, Music, Display or Drama Studios: one (1) space per each two hundred (200
SF) square feet of floor area.
f) Business, Trade or Craft School: one (1) space per each three (3) students in
attendance at peak time of day.
7. Transient Lodging Uses.
a) Hotel, Motel: one (1) space per each room, unit or guest accommodation plus
specific requirements for restaurants, cocktail lounges, and related facilities prescribed
elsewhere in this section.
b) Seasonal Camp or Cabin: one (1) space per each sleeping unit or cabin.
8. Eating and Drinking Establishments.
a) Restaurant, Cafeteria or Cafe: one (1) space per each three (3) seats under maximum
seating arrangement, or one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor
area, whichever is greater.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/536
b) Drive-In Eating and Drinking Establishments: twelve (12) spaces plus one (1) space
per each fifty (50 SF) square feet of floor area.
c) Cocktail Lounges, Taverns and Similar Establishments: one (1) space per each one
hundred (100 [sq.] ft.) square feet of floor area.
9. Social, Recreation and Entertainment Uses.
a) Commercial Amusement Establishments: one (1) space per each one hundred (100
SF) square feet of floor area.
b) Bowling Alley: six (6) spaces per each bowling lane.
c) Private Club or Nightclub: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet
of floor area.
d) Theater: one (1) space per each three (3) seats.
e) Country Club: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area,
exclusive of locker rooms and bathhouses.
f) Recreation Club or Area, Private: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF)
square feet of floor area.
g) Golf Course: five (5) spaces per each green.
h) Dance Hall or Ballroom: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of
floor area.
i) Sports Arena, Stadium or Gymnasium: one (1) space per each four (4) seats or bench
seating spaces.
10. Wholesale, Warehousing, Enclosed Storage, Manufacturing, Processing and Repairing
Uses.
a) Wholesale, Warehousing and Enclosed Storage: one (1) space per each two (2)
employees, or one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF) square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater.
b) Manufacturing, Processing or Repairing: one (1) space per each two (2) employees,
or one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF) square feet of floor area, whichever is
greater.
c) Building Materials/Lumber Yard: one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF)
square feet of site area.
d) Storage Yards for Sand, Gravel or Petroleum Products: one (1) space per each two
thousand (2,000 SF) square feet of site area.
SECTION 6.6 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
A. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract located within any zoning district unless the area upon which
such vehicle is parked is paved with a hard surface. Hard surface shall not be defined as concrete pavers, paver
stones, concrete blocks or similar material. Hard surface shall be defined as asphalt or concrete except as
follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/536
1. On residential lots where the driveway exceeds 150 feet alternate materials approved by the
street department and fire marshal may be utilized. Materials shall be dust-free all-weather and
capable of supporting a 56,000 pound axle load.
2. On Industrial zoned properties where heavy truck loads are required, alternative materials
approved by the street department and fire marshal may be utilized. Materials shall be all-weather
and capable of supporting a 56,000 pound axle load. Employee and customer parking shall meet the
design standards of this Section.
B. In computing the parking requirements for any lot, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the
specific parking space requirements for each use included on that lot.
C. Where multiple uses are proposed for a building, the parking requirements shall be calculated on the basis
of the most restrictive requirements unless specific areas of different uses are delineated by floor or building
segment.
D. Wherever a nonresidential parking lot is located across the street from, or adjacent to, residentially zoned
property, and is designed so that headlight beams will shine into residences (whether or not such residences have
been built at the time the parking lot is constructed), an irrigated earthen berm, evergreen shrubs or a wall or
fence or other screening material of not less than three (3) feet in height above the finished grade of the off-street
parking area shall be erected and maintained so as to provide a headlight screen for the residential zoning
district.
E. Parking spaces shall be provided with sufficient space for entering and exiting without backing onto a
public street. Parking spaces on the perimeter of the parking lot and abutting a property line shall have a wheel
stop or curb as a barrier two (2) feet from the end of the parking space.
F. For MF Districts, the off-street parking spaces designated for each dwelling unit shall be located within one
hundred (100) feet of the dwelling unit served by such spaces.
G. For properties zoned residential or multifamily, no parking space, garage, carport, or other automobile
storage space or structure shall be used for the storage or parking of any truck, truck trailer, van, recreational
vehicle, or boat exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) ton capacity.
H. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract within an area zoned as residential or multifamily when such
vehicle is greater than thirty (30) feet in overall length (including tongue), including a fifth-wheel trailer, bus or
recreational vehicle, unless the following conditions are met:
1. The vehicle is parked in a building, either attached to the main residential building or detached,
completely enclosed by three walls and a roof, and the open side of the building shall have an opaque
gate at least six (6) feet in height. A building used to meet the foregoing requirement shall comply
with all applicable area, height, and setback requirements for attached or detached accessory
buildings;
2. The vehicle is wholly parked on a hard surface driveway behind the front building line of the
residence;
3. The vehicle may not be parked beside a structure in the required side yards;
4. On corner lots, no parking shall be allowed within 15 feet from the side property line adjacent to
a street.
5. The vehicle may not be used as overnight sleeping quarters for more than two (2) consecutive
nights within a six (6) month period of time.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/536
I. For the SF-10, SF-6, SF-5, D, and MF districts, no heavy load vehicle, truck trailer, truck tractor,
manufactured home, motor home, camper, trailer, boat, machinery, farm equipment or machinery, or any other
similar equipment or machinery shall be parked or left standing for more than two (2) days out of any
consecutive seven (7) day period within the front yard between the front building line and the front property line
or within the side yard of a corner lot between the side building line and the side property line on the side of the
lot abutting a street or public right-of-way.
J. In no instance shall any heavy load vehicle, truck trailer, truck tractor, manufactured home, motor home,
camper, trailer, boat, machinery, farm equipment or machinery, or any other similar equipment or machinery
including motor vehicles, trucks or vans be parked or left standing at any time on a surface other than a driveway
or hard surface paved parking lot.
K. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract located in an area zoned as residential or multifamily when such
vehicle is situated on blocks, jacks or anything other than the wheels or mechanism that are originally designed
to equip such vehicles for traveling purposes.
L. Cars, vans, trucks, recreational vehicles, trailers, or boats shall not be permanently connected to sewer
lines, water lines, or electricity. The recreational vehicle, trailer, or boat may be connected to electricity
temporarily for charging batteries.
M. Parking spaces and loading spaces shall be connected by an asphalt or concrete paved driveway (of
approved specifications) to a street or alley where curb cuts are provided. Drainage shall be in accordance with
city standards.
N. Where a lot or tract of land is used for a combination of uses or mixed uses, the off-street parking
requirements shall be the composite or sum of the requirements for each type of use and no off-street parking
space provided for one type use or building shall be included in calculating the off-street parking requirements
for any other use or building except as prescribed by ordinance.
O. No part of a parked vehicle may extend over the public sidewalk or the public right-of-way.
P. STACKING REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVE-THRU FACILITIES: A stacking space shall be an area on a
site measuring eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet with direct forward access to a service window or station of a
drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or
maneuvering area.
1. For kiosks, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided.
2. For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of seven (7) stacking spaces
shall be provided.
3. For banks with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical,
shall be provided with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces.
Q. OVERSIZED VEHICLES. No vehicle rated to have a carry capacity exceeding one (1) ton shall be parked
on a lot or tract located in an area zoned as residential or multifamily unless such vehicle is being actively
loaded or unloaded.
SECTION 6.7 NONCONFORMING STATUS OF PARKING AREAS
Any lawful driveway that was in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be deemed legal
nonconforming. Should the primary structure on the property where the nonconforming driveway is located be
destroyed by more than 50%, or be deemed discontinued or abandoned in the case of a nonresidential use, the
property shall conform to the provisions set forth in this Article. Normal repairs, including [adding] additional
gravel to the existing driveway shall be allowed; however, no expansion to the existing driveway shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/536
allowed. Expansions to existing driveways will require compliance with the provisions as set forth in this
Article.
SECTION 6.8 VISIBILITY TRIANGLE REQUIRED
No fence, screen wall or visual barrier shall be located or placed where it obstructs the vision of motor vehicle
drivers approaching any street or driveway intersection. At all street or driveway intersections clear visibility
shall be maintained across the lot for a proper distance along both streets and driveways.
SECTION 6.9 LOCATION OF LOADING SPACES
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained for all retail, commercial and industrial uses and
structures for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies, and materials within a building or on the lot or tract
adjacent thereto. Such spaces may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck
berth within a building or structure, however no portion of the off-street, loading space shall be located within or
extend into any public street, highway or alley right-of-way.
SECTION 6.10 COMPUTATION OF OFF-STREET [LOADING SPACES] AND LOADING AREAS
At least one-half (1/2) of the required off-street loading spaces or truck berths shall have a minimum dimension
of ten (10') feet by fifty (50') feet each and the remaining required spaces or berths shall have a minimum
dimension of ten (10') feet by twenty-five (25') feet each - exclusive of turnaround and maneuvering space.
SECTION 6.11 RULES FOR THE COMPUTATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
A. No building, structure or part thereof used for nonresidential purposes in any commercial district shall
hereafter be enlarged or extended unless off-street loading space is provided in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
B. No building, structure or part thereof used for nonresidential purposes in any industrial district shall
hereafter be enlarged or extended to provide a gross floor area of twenty-five thousand (25,000 SF) square feet
or more unless off-street parking is provided in accordance with the provisions of this section.
SECTION 6.12 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED
The minimum number of off-street loading spaces required shall be in conformance with the following
schedules:
A. Retail, Service (except personal service), Commercial and Industrial Uses.
SF of Floor Area In Building or
Structure
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Loading Spaces or Berths Required
0,000 to 9,999 None
10,000 to 49,999 1
50,000 to 99,999 2
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/536
100,000 to 199,999 3
Each additional 100,000 1 additional
B. Office Buildings, Hotels/Motels, Restaurants and Similar Establishments
SF of Floor Area In Building or
Structure
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Loading Spaces or Berths Required
0,000 to 49,999 None
50,000 to 149,999 1
150,000 to 299,999 2
300,000 to 499,999 3
500,000 to 999,999 4
Each additional 100,000 1 additional
ARTICLE 7 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION 7.1 DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION 7.1.1 - EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS, GENERALLY
The following design standards shall apply generally and by use type within the zoning district in which the
development is proposed.
A. Masonry Construction. This term shall be construed to mean that form of construction
composed of brick, stone, decorative concrete block or tile, or other similar building units or
materials (or combination of these materials) laid up unit by unit and set [in] mortar, and shall
exclude wall area devoted to doors and windows. As applicable to meeting minimum requirements
for the exterior construction of building[s] within each zoning district, this term shall include the
following materials:
1. Hard Fired Brick. Kiln fired clay or slate material. Brick may include concrete brick if it is
to the same ASTM standard for construction as typical hard fired clay brick. Brick shall be
severe weather grades; minimum thickness of three (3") inches when applied as a veneer; and
shall not include unfired or under-fired clay, sand, or shale brick.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/536
2. Stone. Stone shall include naturally occurring granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock,
and other similar hard and durable all-weather stone that is customarily used in exterior
building construction. Stone may also include cast- or manufactured-stone product, provided
that such product yields a highly textured, stone-like appearance; its coloration is integral to the
masonry materials and shall not be painted or sprayed on; and it is demonstrated to be highly
durable and maintenance-free. Natural or man-made stone shall have a minimum thickness that
meets industry standards.
3. Decorative Concrete Block. Decorative Concrete Block shall include highly textured
finish, such as split-face, indented, hammered, fluted, ribbed or similar architectural finish.
Coloration shall be integral to the masonry material and shall not be painted or sprayed on.
Decorative Concrete Block shall have a minimum thickness that meets industry standards when
applied as a veneer and shall not include lightweight or featherweight concrete block or
cinderblock units. Decorative Concrete Block shall not be used as a material in single-family,
duplex, multifamily, or single-family attached structures.
4. Concrete Pre-Cast or Tilt-Wall Panels. This material shall only be allowed if a highly
textured architectural finish which appears texturally as face brick or stone. Concrete pre-cast or
tilt-wall panels may be brick-like or stone-like in appearance. Coloration of the material shall
be integral to the masonry material and shall not be painted on or sprayed on. This material
shall not include smooth, untextured or inadequately textured finishes. Concrete pre-cast or tiltwall
panels shall not be used as a material in single-family, duplex, multifamily, or singlefamily
attached structures.
5. Glass Blocks or Tiles. This material shall be of the type customarily used in exterior
building construction. It shall not comprise more than thirty (30%) percent of any exterior wall
surface, nor more than twenty (20%) of the building's total exterior on all wall surfaces
combined. It shall not be highly reflective or contain a mirror-like finish.
B. Prohibited Materials and colors. Unless specifically approved by the City Council on an
approved site plan for single-family, single-family attached, attached multifamily, institutional,
office, retail, commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structures, the following materials shall
not qualify or be defined as “masonry construction” in meeting the minimum requirements for the
exterior construction of buildings:
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
1. Exterior plaster, adobe or mortar wash, surface materials; (Ordinance 480-14 adopted
11/20/14; Ordinance 494-15, sec. IV, adopted 5/21/15)
2. Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), acrylic matrix, synthetic plaster, or other
similar synthetic material;
3. Cementitious fiber board siding (such as “Hardy Plank, Hardy Board, etc.), unless
otherwise provided herein;
4. PVC or other plastic-based siding materials;
5. Lightweight or featherweight concrete blocks, cinderblocks or other lightweight based
masonry unit;
6. Any other cementitious product not listed above.
7. Any pastel or bright colors painted directly to the surface of the exterior structure. All
structures shall have an exterior color of muted earth tones such as, but not limited to, reds,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/536
browns, tans, grays, and greens.
SECTION 7.1.2 - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
The standards and criteria contained within this subsection are deemed to be the minimum standards and shall
apply to all new building construction or redevelopment occurring within the City unless otherwise stated in this
Ordinance.
A. Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Zoning Districts
1. The design standards for all single-family and duplex residential structures within the SF-
10, SF-6, SF-5 and D (Duplex) District shall be as follows:
2. All single-family and two-family (duplex) structures shall be of exterior fire-resistant
construction, and shall have a minimum of eighty (80%) percent masonry construction, more or
less equally distributed around all sides of the structure, for the first story of the structure, and a
minimum of fifty (50%) percent masonry construction, more or less equally distributed around
all sides, for any additional story above the first floor.
3. Areas of a single-family or duplex structure's facade that are devoted to windows, doors,
covered porches or patios that have a minimum size of four feet (4') deep and eight (8') feet
wide (thirty-two (32) square feet), chimneys, breezeways, or courtyards shall not be counted as
“wall surface” when calculating the masonry requirement.
4. Prohibited materials. Concrete, concrete block, vinyl, plastic, or metal exterior
construction is not permitted on any single-family or duplex residential structure.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
5. Roof materials for a single-family or two-family (duplex) structure shall be comprised of
an architectural, laminated, dimensional composition shingle (thirty (30) year minimum); Metal
roofing with enamel baked finish or architectural grade metal roofing products which are
stamped to appear as wood shakes, dimensional shingles, wood shingles, slate or tile; or terracotta
or slate tile. All unfinished metal roofing is prohibited. Acceptable colors are: Earth tones
are defined as a color scheme that draws from a color palette of browns, tans, warm grays, and
greens. The colors in an earth tone scheme are muted and flat in an emulation of the natural
colors found in dirt, moss, trees and rocks, and the color pallet [palette] found in the
manufacture's metal roofing with enamel baked finish. If roof is not visible to the public, there
is no pitch requirement (i.e. parapet roof); if roof is visible to the public a minimum 6:12 pitch
is required. (Ordinance 521-17 adopted 4/20/17)
6. Chimney Stacks. All chimney stacks for single-family or duplex structures shall be of one
hundred (100%) percent masonry construction or may be constructed of cementitious fiber
board.
7. Elevation articulation. The elevation of a single-family or duplex structure, including
garages facing the street shall contain at least one section of at least twenty (20%) percent of the
total street elevation that is offset at least two (2') feet from the remainder of the street
elevation.
8. Nonresidential buildings. Any nonresidential building constructed within any residential
zoning districts shall conform to the design standards of Section 7.1.4 below.
9. Newly Constructed Single-Family Dwelling Required Architectural Features. All newly
constructed single-family dwellings are required to comply with the following architectural
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/536
features:
a) Garage spaces for a minimum of two (2) vehicles shall be attached to the primary
structure and shall be located behind the required building setback lines;
b) Wood or stained fiberglass or metal simulated wood grain front door;
c) No Facade may be repeated within any adjacent lots or across the street from those
lots within groupings of five (5) homes;
d) Concealed HVAC units, trash storage and utility meters;
e) If brick is used, brick shall be properly detailed. Brick shall be coursed exactly to the
top and bottom of all wall openings;
f) Windows shall be single hung, double hung, triple hung, or casement;
g) Flush mounted windows are prohibited;
h) Windows are to be placed on each wall elevation with a wall-to-window ratio that
meets the light and air requirements of the building code;
i) If shutters are used, shutters shall be one-half the width of, and the same height of the
associated opening. All shutters shall be louvered, paneled, or constructed of boards as
appropriate to the style of the building. Shutters do not need to be operable;
j) Gutters shall be copper, galvanized steel, aluminum or painted if exposed;
k) Dormers shall not use siding as window jamb material;
l) The body of a single-window dormer shall be vertically proportioned or square;
m) If chimneys are visible, they shall have a projecting cap;
n) If chimneys are located on a street facing wall, they shall extend to the ground;
o) If a porch is used, the porch column base shall not protrude beyond the bottom edge
of the porch flooring.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/536
B. Additional Newly Constructed Single-Family Dwelling Architectural Features. All newly
constructed single-family dwellings shall contain at least four (4) of the following architectural
features:
1. Stoop and portico at the front door
2. Front porch
3. Front porch or front stoop steps and railing
4. Front porch roof
5. Decorative or architectural porch railing
6. Second story porch
7. If brick or stucco is used, a stone base below first floor window shall be installed
8. Trim at gable rake
9. Decorative roof finials or ornamentation
10. Decorative attic or gable feature greater than 3 SF in size
11. Trim at windows and doors of the street facade
12. Arched window head or heads (depending on architectural style) on street facade
13. Dormer with window
14. Window shutters on street facade
15. Divided light windows
16. Decorative concrete driveway
SECTION 7.1.3 - MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS
A. The design standards for all multifamily and single-family attached structures within the Multifamily (MF)
zoning district shall be as follows:
B. All multifamily and single-family attached residential structures shall be of exterior fire-resistant
construction and shall have a minimum of eighty (80%) percent masonry construction, more or less equally
distributed around all sides of the structure, for the first story of the structure, and a minimum of fifty (50%)
percent masonry construction, more or less equally distributed around all sides, for any additional story above
the first floor.
C. Areas of a multifamily and single-family attached residential structure's facade that are devoted to
windows, doors, covered porches or patios that have a minimum size of (4') feet deep and eight (8') feet wide
(thirty [thirty-two] (32) square feet), chimneys, breezeways, or courtyards shall not be counted as “wall surface”
when calculating the masonry requirement.
D. Prohibited materials. Concrete, concrete block, vinyl, plastic or metal exterior construction is not permitted
on any multifamily or single-family attached structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/536
E. Roof materials. Roof materials for a multifamily and single-family attached residential structures shall be
comprised of an architectural, laminated, dimensional composition shingle (thirty (30) year minimum); flat pan
standing seam metal roofing, or architectural grade metal roofing products which are stamped to appear as wood
shakes, dimensional shingles, wood shingles, slate or tile; or terra-cotta or slate tile. Sheetmetal or corrugated
metal roofing materials is prohibited. Roofs shall be earth tones. Earth tones are defined as a color scheme that
draws from a color palette of browns, tans, warm grays, and greens. The colors in an earth tone scheme are
muted and flat in an emulation of the natural colors found in dirt, moss, trees and rocks. If roof is not visible to
the public, there is no pitch requirement (i.e. parapet roof); if roof is visible to the public a minimum 6:12 pitch
is required.
F. Accessory structures. Accessory structures, regardless of size, within the multifamily (MF) zoning district
shall conform to the minimum exterior construction standards for the main building on the lot, tract, [or] site,
and shall be architecturally compatible with the main building.
G. Separation of Multifamily Buildings:
1. Buildings two stories or less in height with opposite walls that:
a) Contain openings for windows, light and air ventilation shall be separated by fifteen (15)
feet between building walls;
b) Contain no openings shall be separated by ten (10) feet between buildings walls.
2. Buildings more than two stories in height with opposite walls that:
a) Contain openings for windows, light and air ventilation shall be separated by (20) feet
between building walls;
b) Contain no openings shall be separated by fifteen (15) feet between building walls.
SECTION 7.1.4 - NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS
The design standards for all nonresidential and institutional structures within the Office Neighborhood Service
(O), Commercial (C), and Industrial (I) zoning districts, and for nonresidential structures located within all other
districts shall be as follows:
A. All nonresidential and institutional structures in any zoning district, shall have a minimum of
seventy-five (75%) percent masonry construction, more or less equally distributed around all sides of
the building, for the first story defined as below the first floor ceiling plate, and a minimum of fifty
(50%) for any story above. Any facade that faces, or is visible from a public street, shall have a
minimum of seventy-five (75%) percent masonry construction, and all other facades shall be
comprised of not less than fifty (50%) percent masonry construction.
B. Areas of a nonresidential or institutional structure's facade that are devoted to windows, doors,
covered porches or stoops, breezeways or courtyards shall not be counted as “wall surface” when
calculating the masonry requirement.
C. Metal exterior material use. Metal exterior construction is prohibited on any nonresidential or
institutional structure which is located within any zoning district, save and except the following:
1. Structures located on a through lot that both fronts and backs onto a public street. The rear
facade, which must be located equal to or more than one thousand (1,000') feet from the public
street, may use metal exterior construction upon approval of the Site Plan by the City Council,
and;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/536
2. Upon approval of the Site Plan by the City Council, nonresidential and institutional
structures within any of the nonresidential zoning districts may use metal as an exterior material
on up to twenty (20%) percent of the facade as an architectural accent.
a) The use of any type of metal for exterior building construction shall be clearly shown
on the Site Plan and shall only be allowed with the Site Plan approval. The exterior finish
of metal used in exterior construction shall be permanent, maintenance-free nature such as
a baked-on finish unless approved otherwise on the Site Plan. The use of corrugated,
galvanized, aluminum-coated, zinc-coated unfinished, or similar metal surfaces shall be
prohibited unless approved otherwise on the Site Plan.
D. Roof materials. Any roof materials for a nonresidential or institutional structure that are visible
from a public street shall be shall be comprised of an architectural, laminated, dimensional
composition shingle (thirty (30) year minimum); flat pan standing seam metal roofing, or
architectural grade metal roofing products which are stamped to appear as wood shakes, dimensional
shingles, wood shingles, slate or tile; or terra-cotta or slate tile. Sheetmetal or corrugated metal
roofing materials is prohibited. Roofs shall be earth tones. Earth tones are defined as a color scheme
that draws from a color palette of browns, tans, warm grays, and greens. The colors in an earth tone
scheme are muted and flat in an emulation of the natural colors found in dirt, moss, trees and rocks. If
roof is not visible to the public, there is no pitch requirement (i.e. parapet roof); if roof is visible to
the public a minimum 6:12 pitch is required. Nonresidential or institutional structures with a flat roof
shall have highly articulated parapet that conceals the roof and any roof-mounted mechanical
equipment.
E. Structural exceptions to masonry standards. The following structures are exempt from the
masonry construction requirements.
1. Barns located on the lots of four (4) acres or more provided that such barns are used solely
for agricultural purposes (as distinguished from commercial purposes).
2. Mobile homes and HUD-Code manufactured homes lawfully existing are not subject to the
masonry requirements.
3. Temporary construction buildings, field offices, sales offices and temporary classrooms or
storage buildings for the public school. The exception shall be only provided that such facilities
are legally permitted by the City for a specific period of time, and provided that they are
completely removed from the premises upon expiration of the permit or upon completion of
construction, whichever occurs first.
4. Residential and nonresidential structures legally in existence as of (date of this ordinance),
and any additions to such structures that do not cumulatively exceed twenty (20%) percent of
the original building size (as it existed on date of this ordinance). Such additions shall be
allowed to be constructed of the same exterior materials as the original building.
F. Use of Alternative Exterior Materials.
1. All written requests for the use of alternative exterior building materials to include
alternative roof material and/or roofing color and alternative roof pitch shall be clearly noted
and described in detail on a color rendering of the structure's elevation that is submitted along
with the site plan for approval. The use of alternative exterior building materials, roof pitch and
roof materials and/or color may only be requested for multifamily, single-family attached and
nonresidential structures. The City may require submissions of an actual sample(s) of the
proposed exterior finish material(s) along with the elevation(s) and the site plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/536
2. The City Council may approve, all alternative exterior construction material(s), roof pitch
and roof materials and/or color if it is determined to be equivalent or better than the exterior
materials, roof pitch, or roof materials and/or colors otherwise required by this Subsection and
the City's Building Code as part of the site plan approval process.
G. Consideration for exceptions to the above exterior construction requirements shall be based
only upon the following:
1. Architectural design, creativity and innovation;
2. Compatibility with surrounding structures;
3. Relative ease of maintenance of the material(s);
4. Long-term durability and weather-resistance of the materials(s); and
5. Long-term stability in property value due to the high quality of the material(s).
SECTION 7.2 SCREENING AND FENCING
SECTION 7.2.1 - SCREENING WALLS AND FENCES
A. General Requirements
1. A permit shall be required for any new fence or screening wall construction or replacement of an
existing fence or screening wall unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. No permit shall be
required to repair a fence as long as the repair keeps the fence in the same location and utilizes the
same materials.
2. All fences and screening walls shall be kept in good repair and shall not create blight.
Dilapidated fences or screening walls shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with provisions of
this section. Wood fences shall be painted or stained with natural wood colors on both sides.
3. No fence or screening wall shall exceed eight (8) feet in height, as measured from the grade of
the property, unless otherwise approved by the City Council during the site plan process or by way of
a variance in accordance with Section 3.2.6.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
4. Reserved. (Ordinance 494-15, sec. 5, adopted 5/21/15)
5. Chain-link fencing not clad in vinyl may be allowed for fencing of dog runs, tennis courts,
swimming pools and similar purposes if it is completely contained on the lot, not on the perimeter,
and it is not directly visible from any street or adjacent property.
6. Temporary fencing used for construction purposes or special events shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section provided that such fencing is approved as part of the applicable building
permit or special events permit.
7. Any variances to the requirements of this section shall be considered by the BOA unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
B. Fencing Requirements for Agricultural Uses
1. The following standards apply to tracts of land with four (4) acres or more used for agricultural
or animal husbandry purposes in accordance with this Ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/536
2. Pipe fencing, split rail fencing, barbed wire, hog wire, chicken wire, chain-link, cable, and other
open style types of fencing traditionally used in agriculture and animal husbandry shall be allowed.
Such fencing may be located up to the right-of-way line and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
Solid style types of fencing shall meet the fence height and setback requirements for residential uses.
Open style fencing typically used in wildlife management may exceed eight (8) feet in height as
necessary for the purposes of wildlife management.
3. No permit is required for agricultural fencing.
C. Electric Fences
1. An electric fence is allowed on properties exceeding 20 acres in all zoning districts, with proof
submitted to the electrical inspector that the fence will be designed to retain animals, be inaccessible
to the general public and not pose a hazard to life.
2. An electric fence is allowed in association with a permitted nonresidential outdoor storage area
in the Industrial “I” zoning districts subject to the following standards.
a) Unless otherwise specified in this Section, electric fences must be installed in conformance
with the specifications set forth in the City's electrical code and the International
Electroctechnical Commission Standard No. 60335-2-76. In addition, the electric fence
controller must meet the requirements of Underwriters Laboratories Standard UL69, Electric-
Fence Controller, and labeled as such.
b) The electric fence controller and emergency entry key safe for the electric fence must be
located in a single accessible location for the entire fence.
c) The electric fence must be surrounded by a nonelectrical fence or wall six to eight feet in
height.
d) The electric fence must be installed a minimum of one foot from the surrounding
nonelectric fence or wall, except along the gate. Along the gate, the electric fence must be
installed a minimum of three inches from the surrounding nonelectric fence or wall.
e) The electric fence must be clearly identified with warning signs at intervals of not less than
sixty (60) feet.
f) The electric fence must only be energized during hours when the public does not have
legal access to the protected property.
D. Prohibited Materials. Permits shall not be issued for materials not manufactured specifically for fencing,
such as fibrous masonry products, landscape timbers, railroad ties, latticework panels, plywood, corrugated steel
panels, metal sheets or fiberglass panels. Other prohibited material include[s] razor wire fencing.
E. Fencing Requirements for Residential Uses
1. Fences shall be constructed of wood, ornamental metal (i.e. wrought iron), tubular steel,
masonry, or other materials traditionally used in private fence construction. New and innovative
materials such as plastics, PVC's, metal panel or slat, cementitious fiberboard, and other similar
materials may be approved for use by the City Council if the material is compatible in character with
traditional residential fencing and proven to be sturdy, durable and relatively maintenance-free.
2. The maximum height, as measured from the grade of the property, shall be as follows:
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/536
a) Restrictions and requirements for a fence, wall and barrier are as follows:
Fences in front yard – No fence, wall or barrier may be built within the required front yard
as established by the zoning regulations of the City of Sansom Park except as follows:
(A) Required Setbacks on Residential Lots – A fence may be erected in the front
yard, as established by the zoning regulations of the City of Sansom Park, of a
residential lot only if the following criteria are met:
i. The fence shall not exceed four (4) feet in height above the adjacent grade;
ii. The fence shall be constructed to provide that a minimum of 50% of the fence is
open;
iii. On corner lots the fence shall not be located within the designated visibility
triangle; and
iv. The fence shall be constructed of wood, wrought iron, plastic or similar fencing
materials[.]
(Ordinance 500-16 adopted 1/21/15)
b) Maximum of eight (8) feet for side or rear yards.
3. Fencing in the front yard of a residential lot shall be located no closer than three (3) feet
(measured inside the residential lot) to the right-of-way line.
4. Gates designed for vehicular access shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum of
twenty-four (24) feet.
5. The height of a fence adjacent or perpendicular to a screening wall shall not exceed the height of
the subdivision's screening wall or any other fence constructed by the developer at the time of initial
development.
6. All fences adjacent to parks, trails, or designated open spaces shall be constructed of split rail,
ornamental metal, tubular steel, masonry columns, or similar open face material and not exceed a
height of six (6) feet. No wood fencing shall be allowed behind the required open space. Solid
fencing constructed of Cedar (with metal posts and Cedar top and bottom caps and stained with wood
sealant) or masonry material may be allowed if adjacent to a park or open space area that is used
actively such as a public swimming pool, sport facility, etc.
7. Allowable wood fences adjacent to streets, schools, parks, open spaces or other public spaces
shall have the finished side facing the public space. All fence posts and structural components shall
be placed on the interior of the lot.
8. All fence posts and structural components shall be placed on the interior of the lot.
9. The location of fences for double frontage lots or corner lots adjacent to a street shall be in
accordance with the building setback line as shown on the final plat. If a property is not platted or if
no building line is shown on the recorded plat, the location of fences shall comply with the building
setback requirements of the zoning district that the property is located in.
10. If a corner lot is adjacent to a subdivision's screening wall, a fence may be placed outside the
required setback line to connect with the screening wall.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/536
11. Fences for nonresidential uses allowed in residential zoning districts such as schools or
Churches shall meet the fencing standards for nonresidential districts.
F. Fencing Requirements for Swimming Pools
1. Swimming pools shall have a fence that shall conform to the requirements of the International
Building Code.
G. Fencing and Screening Wall Requirements for Multifamily and Nonresidential Uses
1. Fencing shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
2. Fencing shall be constructed of wrought iron, tubular steel, masonry, live screening, or a
combination thereof unless adjacent to single-family dwellings, or two-family dwellings, in which a
screening wall shall be constructed and shall be made of masonry materials with masonry columns
placed a minimum of thirty-two (32) foot on center. Wood, barbed wire, and chain-link fencing is
prohibited.
3. All fencing and screening walls for multifamily and nonresidential developments shall be
identified on the site plan for the development and approved as part of the site plan approval.
4. The City Council may approve alternative fencing materials and construction standards to any of
these requirements as a part of the site plan approval process when required.
5. Screening walls shall be constructed of masonry material such as brick, stone, concrete panels,
or similar materials consistent in material, finish, and color with the primary buildings within the
development or adjacent buildings in the area. The wall finish shall be consistent on both sides.
6. Screening walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and a maximum of eight (8) feet in
height on properties adjacent to single-family and two-family residential districts. This screening wall
shall be constructed prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure on the multifamily or
nonresidential use property and shall be maintained by the owner of the property used for multifamily
or nonresidential use.
7. Screening wall plans shall be submitted to the City for review and permitting and shall be signed
and sealed by a Structural or Civil Engineer licensed by the State of Texas.
8. All uses which require storage such as, but not limited to, auto impound lots, wrecking services,
contractor yards, and other facilities shall provide the storage of such items to be within completely
enclosed buildings or effectively screened with screening walls or fences not less than six (6) feet in
height nor more than eight (8) feet in height, provided no storage located within fifty (50) feet of such
screening shall exceed the maximum height of such screening.
SECTION 7.3 LANDSCAPING
A. Applicability. This Section shall apply to all new nonresidential and multifamily development within the
City of Sansom Park.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage low maintenance landscaping, water conservation and
tree preservation while providing guidelines for minimum landscaping for new development throughout the
City, preserving the natural, open character of the Rural Residential areas, and not prohibiting the normal use of
properties for agricultural purposes.
C. Nonresidential and Multifamily landscaping. These standards apply to new nonresidential and multifamily
developments. These standards may be met either by saving existing trees on the site, or planting new trees from
the recommended list.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/536
1. A twenty (20') foot linear landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to all public streets. The
landscape strip shall include a minimum of one (1) shade tree (two and one-half inch caliper
minimum) for every fifty (50) linear feet of street frontage.
2. Where parking lots and drives abut the landscape strip along a street right-of-way, a continuous
hedge of evergreen shrubs shall be provided to screen those areas from the street. The shrubs must be
a minimum of a ten-gallon size at planting with a minimum mature height of three (3) feet. Shrubs
shall be planted according to the spacing recommended for their species. The screening shall extend
along the entire street frontage of the parking lot, exclusive of driveways and visibility clips. A
landscape berm may be provided in lieu of the screening hedge. The berm must be a minimum of
thirty-six (36) inches above the average grade of the street and parking lot curbs with a slope not to
exceed 3:1.
3. Landscaping shall also be provided for the interior parking areas. Trees shall be planted in each
parking lot to attain a minimum average density of one (1) shade tree (two and one-half inch caliper
minimum) for each ten (10) parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. The planting area per
tree shall be a minimum of nine (9') feet wide and twenty (20') feet deep.
a) Interior parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum eight (8%) percent open space.
To calculate the total parking area and the subsequent percentage of required interior lot
landscaping, total the square footage of parking spaces, planting islands, curbed areas and all
interior driveways and aisles. Landscaped areas located contiguous to and within five (5') feet
of the parking lot may be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement. Landscaped areas
located greater than five (5') feet away from the parking lot may not be used to meet the interior
landscaping requirement.
b) The required landscaping for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed
throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the City Manager or
his/her designee where the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other
natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution.
c) Except for customer and employee parking, parking lot landscape requirements do not
apply to storage or standing parking spaces incidental to uses, such as sales and rental of motor
vehicles, mobile homes, boats, trailers or other similar uses.
d) All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and
planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall
be protected with curbs sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion.
4. Foundation Plantings. Exposed sections of building walls that are in high-use or high-visibility
areas of the building exterior shall have planting beds at least five (5) feet wide placed directly along
at least fifty (50) percent of such walls.
5. An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. Irrigation systems shall be
designed and installed with rain sensors and low gallonage, low angle nozzles in such a way as to
avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor shall be placed in each controller to prevent the
irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks.
D. Nonresidential Area Treatment
1. Landscape areas shall include all areas on the site that are not covered by buildings, structures,
paving or impervious surface. Landscape areas shall consist only of landscaping. The selection and
location of turf, ground cover (including shrubs, grasses, perennials, flowerbeds and slope retention),
and pedestrian paving and other landscaping elements shall be used to prevent erosion and meet the
functional and visual purposes such as defining spaces, accommodating and directing circulation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/536
patterns, managing visibility, attracting attention to building entrances and other focal points, and
visually integrating buildings with the landscape area and with each other.
a) Turf grass. High-use areas shall be planted with irrigated turf grass. Nonirrigated
shortgrass prairie grasses or other adapted grasses that have been certified as Xeriscape
landscaping may be established in remote, low-use, low-visibility areas.
b) Planting beds. Shrub and ground cover planting beds shall be separated from turf grass
with edging and shall have open surface areas covered with mulch.
c) Slopes. Retaining walls, slope revetment or other acceptable devices integrated with
plantings shall be used to stabilize slopes that are steeper than 3:1. If soil tests performed on the
subject soils indicate steeper slopes are stable without the above required protection, then the
maximum slope allowed without the above required protection may be increased to the
maximum stated in the soils report or 2:1, whichever is less steep.
d) Agricultural Use. If outdoor space is maintained in active agricultural use, the landscape
surfaces and ground cover standards above shall not apply.
E. Water Conservation
1. All landscaping plans shall be designed to incorporate water conservation materials and
techniques through application of Xeriscape landscaping principles. Xeriscape landscaping principles
do not include or allow artificial turf or plants, mulched (including gravel) beds or areas without
landscape plant material, paving of areas not required for walkways, plazas or parking lots, bare
ground, weed covered or infested surfaces or any landscaping that does not comply with the
standards of this section. Xeriscape landscaping principles shall be:
a) grouping plants with similar water requirements together on the same irrigation zones;
b) limiting high-irrigation turf and plantings to appropriate high-use areas with high visibility
and functional needs;
c) use of low-water-demanding plants and turf where practicable;
d) use of efficient irrigation systems;
e) incorporation of soil improvements;
f) use of mulches;
g) provision of regular and attentive maintenance.
F. Plant Materials.
Trees (Large Shade)
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Oak, Burr Quercus macrocarpa 80' h
80' w
Native
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/536
Oak, Chinkapin Quercus muhlenbergii 80' h
80' w
Native
Oak, Live* Quercus virginiana 90' h
90' w
Native
Oak, Red Quercus shumardii 80' h
60' w
Native
Pecan Carya illinoinensis 100' h
100' w
Native
Trees (Medium Shade)
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Ash, Texas Fraxinus texensis 50' h
40' w
Native
Bald Cypress* Taxodium distichum 80' h
50' w
Native
Elm, Cedar Ulmus crassifolia 90' h
80' w
Native
Elm, Allee Lacebark Ulmus pariviforia
‘Elmer II'
75' h
50' w
Adapted
Elm, Bosque Lacebark Ulmus parivifoia
‘UPMTFI'
60' h
40' w
Adapted
Magnolia, Southern Magnolia grandiflora 60' h Native E. TX
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/536
30' w
Maple, Bigtooth Acer grandidentatum 50' h
40' w
Native E. TX
Maple, Caddo Acer saccharum ‘Caddo' 60' h
30' w
Native
Persimmon, Common Diospyros virginiana 60' h
30' w
Native
Pistachio, Chinese Pistacia chinensis 70' h
50' w
Adapted
Black Locust Robinia pseudoacacia 40' h
40' w
Adapted
Trees (Small Ornamental)
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
American Smoke Tree Cotinus obovatus 25' h
25' w
Native
Buckeye, Mexican Ungnadia speciosa 20' h
20' w
Native
Carolina Buckthorn Rhamnus caroliniana 15' h
15' w
Native
Desert Willow Chilopsis linearis 30' h
25' w
Native
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/536
Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica 25' h
15' w
Adapted
Dogwood (Roughleaf) Cornus drummondii 15' h
15' w
Native
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana 40' h
20' w
Native
Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis 30' h
20' w
Native
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Flameleaf Sumac Rhus lanceolata 30' h
20' w
Native
Goldenball Lead Tree Leucaena retusa 25' h
15' w
Native
Goldenrain Tree Koelreuteria paniculata 30' h
20' w
Adapted
Hawthorn, Washington Crataegus phaenopyrum 25' h
15' w
Adapted
Holly, Yaupon Ilex vomitoria 20' h
20' w
Adapted
Magnolia, ‘Little Gem' Magnolia, ‘Little Gem' 15' h
10' w
Adapted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/536
Maple, Shantung Acer trucatum 25' h
20' w
Adapted
Mexican Plum Prunus Mexicana 25' h
20' w
Native
Oak, Bigelow Quercus sinuate var.
breviloba
40' h
35' w
Native
Oak, Lacey Quercus laceyi
(Q. glaucoides)
35' h
30' w
Native
Pear, Callery Pyrus calleryana 25' h
25' w
Adapted
Persimmon, Texas Diospyros texana 20' h
12' w
Native
Possumhaw Ilex decidua 15' h
8' w
Native
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum 30' h
35' w
Native
Texas Redbud Cercis Canadensis var.
‘texensis'
30' h
30' w
Native
Trees (Living Screen)
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/536
Arizona Cypress Cupressus arizonica 40' h
20' w
Adapted
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana 40' h
20' w
Native
Holly, Burford Ilex cornuta ‘burfordii' 20' h
15' w
Adapted
Holly, Foster Ilex x attenuata ‘Foster' 20' h
10' w
Adapted
Holly, Nellie R Stevens Ilex x ‘Nellie Stevens' 25' h
15' w
Adapted
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Holly, Youpon Ilex vomitoria 20' h
20' w
Native
Magnolia, ‘Little Gem' Magnolia ‘Little Gem' 15' h
10' w
Adapted
Mahonia, Leather Leaf Mahonia bealei 7' h
5' w
Adapted
Myrtle, Wax Myrica cerifera 15' h
10' w
Native
Pine, Mondell Pinus eldarica 40' h
20' w
Adapted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/536
Shrubs
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Abelia Abelia grandiflora 4' h
4' w
Native
Agarito Berberis trifoliate 10' h
10' w
Native
American Beautyberry Calicarpa Americana 5' h
5' w
Native
Apache Plume Fallugia paradoxa 6' h
6' w
Native
Aromatic Sumac Rhus aromatic 6' h
6' w
Native
Black Dalea Dalea frutescens 4' h
4' w
Native
Damianita Compositae Chrysactinia
Mexicana
2' h
2' w
Native
Desert Spoon Dasylirion wheeleri 3' h
3' w
Native
Hawthorn, Indian Raphiolepsis indica 3' h
4' w
Adapted
Holly, Burford Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii 5' h Adapted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/536
Nana' 5' w
Flame Anisacanthus Anisacanthus q. wrightii 4' h
3' w
Native
Texas Kidneywood Eysenhardtia texana 12' h
8' w
Native
Red Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora 3' h
3' w
Native
Texas Sage, Silverado Leucophyllum f.
‘Silverado'
4' h
4' w
Native
Soft-leaf Yucca Yucca recurvifolia 5' h
5' w
Native
Twist-leaf Yucca Yucca rupcola 5' h
5' w
Native
Grass/Turf
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Big Blue Stem Andropogon gerardii 5' h
5' w
Native
Blue Grama Bouteloua gracilis Turf/Sod Native
Buffalograss Buchloe dactyloides Turf/Sod Native
Bermuda grass Cynodon dactylon Turf/Sod Adapted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/536
Eastern Gamagrass Tripsacum dactyloides 4' h
3' w
Native (Seed)
Green Sprangletop Leptochloa dubia 3' h
3' w
Native
Muhly, Seep Muhlenbergia reverchonii 2' h
2' w
Native
Muhly, Deer Muhlenbergia rigens 3' h
3' w
Native
Muhly, Lindheimer Muhlenbergia
lindheimeri
4' h
2' w
Native
Indian Grass Sorghastrum nutans 4' h
3' w
Native
Little Blue Stem Schizachyrium scoparium 5' h
2' w
Native
Prairie Dropseed Sporobolus heterolepis 5' h
5' w
Native
Prairie Wild Rye Elymus Canadensis 3' h
3' w
Native (Seed)
Sideoats Grama Bouteloua curipendula 3' h
1' w
Native
Switch Grass Panicum virgatum 5' h Native
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/536
5' w
Groundcover/Vines
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Ajuga Ajuga reptans 6" h Creeping Adapted
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens Vine Native
Crossvine Bignonia capreolata Vine Native
Frog Fruit Phyla nodiflora 12" h
Spreading
Native
Horseherb Calyptocarpus vialis 10" h
36" w
Native
Liriope Liriope muscari 15" h
12" w
Adapted
Pigeonberry Rivina humilis 18" h
24" w
Native
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Snake Herb Acanthaceae Dyschoriste
linearis
6" h
18" w
Native
Trumpet Vine Campsis radicans Vine Native
Water Clover Marsilea macropoda 8" h Creeping Native
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/536
Wooly Stemodia Stemodia lanata 5" h Creeping Native
Wood Violet Viola missouriensis 6"
Creeping
Native
Perennials
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Angel Trumpet Datura wrightii 3' h
3' w
Native
Autumn Joy Sedum Sedum ‘Autumn Joy' 2' h
2' w
Adapted
Blackeyed Susan Rudbeckia hirta 2' h
2' w
Native (Seed)
Blackfoot Daisy Melampodium
leucanthum
12" h
12" w
Native
Blazing Stars Liatris mucronata 2' h
2' w
Native
Brown-eyed Susan Rudbeckia triloba 3' h
2' w
Native
Clasping Coneflower Dracopis amplexicalis 2' h
1' w
Native (Seed)
Chocolate Flower Berlandiera lyrata 1' h
2' w
Native
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/536
Cutleaf Daisy Engielmannia pinnatifida 3' h
3' w
Native (Seed)
Fournerve Daisy Hymenoxys scaposa 1' h
1' w
Native
Fall Aster Aster longifolia 3' h
3' w
Native
Globemallow, Scarlet Sphaeralcea coccinea 12" h
12" w
Native
Indian Blanket Gailardia pulchella 12" h
2" w
Native (Seed)
Indian Paint Brush Castilleja indivisa 12" h
2" w
Native (Seed)
Green-headed
Cornflower
Rudbeckia lanciniata 4' h
2' w
Native (Seed)
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Gregg Dalea Dalea greggii 1' h
4' w
Native
Gregg's Mistflower Eupatorium greggii 2' h
1' w
Native
Illinois Bundleflower Desmanthus inllinoensis 2' h
1' w
Native (Seed)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/536
Maximilian Sunflower Helianthus maximilliani 5' h
3' w
Native (Seed)
Mexican Hat Ratibida columnifera 2' h
1' w
Native (Seed)
Lindheimer's Senna Senna lindheimeriana 3' h
3' w
Native
Obedient Plant Physostegia virginiana 4' h
2' w
Native (Seed)
Pink Evening Primrose Oenothera speciosa 1' h
1' w
Native (Seed)
Pink Scullcap Scutellaria suffrutescens 1' h
1' w
Native
Plains Coreopsis Coreopsis tinctoria 1' h
1' w
Native (Seed)
Purple Coneflower Echinacea purpurea 2' h
2' w
Native (Seed)
Prairie Verbena Verbena bipinnitfida 6" h
18" w
Native
Rockrose, Brazilian Parvonia brazilliensis 3' h
3' w
Adapted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/536
Rockrose Parvonia lasiopetala 3' h
3' w
Native
Sage, Autumn Salvia Greggii 3' h
2' w
Native
Sage, Big Red Salvia penstemonoides 4' h
3' w
Native (Seed)
Sage, Indigo Spires Salvia longespicata x
farinacea
4' h
6' w
Native
Sage, Mealy Blue Salvia farinacea 2' h
1' w
Native
Sage, Pitcher Salvia 4' h
3' w
Native (Seed)
Sage, Russian Perovskia atriplicifolia 4' h
3' w
Adapted
Sage, Scarlet Salvia coccinea 3' h
3' w
Native (Seed)
Skeletonleaf Goldeneye Viguiera stenoloba 2' h
2' w
Native
Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Sundrops Calylophus
drummondianus
6" h
12" w
Native
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/536
Texas Betony Stachys coccinea 18" h
24" w
Native
Texas Greeneyes Berlandiera texana 4' h
2' w
Native
Texas Lantana Lantana horrida 5' h
5' w
Native
Texas Star Hibiscus Hibiscus coccinea 5' h
3' w
Native
Turk's Cap Malvaviscus drummondii 4' h
4' w
Native
Whirling Butterflies Gaura lindheimeri 3' h
3' w
Native
Winecup Callirhoe involucrate 1' h
2' w
Native
Zexmenia Wedelia hispida 2' h Spreading Native
ARTICLE 8 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 8.1 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
A. In a residential district, an accessory building is a subordinate or incidental building detached from the
main building, not used for commercial purposes and not rented. Accessory buildings other than carports, shall
be located behind the primary structure. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted without a primary use being
in existence on the lot.
B. In nonresidential districts, an accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is secondary to
and supportive of the main building. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted without a main building or
primary use being in existence. Accessory buildings should, wherever possible, be located behind the primary
structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/536
C. Accessory structures less than or equal to one hundred twenty (120) square feet do not require a building
permit.
D. Area and development regulations for accessory buildings:
1. Size of yards:
a) Front yard: Detached accessory buildings shall be prohibited in front of the main building
with the exception of carports. Carports shall be allowed within the front yard, but may not
encroach into any public right-of-way, public sidewalk, public utility easement or interfere with
any sight visibility from the drive approach to the public right-of-way.
b) Side yard: There shall be a side yard not less than five (5) feet from any side lot line, or
alley line for any accessory building provided that such building is separated from the main
building by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. In the case of an accessory building being
closer than ten (10) feet to the main building, the minimum side yard requirements for the main
building shall be observed.
c) Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard not less than five (5) feet from any lot line or alley
line, or alley easement line when accessory buildings are constructed ten (10) feet or more from
the main building.
2. Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
3. Accessory buildings are not permitted without a primary structure. The combination of square
footage of the primary structure and accessory buildings may not exceed the maximum lot coverage
for any zoning district.
4. There shall be no more than two (2) accessory structures per lot.
5. All accessory structures over 120 square feet shall be located on a permanent foundation, either
pier and beam or slab.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
6. Accessory structures larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet up to three hundred (300)
square feet may be constructed of lightweight masonry siding and/or lightweight masonry soffit
boards, or other manufactured pre-finished wood siding, in lieu of other masonry construction
materials.
7. All accessory structures larger than three hundred (300) square feet shall be constructed of the
same or similar materials as the primary structure. The pitch of the roof of said accessory structure
shall be no less than a 3:12 ratio and no greater than 6:12 ratio. Foundations exceeding three hundred
(300) square feet shall have a stamped, engineered foundation.
(Ordinance 494-15, sec. VI, adopted 5/21/15)
E. Carports shall be measured from the posts supporting the roof nearest to the street or alley. Carports may be
constructed of masonry or as a prefabricated metal unit with a metal roof. All carports, require a building permit
from the City of Sansom Park and shall be inspected by the City to ensure structural integrity and appropriate
anchorage to the ground.
F. Swimming pools may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that such pools are not located closer
than ten (10) feet to a rear lot line or ten (10) feet to an interior or side lot line. Swimming pools are not
permitted in the front yard. A pedestrian space of at least three (3) feet in width shall be provided between pool
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/536
walls and the protective fences or barrier walls of the pool. Swimming pools shall be fenced according to
International Building Code.
G. Any stable or barn used for agricultural purposes shall be set back one hundred fifty (150') feet from all
property lines.
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
[H.] Use of Alternative Materials. A written request for alternative building materials shall be made and shall
include a detailed color rendering of the structure's elevation that is submitted along with a site plan for
approval. The City may require submissions of an actual sample of the proposed exterior material(s) along with
the elevations and the site plan.
The City Council may approve alternative exterior construction material(s) and/or color if it is determined to be
equivalent or better than the exterior material otherwise required by this Section.
Consideration for exceptions to the above exterior construction requirements shall be based only upon the
following criteria:
1. Architectural design, creativity, and innovation;
2. Compatibility with surrounding structures;
3. Long-term durability and weather-resistance of the material(s); and
4. Relative ease of maintenance of the material.
(Ordinance 494-15, sec. VI, adopted 5/21/15)
SECTION 8.2 HOME OCCUPATIONS
A home occupation may be permitted as accessory to any principal dwelling unit in all residential districts,
subject to the following standards:
A. Location: The home-based business shall be conducted in the house by a resident of the primary
dwelling.
B. Size and Area: The business or service located within the dwelling shall not exceed 25 percent
of the floor area of the house. Activities are limited to the living portion of a house or its attached
garage. Accessory buildings or detached structures cannot be used in conjunction with a home-based
business.
C. Employees and Residency: The principal person(s) providing the business or service shall
reside in the dwelling on the premises. Only one additional employee, other than the resident(s) of
the primary dwelling unit, is permitted at the home-based business at any one time.
D. Neighborhood Compatibility
1. The home-based business shall cause no change in the external appearance of the existing
buildings and structures on the property.
2. All vehicles used in connection with the home-based business shall be of a size, and
located on the premises in such a manner, so that a casual observer or a person of normal
sensibilities will not be able to detect any sign of the premises being used as a home occupation.
No vehicle larger than one ton shall be kept on the premises[.]
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/536
3. Parking of vehicles to accommodate off-site employees or permitted customers shall be
limited to the driveway of such premises or along the curb immediately adjacent to such
premises.
4. There shall be no advertising devices on the property or other signs of the home-based
business that are visible from off the premises.
5. The property shall contain no outdoor display of goods or services that are associated with
the home occupation. Outside storage is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, the parking
of one trailer in a driveway or along the street curb is not considered outside storage.
6. Wholesale or retail sales of goods shall not occur on the premises.
7. The home-based business shall not create traffic or parking congestion, noise, vibration,
odor, glare, fumes, or electrical or communications interference that can be detected by the
normal senses off the premises, including visual or audible interference with radio or television
reception.
E. Prohibited Home-based Businesses: The following uses, because of their effects on the
surrounding residential area, shall not be permitted as home-based businesses: auto repair or
motorized implement repair; dance, music or other types of tutoring instruction where more than four
students are being instructed at one time; dental offices; medical offices; the painting of vehicles,
trailers or boats; private schools with organized classes; motor vehicle towing operation; barber or
beauty shops having more than one chair; welding shops; nursing homes; bed and breakfast and other
such transient lodging; or any other home-based business that, in the opinion of the Code Compliance
Officer and City Manager or his/her designee, will have negative effects on the neighborhood.
SECTION 8.3 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND ADULT CABARETS
SECTION 8.3.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this section have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by
the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
SECTION 8.3.2 - DEFINITIONS
In this section:
A. Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated
or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
B. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store means a commercial establishment which as one of its
principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of
the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/536
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities.
C. Adult Entertainment Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
2. Live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an emphasis on specified sexual activities; or
3. Physical activities in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite or
transgender sex; or
4. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or
more of the persons are nude or semi-nude; or
5. A book, magazine, newspaper, picture, photograph, film, videotape, motion picture,
drawing or other printed or pictorial material which explicitly depicts:
a) Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal; or
b) Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse[.]
D. Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time
that is less than ten (10) hours.
E. Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
F. Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall[,] auditorium, or similar commercial establishment
which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities.
G. Entertainment means live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities, whether performed by employees, agents, contractors, or customers. The term
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/536
entertainment shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses, or other employees exposing specified
anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities in the presence of customers.
H. Chief of Police means the chief of police of the City of Sansom Park or his designated agent.
I. Nude Model Studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays
specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration;
J. Nudity or a State of Nudity means less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair;
2. Human buttock,
3. Female breast or breast[s] below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or
4. Any combination of the foregoing.
K. Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal
entity.
L. Sexually Oriented Business means a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult
bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel,
or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the
selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification to the customer as defined in Section 243.002 of the Texas Local Government
Code.
M. Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; or
2. Human buttocks; or
3. Female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
4. Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered;
or
5. Any combination of the foregoing.
N. Specified Sexual Activities means and includes any of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals;
2. Sexual acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
3. Masturbation; or
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1)
through (4) above.
SECTION 8.3.3 - LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/536
A. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within
one thousand (1,000) feet of:
1. A church;
2. A public or private elementary or secondary school;
3. Residentially zoned property; or
4. A public Park.
B. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one
thousand (1,000') feet of another sexually oriented business.
C. A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more
than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor
area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.
D. For the purposes of subparagraph (A) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church or public or private elementary or secondary school or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park
or residential zoning district.
E. For purposes of subparagraph (B) above, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior
wall of the structure in which each business is located.
F. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this ordinance, that is in
violation of subparagraph (A), (B) or (C) of this paragraph shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such
nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one
another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and
continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established businesses is
nonconforming.
G. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use after the effective date of this
ordinance is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the operation of the sexually
oriented business, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park or residential
zoning district within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business.
SECTION 8.3.4 - REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this section.
B. A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the
time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
C. For purpose of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph, the terms rent or subrent mean the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/536
D. If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio, then a violation of this ordinance [this
section] shall be punishable as a Class B Misdemeanor.
E. It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph (3) [D.] that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in
a modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
c) Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time.
SECTION 8.3.5 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS - PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose of this section to regulate adult entertainment cabarets as defined herein to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent the continued concentration of adult entertainment cabarets within the City. The provisions of this
section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor the effect of this section to restrict or deny access by
adults to adult entertainment cabarets protected by the First Amendment, nor to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of adult entertainment cabarets to their intended market.
SECTION 8.3.6 - LOCATION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS
A. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment cabaret within
one thousand (1,000) feet of:
1. A church;
2. A public or private elementary or secondary school;
3. Residentially zoned property; or
4. A public park.
B. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment cabaret within
one thousand (1,000') feet of another adult entertainment cabaret or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a
sexually oriented business.
C. A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more
than one adult entertainment cabaret in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor
area of any adult entertainment cabaret business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another
adult entertainment cabaret.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/536
D. For the purposes of subparagraph (A) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where an adult entertainment cabaret business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises
of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or the nearest boundary of an affected public
park or residential zoning district.
E. For the purposes of subparagraph (B) above, the distance between any two (2) adult entertainment cabarets,
or between an adult entertainment cabaret and a sexually oriented business, shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
F. Any adult entertainment cabaret business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this ordinance that
is in violation of subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of this section shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use. Such
nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two (2) or more adult entertainment cabaret businesses are located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult entertainment cabaret business
which was first established and continually operating at particular location is the conforming use, the later
established business is the legal nonconforming use.
G. An adult entertainment cabaret lawfully operating as a conforming use after the effective date of this
ordinance is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the operation of the adult
entertainment cabaret, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, or residential
zoning district within one thousand (1,000) feet of the adult entertainment cabaret.
SECTION 8.4 TEMPORARY BUILDINGS
Temporary buildings accessory to new construction are permitted, provided such are razed within thirty (30)
days after substantial completion of construction. Temporary real estate sales offices located within the
subdivision, for which lots are being sold are permitted, but limited to the period of actual sales and not
exceeding two (2) years.
SECTION 8.5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
A. For the purpose of this ordinance, telecommunication towers shall include radio, wireless telephone,
television, microwave, short wave radio and/or any other tower used exclusively for communication purposes as
interpreted by the City Manager or his/her designee.
B. No telecommunication tower shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a residential district unless
the applicant can otherwise demonstrate by providing coverage, interference and capacity analysis that the
proposed location of the antenna is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the wireless
telecommunications facility and to provide adequate coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately
served by locating the tower in a less sensitive area.
C. Towers or structures supporting telecommunication antenna or otherwise conforming to all the applicable
provisions of this ordinance are hereby permitted subject to approval of a specific use permit in the Industrial
district when the tower is considered an accessory use. Towers and supporting telecommunication antennae are
also permitted subject to approval of a specific use permit in the following locations regardless of the underlying
zoning district:
1. Church sites when camouflaged as steeples or bell towers;
2. Park sites when compatible with the existing environment and nature of the park; and
3. Government, school, utility and institutional sites.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/536
D. The minimum setback from the base of the tower to any property line or to any adjacent nonresidential
structure shall be equal to one-half (1/2) the height of the tower, unless the Zoning Board of Adjustment grants a
variance due to special or unusual characteristics.
E. The following general criteria shall be considered in determining the appropriateness of sites for a
communication tower when considering a conditional use permit:
1. Whether the proposed tower is to be located in an area where it would be unobtrusive to
surrounding uses and would not substantially detract from the local aesthetic or neighborhood
character;
2. Where the application represents a request for multiple use of a proposed tower;
3. Whether the application exhibits how the site and the tower and/or antenna will be designed and
arranged to accommodate future multiple users.
F. In the event the tower and antenna array shall serve as the primary use of the property, any accessory
facility or building greater than one hundred (100) square feet will be designed so as to be architecturally
compatible with principal structures on the site and shall be compatible with the surrounding natural or built
environment.
G. Advertising or signage provided for any use other than to provide warning or equipment instruction and/or
other information pertinent to the safe operation of the facility on any portion of the tower and/or antenna or any
other accessory facility shall be prohibited.
1. Each tower shall maintain a gray or other neutral colored finish.
H. If at any time the use of the tower and/or antenna ceases, the owner or leasee of the tower and/or antenna
shall dismantle and remove it within six (6) months after ceasing to use it, unless a binding lease agreement with
another wireless communications provider on the same tower has been executed in which case an additional six
(6) months shall be granted.
SECTION 8.6 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: NOISE, AIR AND WATER POLLUTION, GLARE,
EXPLOSIVE OR HAZARDOUS GASES, LIQUIDS AND MATTER, RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS,
VIBRATION, ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE
All uses in all districts shall conform in operation, location and construction to the performance standards herein
specified. In conformance therewith, the following general provisions shall be observed:
A. Any and all county, state and federal rules, regulations and standards applicable to and
governing, excess noise generation, pollution, emission of air pollution, water pollution by liquid or
solid wastes, explosive or hazardous gases, liquids and matter, radioactive materials, vibration,
electromagnetic interference, and storage, manufacture, handling, transportation or use of explosives
or inflammable material shall be observed for all uses in all districts.
B. No use or light in any district shall be operated so as to produce any intense glare or direct
illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source, or illumination of such intensity
as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of privacy of adjacent properties. All
exterior lights shall be made of a light source with a reflector so selected that, acting together, the
light beam is controlled so as not to be directed across any adjacent property line.
C. Any use established after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with all of the
performance standards herein established.
D. The City Manager shall have the power to refuse a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy
when in his opinion the applicant's request could or would, if placed in use or operation, be in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/536
violation of the performance standards herein established. In such case, the City Manager shall
request, and the applicant shall furnish, at his expenses, sufficient detailed information to show
conformity with the applicable standards as respects his particular use or operation, prior to the
issuance of such permit or certificate by the City Manager.
E. In the case of alleged violations of these standards of any use or operation, as prescribed herein,
the City Manager shall investigate and determine what subsequent actions should be taken to abate
the alleged violation. If after consultation with the owner of the use or operation alleged to be in
violation with these standards, and if an appropriate solution cannot be mutually agreed upon by both
parties, the City Manager shall cause to be placed on the first available agenda of the City Council for
due consideration the proposed violation(s). If after consultation between the City Council and the
owner of the use or operation alleged to be in violation with these standards, and if an appropriate
solution still cannot be mutually agreed upon by both parties, the City Manager shall cause to be
placed on the first available agenda of the City Council for due consideration the proposed
violation(s). The City Council may employ the use of professional qualified experts to conduct a
detailed investigation, report and recommendation thereon. Following receipt of the report, the City
Council shall conduct a public hearing on the case, in the same manner and procedure as that
employed for a zoning change. After considering all testimony submitted at the public hearing, the
City Council shall make the final determination whether or not a violation exists. Costs incurred by
the City in the employ of the expert's investigation, report and testimony shall be reimbursed by the
violator if a violation is found to exist, otherwise such costs shall be borne by the City. The violator
may appeal the City Council's findings and decisions through the Courts, as established by state
statutes.
SECTION 8.7 SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR CERTAIN USES
The following describe conditions and special regulations for uses listed in the Permitted Use Table Section
4.12. Additional requirements may be added to these herein by the City Council as deemed necessary to protect
the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Sansom Park. No construction or occupancy shall
commence for any permitted use until the conditions herein stated or required by the City Council have been
met.
A. Temporary buildings utilized for construction purposes shall not be installed for a period to
exceed the duration of such construction.
B. Pens, outdoor kennels, or animal runs associated with a nonresidential primary use, must be
located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150') feet from any residentially zoned property.
C. Any use other than salvage yards which involves the repair of automobiles or other vehicle
types shall not be used for the storage of wrecked vehicles, or the dismantling of vehicles or the
storage of vehicle parts.
D. All vehicles being stored for repair by any automotive repair uses shall be screened from all
public rights-of-way.
E. Any farm or machinery equipment sales shall be stored and displayed on a concrete or asphalt
surface.
F. Propane sales as an accessory use shall be limited to:
1. The public's view of the rack of propane containers shall be minimized with screening
devices such as planters, building columns, facade elements or walls.
2. The propane shall be sold only in sealed steel containers with a maximum volume of 20
lbs. (4.8 gallons propane). The containers shall be in racks with an aggregate capacity of not
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/536
more than 48 containers at each location.
3. The rack of containers shall be mounted or anchored to the ground or building, the rack
shall not block the view into a store window and in all events may not be more than 41 inches
high.
4. Each 20 lb. (4.8 gallon propane) container shall be fitted with a propane service valve
(Type I) for safety purposes.
5. Signage shall be limited to product identification on each 20 lb. (4.8 gallon propane)
container and to six (6) square feet of identification signs on the storage rack.
ARTICLE 9 - SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION 9.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this Article is to protect and enhance the City's character and its economic base through the
provision of appropriate sign standards and the avoidance of excessive or obtrusive signs on privately owned
property. This Article also seeks to limit the size, type and location of signs in order to protect the public safety,
health, and welfare; to maintain the quality of community life; to maintain the beauty of the City's natural and
architectural features; to ensure that signs do not visually dominate the zone in which they are located; and to
provide appropriate standards for achieving the primary intended purpose of identification.
SECTION 9.2 ADMINISTRATION
A. The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby empowered to inspect and examine any tract of land and to
order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein in violation of any provision of this Sign
Section. After any such order has been served, no work shall proceed on any building, other structure or tract of
land covered by such order, except to correct such violation or comply with the order.
B. For new signs associated with new construction of a structure. The sign shall be approved by the City
Council, in accordance with the regulations of this Section and the Site Plan requirements.
C. No sign shall be constructed, established, placed, or painted on a building, structure, or site, and no existing
sign shall be modified except for change of copy or repair, unless such sign has been approved by the City
Manager or his/her designee and issued a sign permit, unless exempt from these regulations, or is a temporary
sign.
D. Any sign authorized in this Article is allowed to contain a noncommercial message in place of any other
authorized commercial or noncommercial message.
SECTION 9.3 APPLICATION AND PERMITS
The application for a sign permit and the applicable fee must be submitted on such forms provided by the City
and must be accompanied by the information, scaled drawings of the sign including placement thereof and
descriptive data to ensure proper regulation of the sign and to ensure compliance with this Section.
A. Issuance of Permits. If the plans and specifications for a sign set forth in any application for a
permit conform to all of the requirements of this Section and other City regulations, the administering
employee will issue the appropriate permit.
B. Permit Not Required. A sign permit is not required:
1. To repaint a sign or to restore a conforming sign to its original condition if the sign
otherwise complies with this Section;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/536
2. To periodically change only the letters, numbers or message portion of a lawful sign
specifically designed for that purpose;
3. For the placement or use of a stake sign; or
4. For the placement of a temporary freestanding sign as provided for in this Section.
C. Duration. Unless earlier revoked, a sign permit to construct, erect or place a freestanding or wall
sign is valid for one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. The durations of
temporary signs are placed with each sign definition.
D. Revocation. A sign permit may be revoked for a violation of this Section. The City Manager or
his/her designee shall give prior written notice of a proposed revocation to the permittee and an
opportunity to respond to the reasons for revocation prior to making a decision thereon.
E. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of an administering employee in the application of
this Section may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
procedures applicable to appeals of decisions under the City's zoning regulations. The Zoning Board
of Adjustment will hear and decide appeals in accordance with the provisions applicable to appeals
under the City's zoning regulations.
F. Variances. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant variances to the provisions of these
regulations in accordance with Section 3.2.6.
SECTION 9.4 DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS
A. Abandoned Sign - A sign that had a permit, but the permit has expired and/or does not identify or advertise
a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, event, or activity, or pertains to a time, event or purpose
which no longer applies. Abandoned Signs are prohibited in the City.
B. Athletic fields - Signs located on the field side of scoreboards and fences of athletic fields. No sign permit
required.
C. Audible Sign - Any sign that emits music, talking, words, or other sound amplification. Audible Signs are
prohibited in the City with the exception of signs in connection with drive-up windows menu boards.
D. Awning Sign (Internally Illuminated) - Any sign which is located on or is part of an awning if the awning
contains any form of interior illumination that is intended to or has the effect of making the sign more readily
visible from a public street. Internally illuminated awning signs are prohibited in the City.
E. Balloon Sign - A temporary inflatable device sign.
1. Time - Sign permit required. For commercial establishments the sign may not be installed for a
time period greater than fourteen (14) days. For authorized community events, which shall include,
but not be limited to, athletic events, parades, street fairs, and other civic, cultural, or recreational
events; such signs shall be displayed for a period not to exceed the authorized duration of the event.
2. Place - no balloon sign, or portion thereof, shall extend to, or interfere with, any utility line or
wire, or interfere with any pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or extend into or over any public right-ofway.
3. Manner - No balloon shall exceed eighteen (18) inches in diameter and shall not be displayed
above a height of sixteen (16) feet or the height of the nearest adjacent wall, whichever is lower.
F. Bandit Signs - Any sign which is not exempt or allowed by permit. These signs include signs located on or
attached to a streetlight, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, traffic-control device, street sign, or other city-owned
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/536
building, facility, structure, or equipment, and signs attached to trees and shrubs. Bandit signs are prohibited
within the City.
G. Banners - A temporary sign having characters, letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth[,] canvas, or
other light fabric or similar material, with the only purpose of such nonrigid material being for background. A
Banner advertises the business's name, opening dates, telephone number, hours of operation, and/or types of
products offered or sold.
1. Time - A sign permit is required to be issued by the City Manager or his/her designee. No more
than two (2) permits per calendar year may be issued by the City for any owner, tenant or occupant of
a lot or leased space within a nonresidential zone. Each permit may be issued for a time period of up
to thirty (30) days.
2. Place - Banners may only be issued permits to owner, occupant or tenant of any lot in any
nonresidential zoning district. The banner shall be securely affixed to the wall of the structure or
building, where feasible.
3. Manner - Banners shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. The banner shall have affixed
to it a label or mark identifying the expiration date of the permit.
4. Maintenance - All banners must be maintained in good condition and repair. Any banner which
is torn, faded, sagging or in disrepair shall be replaced at the request of the City Manager or his/her
designee.
5. Authorization for Removal - The applicant for a temporary banner permit shall consent to the
City Manager or his/her designee entering upon the lot or parcel solely for the removal of the
temporary banner if it is not promptly removed at the expiration of the permitted period. Such entry
and removal shall occur only after not less than forty-eight (48) hours' written notice posted upon the
property and left with a manager or other responsible person at the location of the temporary banner.
6. Deposit - The applicant for any temporary banner permit shall deposit a cash deposit in an
amount to be set by the City which shall be forfeit in the event it is necessary for the City to remove
the temporary banner under the provisions of this ordinance.
7. Revocation of Permit - The City Manager or his/her designee may revoke a permit granted
under this section under the following conditions:
a) The permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, or
b) The banner(s) is not maintained pursuant to this ordinance.
8. Appeal - The applicant may appeal the decision by requesting a hearing in writing before the
City Manager or his/her designee within ten (10) days of receiving written Notice of Revocation. The
City Council shall hold a hearing as soon as practical. Within forty-eight (48) hours after such City
Council hearing the City Manager or his/her designee shall mail a written Statement of Decision
indicating therein the factual basis for the decision of the City Council.
9. The City Manager or his/her designee may remove any banner by written notice pursuant to this
ordinance if the Notice of Revocation is not appealed or if, after hearing, the Statement of Decision
affirms the Notice of Revocation.
H. Billboard - A sign which is a primary sign and advertises businesses, commodities, activities, services or
persons which are not usually available or present upon the premises upon which such sign is located, or which
directs persons to any location not on the premises. Billboards are prohibited in the City.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/536
I. Business Door Nameplates - Any sign which identifies the name of a business and may contain the name
and address of the business.
1. Time - No sign permit required. Business Door Nameplates may be installed permanently on the
building.
2. Place - Business Door Nameplates may only be affixed to the door of each individual business
or immediately adjacent thereto.
3. Manner - A Business Door Nameplate may not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
J. Canopy and Awning Signs - Signs printed on, painted on, or attached onto a canopy or awning[.]
1. Time - A sign permit is required. Canopy and awning signs may not be issued for any structure
until they have been permitted by the City Manager or his/her designee.
2. Place - Canopy and awning signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential
use in a nonresidential zoning district. Canopy and awning signs are limited to the ground floor.
3. Manner - Canopy and awning signs shall not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the length of the canopy
or awning and shall consist of no more than one line of lettering not exceeding twelve (12) inches in
height, and shall be located on the valance of such canopy or awning. In addition to lettering, an
identification emblem, insignia, or other similar feature not exceeding an area of four (4) square feet
may be printed on, painted on, or attached onto any other portion of the canopy or awning.
K. Construction Sign - A temporary sign used to advertise or display contact information of property owners,
opening dates, architects, contractors, engineers, landscape architects, and/or financiers, who are engaged with
the design, construction, improvement or financing of a residential subdivision with homes under construction
within the subdivision to which it pertains or within a commercial project to which it pertains.
1. Time - No sign permit required. May only be installed during the period of construction.
2. Place - Construction signs shall be installed no closer than fifteen (15') feet to any property line.
The minimum distance between a construction sign and another construction sign is two hundred
(200') feet.
3. Manner - Construction signs are not to exceed a total of thirty-two (32) square feet. A larger
total area may be permitted subject to the approval of the City Manager or his/her designee for
projects on larger sites with a substantial length of street frontage.
L. Custom Decorative Flags, Banners and Pennants - Custom decorative flags, banners, or pennants utilized as
an integrated and permanent part of the architectural design of a building or site may be permitted pursuant to
the approval of the City Council and subject to the following criteria:
1. That the flags, banners or pennants do not contain written material or text, and are not solely for
the purpose of calling attention to the premises.
2. That the flags, banners or pennants contribute to a theme or architectural harmony or
architectural integrity of the project, building, structure, or site.
3. That the flags, banners or pennants do not adversely affect other properties in the neighborhood.
4. That the applicant has provided, or will provide, adequate written assurance that the flags,
banners and pennants will be maintained in good repair and condition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/536
M. Dilapidated Sign - Any surface element, background, or support of any Sign that has finished materials
that are missing, broken, bent, cracked, decayed, dented, harmful, hazardous, illegible, leaning, splintered,
ripped, torn, twisted, or unsightly. Signs that are deteriorated, dilapidated, or unsafe are prohibited within the
City.
N. Exempt Signs - The following signs do not require a sign permit. Refer to each sign's definition for specific
qualifications. Athletic Fields; Business Door Nameplates; Construction Sign; Governmental Sign; Holiday
Signs and Lights; Mailboxes and addresses; National or State Flags; Plaques; Private Traffic-Control Sign;
Railroad Sign; Real Estate Sign; Signs on outdoor machines, devices or equipment; Signs on persons; Unused
Signs; Utility or Hazard Signs; Vehicle Sign; Window and Door Sign.
O. Governmental Sign - A Governmental Sign is any sign which is erected or maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any governmental function or is required by law, ordinance or governmental regulation; or used to
convey health, safety and welfare information to the public regarding City, County, State, or Federal government
requirements and regulations such as water restrictions, burn bans, or other similar information. Governmental
signs may also be defined as those located on property owned, leased or under the control of a governmental
entity. No sign permit required.
P. Grand Opening Banner - In addition to the limitations of this ordinance, the owner, and any tenant or
occupant of a lot shall be permitted a banner, for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, whose sole purpose is to
announce or advertise the initial opening of an establishment, project, business or other enterprise.
Q. Hanging Signs - A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface such as a canopy
or marquee and is supported by such surface.
1. Time - A sign permit is required.
2. Place - Hanging signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use in a
nonresidential zoning district. Hanging signs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet vertical distance
from the sidewalk grade and at approximately a ninety (90) degree angle to the face of the building.
3. Manner - The maximum area of such signs shall be determined by the following:
4. The length of such signs shall not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the projecting dimension of the
awning, canopy, or parapet overhang.
5. Such signs shall not exceed two (2) feet in height.
R. Holiday Signs and Lights - Temporary signs, including Christmas lights, containing only holiday messages
and no commercial advertising.
S. Illegally Placed Sign - Sign erected without the permission of the owner, or his agent, of the property on
which or over which such sign is located.
T. Illuminated Sign (High Intensity) - Signs which are illuminated from within or without that:
1. Are illuminated to such intensity or without proper shielding so as to constitute a hazard to the
operation of motor vehicles upon a public street or substantially interfere with the reasonable
enjoyment of residential property; or
2. Have any type of intermittent illumination, including flashing, fading, revolving or blinking
lights, or any type of moving, traveling or changing message by means of lights or illumination.
3. Are located or illuminated so that they obscure or interfere with the entirety of an official traffic
sign, signal, or device, or obstruct or interfere with the view of approaching, emerging or intersecting
traffic, or prevent any traveler on any Street from obtaining a clear view of approaching vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/536
4. Illuminated Sign (High Intensity) are prohibited in the City.
U. Imitation Governmental Sign - Any sign, which, by color, shape, location or other means endangers public
safety by resembling or conflicting with any traffic-control sign or device or which due to its dangerous
construction, manner of display, or location is hazardous. Imitation Governmental Signs are prohibited in the
City.
V. Mailboxes and Addresses - Addresses and names located on mailboxes. No sign permit is required.
W. Mobile Advertisement Sign - An operable or inoperable vehicle with illuminated or nonilluminated panels,
other devices, or appendages used to advertise, promote or draw attention to products, services, events, or other
similar purpose. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer on public property, or on private property so as to be
visible from a public right-of-way, which vehicle has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising
device for the purpose of providing advertisements of products located on the same or nearby property or
directing people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property. This definition is not intended
to apply to standard advertising or identification practices as defined as a Vehicle Sign. Mobile Advertisement
Signs are prohibited in the City.
X. Monument Signs - A sign supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a
solid and opaque base and used to identify tenants or name of a business located within a development or on a
separately platted lot.
1. Time - A sign permit is required. Monument signs may not be issued for any parcel until they
have been permitted by the City Manager or his/her designee.
2. Place - Monument signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use.
a) Monument signs shall be set back from property lines by fifteen (15) feet.
b) One (1) monument sign per street frontage may be permitted.
c) A monument sign must not be located within one hundred twenty-five (125) linear feet of
another freestanding sign.
3. Manner -
a) The maximum sign area permitted shall not be more than one hundred (100) square feet
per face for any monument sign. Not more than two (2) sign faces shall be permitted, and such
sign faces shall be parallel.
b) Monument signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height above existing grade, except where
otherwise allowed by this Section. Berming incorporated with the placement of the sign shall be
included in any height measurement.
c) Monument signs shall be placed in a landscaped area of not less than the area of one face
of such sign.
Y. Moving Sign - Any sign, sign appendages or apparatus designed or made to move freely in the wind or
designed or made to move by an electrical or mechanical device. Moving signs, and/or any sign appendage that
moves, are prohibited in the City.
Z. Multi-tenant Development Sign - A MTDS is a sign that is supported from the grade to the bottom of the
sign having, or appearing to have, a solid base or a sign that is supported by poles or supports in or upon the
ground independent of any building and is used to identify multiple tenants within a development. A MTDS is
permissible on a nonresidential zoned property subject to the following conditions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/536
1. Time - A sign permit is required. A sign permit for a MTDS shall not be issued to erect, install
or place a MTDS until a subdivision plat, and/or site plan for the property has been approved and
after issuance of a building permit for a building within the development.
2. Place -
a) MTDS shall be located within a development that may contain multiple tenants and/or
multiple lots under a single development.
b) A MTDS is permitted on the same lot as a Monument Sign, but the total number of MTDS
and Monument Signs located within a development shall generally not exceed the number of
lots located within the development. The total number of signs shall not be permitted to exceed
to the total number of lots in the development when additional MTDS are permitted on a
property.
c) The minimum front yard setback for a MTDS is fifteen (15') feet from the property line.
d) No minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks are required for a MTDS, but a MTDS shall
not be located closer than seventy-five (75') feet to another MTDS or a Monument Sign.
3. Manner -
a) A MTDS shall be constructed of masonry materials and a design consistent with the
buildings located on the property.
b) The maximum area and height of a MTDS shall be based on the classification of the
streets adjacent to the development.
Street Classification Maximum Area Maximum Height
Local and Collector Streets Fifteen (15) square feet per
tenant up to 120 square feet
inclusive of development
identification
Fifteen (15') Feet
Minor/Major Arterials Twenty-five (25) square feet
per tenant up to three hundred
(300) square feet inclusive of
development identification
Twenty (20') Feet
State Highways Forty (40) square feet per
tenant up to 400 square feet
inclusive of development
identification
Forty (40') Feet
c) Architectural embellishments for MTDS are encouraged. Exceptions in maximum height and
area may be considered through the review of the Unified Sign Development Plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/536
d) One MTDS is permitted per street frontage of the development. One additional MTDS is
permitted along a street for each additional seven hundred and fifty (750') linear feet, or portion
thereof, of street frontage that exceeds seven hundred and fifty (750') linear feet of street frontage.
AA. National or State Flags - A national or state flag, or both, on any one premises if they do not exceed the
total area regulations applicable to freestanding signs for that premises. No sign permit required.
BB. Noncompliant Sign - Any sign that does not comply with the standards of this Section or other City
ordinances. Noncompliant signs are prohibited in the City.
CC. Non-Railroad Related Sign - A freestanding sign located on any railroad right-of-way that is not used for
or related to railroad operations. Non-Railroad Related Signs are prohibited in the City.
DD. Off-Premise Sign - A sign that advertises, promotes or pertains to a business, person, organization,
activity, event, place, service, product, etc. at a location other than where the business, person, organization,
activity, event, place, service, product, etc. is located. With the exception of political signs, off-premise signs are
prohibited in the City of Sansom Park.
EE. Plaques - Historical and commemorative plaques of recognized historical societies and organizations. No
sign permit is required if the signs are less than fifteen (15) square feet in total area.
FF. Portable Sign - Any sign designed or intended to be relocated from time to time, whether or not it is
permanently attached to a building or structure, or is located on the ground. Portable Signs include signs on
wheels or on portable or mobile structures, such as, among other things, trailers, skids, banners, tents or other
portable structures, A-frame signs, T-shaped signs, airborne devices, or other devices used for temporary display
or advertising. Portable Signs are prohibited in the City except as specifically allowed by this Ordinance.
GG. Private Traffic-Control Sign - Signs on private property containing no advertising that direct the
movement of traffic, warn of obstacles or overhead clearances, or control parking, including entrance and exit
signs. No sign permit required.
HH. Prohibited Signs - It is unlawful for any person to erect, install, construct, display, maintain, reconstruct,
place, locate, relocate or make use of any of the following signs for advertising purposes. These signs are
specifically defined within this Section. Abandoned Sign; Audible Sign; Awning Sign (Internally Illuminated);
Bandit Signs; Billboards, Blocking of Public Access Signs; Dilapidated Sign; Illegally Placed Sign; Illuminated
Sign (High Intensity); Imitation Governmental Sign; Mobile Advertisement Sign; Noncompliant Sign; Non-
Railroad Related Sign; Portable Sign; Off-Premise Sign; Roof Sign; and signs which interfere with Sight
Visibility.
II. Projecting Signs - A sign projecting out from and attached to the exterior wall of any building and forming
an angle of thirty (30) degrees or more to said wall.
1. Time - A sign permit is required.
2. Place - Projecting signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use in a
nonresidential zoning district. Projecting signs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet vertical distance
from the sidewalk grade. No projecting sign shall extend above the adjacent eave or parapet line of
the roof.
3. Manner - The maximum sign area per face shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each linear
foot of building frontage.
JJ. Pylon Sign - A sign erected on a vertical framework consisting of two or more uprights supported by the
ground independent of support from any building. Pylon Signs shall only be permitted on properties zoned
Commercial or Industrial.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/536
1. Time - A Sign permit is required. A Sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a
Pylon Sign on a property until a site plan and a sign visibility study has been approved for
development of the property and after the issuance of a building permit for a building on the property.
2. Place - The minimum front yard setback for a Pylon Sign is fifteen (15') feet from the property
line. The minimum side and rear setback from the property line shall be equal to ten (10) percent of
the lot width. Pylon Signs shall not be placed within any designated or dedicated public utility
easements without the approval of an Easement Use Agreement from the appropriate utility. Pylon
Signs shall not be placed within two hundred (200) feet of another Pylon Sign.
3. Manner - The maximum area and height of a Pylon Sign shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet in area or exceed forty (40) feet in height.
a) Pylon Signs, including supporting structures shall be constructed of masonry materials and
a design consistent with the buildings located on the property.
b) The maximum area and height of a Pylon Sign shall be based on the classification of the
streets adjacent to the development.
Street Classification Maximum Area Maximum Height
Local and Collector Streets Fifty (50) Feet Fifteen (15) Feet
Minor Arterials One Hundred (100) Feet Twenty (20) Feet
Major Arterials, including Highway
199 and Azle Avenue
One Hundred Fifty (150) Feet Thirty (30) Feet
KK. Railroad Sign - Any sign on railroad property placed or maintained in reference to the operation of the
railroad. No sign permit required.
LL. Residential Nameplate - An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the occupants residing
in the residence.
1. Time - No sign permit is required.
2. Place - Allowed in the SF-10, SF-6, SF-5, D, and MF zoning districts.
3. Manner - Residential nameplates shall be unilluminated and shall not exceed one (1) square foot
in area.
MM. Real Estate Sign - An on-site, temporary stake sign used to advertise a home or residential property for
sale or lease. A real estate sign is used to advertise the name of the owner or realtor, telephone number, property
information, and/or website address[.]
1. Time - No sign permit required. A real estate sign may be erected 24 hours each and every day.
2. Place - A real estate sign shall be erected only on the lot on which the home or property is for
sale or lease. A real estate sign shall be erected no closer than ten (10') feet from the street pavement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/536
3. Manner - A real estate sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, except where more than
one unit of a condominium is offered for sale, rent or lease, the signs may be combined in a single
supporting structure, and the sign area shall not exceed three (3) square feet per unit offered. A
maximum of one real estate sign shall be erected on a lot.
NN. Roof Sign - Signs located on a roof or attached to a building if it projects above the highest point of the
facade or parapet. Roof Signs are prohibited in the City.
OO. Sight Visibility - Any sign that violates any sight visibility regulations of the City. These signs are
prohibited in the City.
PP. Signs for Permitted Uses within Residential Zones (Unilluminated) - A sign for permitted nonresidential
uses within certain residential zones including SF-10, SF-6, SF-5, D, MF and MH.
1. Time - A sign permit is required.
2. Place - Allowed in the SF-10, SF-6, SF-5, D, MF and MH zoning districts. Nameplate signs
shall be set back ten (10) feet from the property line. Such signs shall not be placed within twenty
(20) feet of drives providing ingress and egress to the property. These signs shall not be placed higher
than twenty-five (25) feet above grade.
3. Manner - These signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area.
QQ. Signs on outdoor machines, devices, and equipment - Signs located on outdoor machines, devices or
equipment which display the trademark, trade name, manufacturer, cost, or operating or service instructions or
similar information but do not advertise the business where located. This exemption includes signs on coinoperated
vending machines, fuel dispensing pumps, telephone facilities, automatic teller machines, automotive
vacuum cleaners, amusement rides, and similar machines, devices, or equipment. No sign permit required.
RR. Signs on persons - Hand-held signs on persons. No sign permit required.
SS. Stake Sign - A temporary sign with a base/stake commonly made of metal, wood or other similar material
with an end for driving into the ground.
1. Time - A stake sign may only be displayed between the weekend hours of 8:00 a.m. on Friday to
10:00 a.m. on the following Monday. A stake sign that advertises a particular event or happening
must be removed within three (3) days after the conclusion of the event by the owner of the premises
on which it is located.
2. Place - A stake sign may not be located within the right-of-way of a public street or within a
railroad right-of-way. On any public property that is used as an election polling place, a person may
place a stake sign on the public property in a manner consistent with State law. The City may remove
and dispose of any sign that does not comply with these regulations.
3. Manner - A stake sign may not have a total area in excess of nine (9) square feet or a height in
excess of four (4) feet.
TT. Temporary Freestanding Sign - A temporary on-premise sign.
1. Time - A sign permit is required. The permit shall be valid for one (1) year and renewable for
one (1) additional year for one (1) temporary freestanding sign on any one premises. The sign must
be in compliance with the place and manner sections of this definition.
2. Place - Set back fifteen (15) feet from the property line and is not located within a sight
visibility area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/536
3. Manner - Temporary freestanding signs shall be constructed as follows:
a) Is nonilluminated;
b) The face is fabricated of one-half (1/2) inch thick medium density overlay plywood of
yellow treated pine mounted on both sides of a frame with dimensions of four (4) feet by four
(4) feet where no part of the frame or posts extend beyond the sign faces at the sides or top of
the sign;
c) The plywood face of the sign is four (4) feet in width and eight (8) feet in height and
extends down to within six (6) inches of the ground;
d) The sign is anchored by two (2) four (4) inch by four (4) inch yellow pine treated posts
anchored in sand-filled holes extending down at least two feet in the ground; and
e) The plywood face is securely held to the frame by galvanized nails or screws installed with
the heads flush to the surface; all seams are tight; all holes are filled and sanded smooth; and all
surfaces are coated with primer and painted with good quality exterior grade semi-gloss paint.
UU. Temporary Identification Banner - In addition to the limitations of this ordinance any owner, tenant or
occupant of a lot not otherwise having a permitted permanent sign shall be entitled to a banner for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) days to direct attention to the name of the owner or occupant of the premise upon which the
banner is placed, or identifying the premises; or advertising goods manufactured or produced or services
rendered on the premises upon which the banner is placed pending the installation of a permanent sign.
VV. Temporary Sign - Any sign used to display information that relates to a land use, or a sign with a limited
duration which is not rigidly and permanently installed into or on the ground, attached to a building, or as
identified in this Section as Balloon Sign; Banners; Grand Opening Banner; Temporary Freestanding Sign;
Temporary Identification Banner; Stake Sign; and Wind Device Sign.
WW. Utility and Hazard Signs - Signs marking utility or underground communication or transmission lines
and hazards. No sign permit is required.
XX. Vehicle Sign - A sign attached to any vehicle, truck, car, bus, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle,
motorcycle or any other vehicle; however, any vehicle, whether operable or not, shall not be parked and/or
decorated where the intent is to use the vehicle as advertising. Vehicle signs shall exclude bumper stickers and
state-required registration or inspection stickers/identifications.
1. Time - No sign permit required. Vehicle signs are allowed 24 hours each and every continuing
day.
2. Place - Vehicle signs are permitted provided that during periods of inactivity such vehicle is not
parked in the right-of-way or placed in a manner that the vehicle sign is readily visible from an
adjacent right-of-way. “For sale” signs placed in or on vehicles when the vehicle is parked or placed
in a manner that the vehicle sign is readily visible from an adjacent public right-of-way are
prohibited, with the exception that one vehicle may contain a “for sale” sign parked or placed at an
occupied single-family, two-family, townhome, or multifamily dwelling unit is permitted.
3. Manner - Vehicle signs are permitted provided that:
a) The primary purpose of the sign is not for display of the sign;
b) The signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle;
c) The vehicle is operable, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets and
actively used in the daily function of the business to which such sign relates;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/536
d) The vehicle is not used as a static display, advertising a product or service, not utilized as
storage, shelter, or distribution points for commercial products or services for the public.
YY. Wall Sign - Any sign either painted or erected against an exterior wall or erected parallel to a wall. A
Wall Sign is a sign erected parallel to and extending not more than eighteen inches (18") from the facade of any
building to which it is attached, supported throughout its entire length by the building face. A Wall Sign
identifies the name of a business and/or logo of a business. Neon shall not be installed on any wall sign installed
below nine feet (9') from grade. A Wall Sign may include neon tubing attached directly to a wall surface when
forming a border for the subject matter or when forming letters, logos, or pictorial designs. This definition shall
not include painted on murals. Wall Signs are permissible subject to the following conditions and upon issuance
of a sign permit:
1. Time - A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, place or install a
Wall Sign on a property until a site plan is approved by the City Council for development of the
property and after issuance of a building permit for a building on the property.
2. Place - Wall signs are permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use. When projections
on the wall face prevent the erection of the sign flat against the wall face, the space between the back
of the sign and the wall shall be closed at the top, bottom and ends with incombustible materials. For
buildings with a height of five (5) stories or greater, a wall sign may extend above the roofline of the
building on which it is attached up to twenty-five (25) percent of the sign's height. The Wall Sign
must be located on that portion of the building that is five (5) stories or greater.
3. Manner -
a) The total number of Wall Signs allowed shall be as follows:
Building (Elevation) Width (in
Feet)
Number of Allowed Wall Signs
< 65' 1
66' up to and including 100' 2
101' up to and including 150' 3
=>151' 4
b) The total cumulative size of all allowed Primary Wall Signs per elevation shall be as
follows:
Building Height
Measured at Plate
(Feet)
Maximum Sign
Height (Feet)
Maximum Percentage
of Wall Length*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/536
0 to 20 4 75
20 to 30 6 60
> 30 8 50
*Note: Wall Signs shall not occupy more than the maximum percentage of the length of
any wall on which it is erected. Corporate logos may exceed the maximum sign height by
50 percent.
ZZ. Wind Device Sign - Any devices made of cloth, canvas, plastic or any flexible material designed to float
or designed to move, or moves freely in the wind, with or without a frame or other structure, used for the
purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a business, commodity, service, sale or product. Wind device
signs may not extend beyond the property lines of the premises where located, over any public highway, street or
sidewalk, or to a greater height than the maximum height allowed for a structure on the premises. Only one (1)
wind device sign is allowed per lot. Sign permit is required.
AAA. Windows and Door Sign - Signs painted on or placed on and supported by the glass surfaces of windows
or doors, if not illuminated with the intent of being viewed from the public street. No sign permit required.
SECTION 9.5 MANNER OF MEASUREMENT
A. The size of a sign is determined by its total area. For freestanding signs, the total area includes the entire
structure on which all signs are placed or mounted.
B. The setback is measured perpendicularly from the curb line to the closest point of the sign.
C. The height of a sign is measured from the natural ground level at the base of the sign to the highest point of
the sign.
D. The width of a sign is measured along a line drawn from the outermost edges of the sign, parallel to the
ground.
E. Directional signs or incidental signs are signs such as “entrance” or “exit' that give information but do not
contain advertisements. They require a sign permit but do not count toward the size requirements of this section.
F. Informational signs are signs that give information of a noncommercial or advertising nature such as
historic markers, highway identification markers, or traffic signs within the parking area of a building. They
require a sign permit but do not count toward the size requirements of this document.
SECTION 9.6 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. Nonconforming signs are allowed if the sign was erected in compliance with the regulations in effect prior
to the effective date of this ordinance or was lawfully in place at the time the sign was annexed into the City.
B. A freestanding sign becomes nonconforming if not removed within thirty (30) days of the date the sign
becomes an abandoned sign. Within sixty (60) days of the date a freestanding sign becomes an abandoned sign,
the message portion of the sign must be painted over, covered, removed, or modified so that the remaining sign
structure is left visually unobtrusive, presents a solid facade, and does not appear to be in disrepair or
dismantled.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/536
C. Any nonconforming sign, including its supporting structure, which is destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or
deteriorated must not be replaced, repaired or renovated, in whole or in part, if such replacement, repair or
renovation would require an expenditure of monies in excess of sixty (60) percent of the reproduction cost of a
new sign, including its supporting structure, which is substantially the same or similar to the nonconforming sign
destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated, unless such alteration or repair makes the sign conforming. A
person may not repair, renovate or alter a nonconforming sign without first receiving a sign permit. A permit is
not required to repaint a sign.
D. The City Manager or his/her designee may, whenever deemed necessary to reasonably determine the
applicability of this Section, require the owner of the nonconforming sign to submit two or more independent
estimates from established sign companies of the cost of replacing, repairing or renovating, in whole or in part,
the existing nonconforming sign and two or more independent estimates from established sign companies of the
reproduction cost of a new sign, including its supporting structure, which is substantially the same or similar to
the nonconforming sign destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated.
E. Any part of a sign or the supporting structure of a sign that is a nonconforming use may be repaired or
renovated only by the use of the types of materials and dimensions of materials that are the same as the parts of
the sign or supporting structure being repaired or renovated.
ARTICLE 10 - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in this
section. Words used in the present tense shall also include the future tense; words used in the masculine gender
shall also include the feminine gender; words used in the singular number shall also include the plural number;
and words in the plural number shall also include the singular number, except where the natural construction of
the writing indicates otherwise. The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
Accessory use means a use that is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land
or buildings and that is located upon the same lot therewith.
Agricultural farming and livestock means uses such as dairy, livestock, swine, poultry and hatcheries, horse
raising and breeding, field and truck crop, horticulture, hydroponic raising.
Alley means a minor right-of-way that is dedicated to public use and which affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may also be used for
public utility purposes.
Amusement arcade (also video arcade) means any building, room, place or establishment of any nature or kind,
and by whatever name called, where more than ten percent (10%) of the public floor area is devoted to three or
more amusement devices that are operated for a profit, whether the same is operated in conjunction with any
other business or not, including but not limited to such amusement devices as coin-operated pinball machines,
video games, electronic games, shuffleboards, pool tables or other similar amusement devices. However, the
term “amusement device,” as used herein, shall not include musical devices, billiard tables which are not coinoperated,
machines that are designed exclusively for small children, and devices designed to train persons in
athletic skills or golf, tennis, baseball, archery or other similar sports.
Amusement, commercial (indoor), means an amusement enterprise that is wholly enclosed within a building
which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property
line, and that provides activities, services and/or instruction for the entertainment of customers or members, but
not including amusement arcades. Uses may include, but are not limited to, the following: bowling alley, ice
skating rink, martial arts club, racquetball/handball club, indoor tennis courts/club, indoor swimming pool or
scuba diving facility, and other similar types of uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/536
Amusement, commercial (outdoor), means an amusement enterprise offering entertainment and/or games of skill
to the general public for a fee wherein any portion of the activity takes place outdoors and including, but not
limited to, a golf driving range, archery range, miniature golf course, batting cages, go-cart tracks, amusement
parks, and other similar types of uses.
Antique shop means a retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture and/or other artifacts
of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building.
Arcade means an establishment in which is located six or more coin-operated games, online gaming, noncoinoperated
gaming and sweepstakes.
Art gallery or museum means an institution for the collection, display and/or distribution of objects of art or
science, and which is typically sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and generally open to the public.
Assisted living facility means residential care facilities that provide housing, meals, personal care and supportive
services to older persons and disabled adults and are able to live independently. Units include limited or full
kitchen facilities. Full-time medical or nursing care is not typically provided by the facility, but may be privately
arranged for by individual residents on a part-time or temporary basis.
Auto parts and accessory sales means the use of any building or other premises for the primary display and sale
of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. No outside storage is
permitted.
Auto rental means storage of vehicles for the purpose of renting automobiles or light trucks.
Auto sales means retail sales of new or used automobiles or light load vehicles and the service of new or used
vehicles.
Auto storage or auto auction means the storage or impoundment, on a lot or tract which is paved in accordance
with parking lot paving requirements set forth in this Ordinance, of operable automobiles for the purpose of
holding such vehicles for sale, distribution and/or storage. This definition shall not include the storage of
wrecked or inoperable vehicles.
Automobile means a self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the
conveyance of goods and people including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, light duty trucks and
sport utility vehicles, vans and minivans, motor scooters and motorcycles.
Automobile accessory installation means minor installation of minor automobile accessories such as car alarms,
radio and stereo equipment, window tinting, pin striping, cellular telephones and similar accessories.
Automobile parking (garages and commercial lots) [sic]
Automobile repair garage means an establishment providing major or minor automobile repair services to all
motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles.
Automobile repair, major, means general repair or reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and
transmissions for motor vehicles; wrecker service; collision repair services including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; undercoating and rustproofing; those uses
listed under “Automobile repair, minor” and other similar uses.
Automobile repair, minor, means minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes and batteries; diagnostic
services; minor maintenance services such as grease, oil, spark plug and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency
road service; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses and brake parts; automobile washing and polishing;
performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; normal servicing of air
conditioning systems; and other similar minor services for motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles, but not
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/536
including any operation named under “Automobile repair, major” or any other similar use. Vehicles which are
inoperative or are being repaired may not remain parked outside these facilities overnight[.]
Bakery or confectionery (industrial) means a manufacturing facility over 1,500 square feet for the production
and distribution of baked goods and confectioneries intended for off-premises distribution.
Bakery or confectionery (nonindustrial) means a facility less than 1,500 square feet for the production and/or
sale of baked goods.
Bar, Lounge or Tavern: An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises that derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue on an annual basis from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for on-premises consumption.
Barn means a structure intended for the purpose of storing farming and ranching related equipment and/or
housing livestock.
Basement (or cellar) means a portion of a building that is at least one-half (1/2) of its height underground. A
basement shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In
cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the City Manager or his/her designee shall determine the
outline of the block.
Board means the Board of Adjustment of the City of Sansom Park, Texas. If a Board of Adjustment is not
appointed by the City of Sansom Park, then any reference to a Board of Adjustment shall refer to the City
Council as defined by Section 211.008(g) of the Texas Local Government Code.
Boardinghouse or roominghouse means a dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, lodging and/or meals are provided.
Bus station or terminal means any premises for the transient housing and/or parking of motor-driven buses and
the loading and unloading of passengers.
Car title loan business: An establishment that makes small consumer loans that leverage the equity of a car or
other vehicle as collateral where the title to such vehicle is owned free and clear by the loan applicant and any
existing liens on the car or vehicle cancel the application. Failure to repay the loan or make interest payments to
extend the loan allows the lender to take possession of the car or vehicle.
Caretakers' or guards' residence means a residence located on a premises with a main residential or
nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises.
Carnival, circus or tent service (temporary) means outdoor or indoor commercial amusement provided on a
temporary basis.
Carport means a structure that is open on a minimum of three (3) sides and designed or used to shelter vehicles.
Also called “covered parking area.”
Carwash, Automated: A facility where a customer can have a motorcycle, automobile and light load vehicle
washed in exchange for financial consideration.
Carwash, Self-Serve: A facility, typically coin-operated, used by the customer to wash motorcycles, automobiles
and light load vehicles.
Cemetery or mausoleum means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated
for cemetery purposes, including columbariums[,] crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/536
Cemetery, animal, means the same as cemetery except only for the burial of dead animals.
Certificate of occupancy means an official certificate issued by the city through the Building Official or his/her
designee which indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and building codes and which authorizes
legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
Check cashing business. An establishment that provides one or more of the following:
A. An amount of money that is equal to the face of the check or the amount specified in the written
authorization for an electronic transfer of money, less any fee charged for the transaction;
B. An agreement not to cash a check or execute an electronic transfer of money for a specified
period of time; or
C. The cashing of checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper for
compensation by any person or entity for a fee.
Child care center (or day care center) means the care, supervision, training, or education of an unrelated child or
children (13 years old or younger) for less than 24 hours per day in a place other than the child's own home.
City means the City of Sansom Park, Texas.
City Council means the governing body of the City.
City Manager or his/her designee means the City Administrator, inspector or administrative official charged
with responsibility for issuing permits and enforcing this Ordinance and building codes of the City.
Civic center means a building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and which may
include cultural, recreational, athletic, food service, convention and/or entertainment facilities owned and/or
operated by a government agency.
Cleaning plant (commercial/wholesale) means an industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially
nonaqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis.
Cleaning shop or laundry (small shop, pickup and self-service) means a custom cleaning shop not exceeding
2,500 square feet of floor area and may include customer self-service laundry and cleaning.
College or university means an institution established for educational purposes, accredited or recognized by the
state, offering courses for study beyond the secondary education level and covering a program or series of
programs of academic study.
Community home means community-based residential home as defined and regulated by Chapter 123, Human
Resources Code, of the Texas state statutes.
Comprehensive plan means the plan adopted by the City that consists of graphic and textual policies which
govern the future development of the City and which consists of various components governing specific
geographic areas and functions and services of the City.
Concrete or asphalt batching plant (permanent) means a permanent manufacturing facility for the production of
concrete or asphalt.
Concrete batching plant (temporary) means a temporary manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or
asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed.
Contractor's shop with outside storage yard means a building, part of a building, or land area for the
construction or storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/536
Convenience Store with or without gasoline sales means a retail establishment that sells food and other
consumable and nonconsumable products for off-premise use or consumption. This definition shall also include
the dispensing or sale of motor vehicle fuels, lubricants, and accessories, but shall not include automotive repair
or the sale of replacement parts.
Copy shop or printing shop means an establishment which reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from a
business, profession, service, industry or government organization and occupies less than 4,000 square feet.
Country club (private) means a land area and buildings which may include a golf course, clubhouse, dining
room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their
guests.
Court means an open, unobstructed space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner
court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street,
alley, yard, or other permanent open space.
Density means the total number of residential buildings allowed upon a given tract of land usually expressed in
total number of units per gross acres or net acre.
Detached means having no physical connection above the top of the floor line of the first floor with any other
building or structure.
Distribution center means a building or facility used for the storage and distribution of wholesale
items/products.
Drapery or furniture upholstering shop means an establishment for the production, display and sale of draperies
and soft coverings for furniture.
Electrical substation means a subsidiary station in which electric current is transformed.
Fairgrounds or exhibition area means an area or space either outside or within a building for the display of
promoting agricultural, horticultural, mechanical, and domestic arts, fine arts, and allied sciences including but
not limited to temporary and seasonal educational, exhibition and entertainment events.
Family means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living together as a single household unit
with common access to, and common use of, all facilities comprising the dwelling unit.
Family home (residential child care) means a child-care facility that provides care for not more than six children
for 24 hours a day, as defined and regulated by Chapter 42, Human Resources Code, of the Texas state statutes.
Farm, ranch, garden, crops or orchard means an area used for growing usual farm products, vegetables, fruits,
trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and
including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not
including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of
agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law.
Feed and grain store means an establishment for the selling of corn, grain and other foodstuffs for animals and
livestock, and including implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm
machinery.
Financial Institution means an establishment for the custody, loan exchange, and/or issue of money, the
extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds.
Fire, police or municipal building means any public service building of the municipal government including a
library or city hall, but excluding storage yards, utility shops and equipment centers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/536
Floodplain means an area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency flood as determined using
standard engineering practices and generally as shown on the FIRM, Flood Insurance Rate Map of the city.
Floor area means the total gross square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including
each floor level, but excluding carports, residential garages, and breezeways.
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the floor area of a main building or buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area.
Florist shop means an establishment for the display and retail sale of flowers, small plants and accessories.
Food processing means a manufacturing or light industrial use that primarily deals with the processing and
packaging of food products that are intended for human consumption, but which are not typically sold in volume
to end users on the premises. Incidental retail sales of food products created and packaged on the premises may
be allowed as an accessory use.
Food Truck Park: The stationary operation of three (3) or more “mobile food vendors” clustered together on a
single private property site, public property site, or within a specific section of public right-of-way.
Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, or union means an organized group having a restricted membership
and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members such as Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, or a
labor union.
Front yard. See “Yard, front.”
Funeral home or mortuary means a place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a
building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
Furniture, home furnishings or appliance store means a retail store selling goods for furnishing the home
including, but not limited to furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, domestic stoves,
refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas appliances.
Garage, private, means an accessory building, or a part of a main building, that is enclosed on at least three
sides, used for storage of automobiles and used solely by the occupants and their guests. Also called “enclosed
parking space.”
Garage, Storage (Parking). A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used exclusively for
parking or storage of self-propelled vehicles, but with no other services provided except facilities for washing.
Garden shop means a facility which is engaged in the selling of flowers, ornamental plants, shrubs, trees, seeds,
garden and lawn supplies, and other materials used in planting and landscaping, but not including cultivation and
propagation activities outside a building.
General manufacturing. See “Industrial, manufacturing.”
Golf course means an area improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses.
Gymnastic or dance studio means a building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast or
dancer or for instructional classes in gymnastics or dance.
Hauling or storage company. See “Motor freight company.”
Heavy load vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight
(GVW) of greater than 16,000 pounds (including trailers), such as large recreational vehicles, tractor-trailers,
buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. The term “truck” shall be construed to mean “heavy load vehicle” unless
specifically stated otherwise.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/536
Heavy machinery sales and storage means a building or open area used for the display, sale, rental or storage of
heavy machinery, tractors or similar machines, or a group of machines which function together as a unit.
Height of buildings: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street
line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to:
A. the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface,
B. to the deck line of mansard roofs, or,
C. to the average height of the highest roof surface.
Home occupation means an occupation commonly carried on within a home by a member of the occupant's
family occupying the dwelling. The use of the home as an occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to the
use of the home as a dwelling.
Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care
for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. Hospitals can be
limited purpose establishments, such as:
A. Acute care means an institution where sick or injured patients are given medical and/or surgical
treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life, and which is licensed by the state.
B. Chronic care means an institution where those persons suffering from illness, injury, deformity
and/or deficiencies pertaining to age are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis
and which is licensed by the state.
Hotel means a facility offering temporary lodging accommodations or guestrooms on a daily rate to the general
public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, housekeeping service and
recreational facilities. A “guestroom” shall be defined as a room designed for the overnight lodging of hotel
guests for an established rate or fee. Guestrooms shall be accessed internally from the structure.
Household appliance service and repair means the maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances that are
customarily used in the home including, but not limited to, washing and drying machines, refrigerators,
dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners, etc., but not
including appliances/equipment which have internal combustion engines.
Independent Senior Living Facility. A facility containing dwelling units, accessory uses, and support services
specifically designed for occupancy by persons 60 years of age or older. Such facilities may include
accommodations for people who are fully ambulatory or who require no medical or personal assistance or
supervision, as well as accommodations for people who require only limited or intermittent medical or personal
assistance.
Industrial, manufacturing and assembly means establishments engaged in the manufacturing or transformation
of materials into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants and factories, and
characteristically use power-driven machines and materials handling equipment. Manufacturing production is
usually carried on for the wholesale market, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer.
Institution for alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients means an institution offering outpatient treatment to
alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients.
Kennels (indoor pens) means an establishment with indoor pens in which more than four dogs or domesticated
animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial
purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/536
Kennels (outdoor pens) means an establishment with outdoor pens in which more than four dogs or
domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for
commercial purposes.
Kindergarten or nursery school (private) means an establishment where more than three children are housed for
care and/or training during the day or portion thereof.
Laboratory equipment manufacturing means a facility that makes or produces equipment or products used for
research or testing.
Laboratory, scientific or research, means an establishment that engages in research, testing or evaluation of
materials or products, but not medically related (see “Medical facilities” and “Medical laboratory”).
Landscaping means material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or
palms, and nonliving durable materials that are commonly used in landscaping such as, but not limited to, rocks,
pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving.
Laundromat or self-serve washateria means a facility where patrons wash, dry and/or dry clean clothing and
other fabrics in machines that are operated by the patron.
Light load vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight
(GVW) not greater than 16,000 pounds and having no more than two axles, such as pickup trucks, sport utility
vehicles, vans and minivans, recreational vehicles (less than thirty-two (32') feet in length), campers and other
similar vehicles but not including automobiles and motorcycles.
Loading space means an off-street space or berth used for the delivery and loading/unloading of vehicles.
Local utility line means the facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for distribution
or collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power or telephone service, including padmounted
and pole-mounted transformers.
Lot means a platted (as specified in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended) parcel of
land that is occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building or a group of main buildings and any
accessory building, which includes such parking, landscaping and open space as are required by this Ordinance
or other laws and/or ordinances, and also which has its principal frontage upon a public street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/536
Lot area means the total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines.
Lot, corner, means a lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths upon a street,
provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.
Lot coverage means the percentage of a lot covered by primary and accessory buildings.
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines which create an area that
meets the zoning district's minimum width and depth requirements.
Lot, double frontage, means a lot having frontage upon two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a
corner lot.
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting onto a street, excluding the side dimension
of a corner lot.
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/536
Lot, key, means a corner lot whose exterior side is adjacent to the front yard of another lot.
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
county clerk.
Lot width means the horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, and
measured from the point on the building line which is closest to the front lot line.
Main building means the building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
Manufactured housing means any one of two types of prefabricated housing products which are typically
manufactured/assembled at a location other than the end user's permanent site, and which are regulated by the
Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Chapter 1201 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended. For the
purpose of this Ordinance, there are two types of manufactured homes:
A. Mobile home means a moveable dwelling designed to be transported on its own chassis on the
highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which is constructed with a base
section so as to be independently self-supporting, and which does not require a permanent foundation
for year-round living. A mobile home is also defined as any manufactured home that was constructed
prior to June 15, 1976.
B. HUD-Code manufactured home means a moveable dwelling designed to be transported on the
highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which can be used as a residential
dwelling either with or without a permanent foundation. A HUD-Code manufactured home is also
defined as a moveable manufactured home that was constructed after June 15, 1976.
Masonry construction means that form of construction composed of brick, stone, decorative concrete block or
tile, or other similar building units or materials (or combination of these materials) laid up unit by unit and set in
mortar, and shall exclude wall area devoted to doors and windows.
Medical facilities means:
A. Medical clinic or office means a facility or group of offices for one or more physicians for the
examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients provided that patients are not kept
overnight except under emergency conditions.
B. Dental office or doctor's office means the same as “medical clinic.”
C. Public health center means a facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public
health services including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices
operated in connection herewith.
D. Surgical outpatient facility means an establishment offering any type of surgical procedures and
related care which, in the opinion of the attending physician, can be performed safely without
requiring inpatient overnight hospital care and exclusive of such surgical and related care as licensed
physicians ordinarily may elect to perform in their private offices.
E. Medical laboratory means an indoor establishment that includes laboratories and/or
experimental equipment for medical testing, prototype design and development, and product testing.
Model home means a dwelling in a developing subdivision, located on a legal lot of record that is limited to
temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been
built or which are proposed to be built within the same subdivision.
Motel. A building or group of buildings designed for and occupied as, a temporary dwelling place and that is not
classified as a hotel. Guest room access for a motel is from the exterior of the building and not an internal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/536
hallway.
Motor freight company means a company using trucks or other heavy load vehicles to transport goods,
equipment and similar products. The term “motor freight company” includes companies that move residential or
commercial belongings.
Motorcycle sales and repair means the display, sale and/or servicing, including repair work, of motorcycles.
Multiple-family dwelling means three or more dwelling units on a single lot designed to be occupied by three or
more families living independently of one another, exclusive of hotels or motels. Includes three-family units
(triplex) and four-family units (quadraplex), as well as traditional apartments.
Municipal facility or use means any area, land, building, structure and/or facility which is owned, used, leased or
operated by the city.
Nonconforming use means a building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied as of the effective date of this
Ordinance, which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Non-depository financial institution. Any check cashing business, payday advance/loan business, or car title loan
business as defined in this section. This definition excludes:
A. A state or federally chartered bank, savings and loan association or credit union, or pawnshop;
and
B. A convenience store, supermarket, or other retail establishment where consumer retail sales
constitute at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the total gross revenue generated on-site.
Nursery means an establishment, including a building, part of a building or open space, for the growth, display
and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees and other materials used in indoor or outdoor planting.
Nursing home, means a facility or area furnishing food and shelter in single or multiple facilities to five or more
persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or proprietor of the establishment. In
addition, the facility provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician, or provides a
service which meets some need beyond the basic provision of food, shelter, and laundry.
Occupancy means the use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
Office center means a building or complex of buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business,
profession, service, industry, government or similar entity that may include ancillary services for office workers
such as a coffee shop, newspaper stand, sundries shop, hair/nail salon, etc.
Office showroom means an establishment with no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its total floor area
devoted to storage and warehousing, but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include
retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the
storage and warehousing areas.
Office warehouse means an establishment with more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area
devoted to storage and warehousing, but not generally accessible to the public.
Offices, professional and general business, means a room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive,
management and/or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including
real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone
answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations; but excluding medical offices.
A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management and/or administrative services.
Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/536
investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities,
organizations and associations; but excluding medical offices. [sic]
Officially approved place of access means access to a property, other than from a dedicated street, which is
approved by the city.
Off-street parking incidental to main use means off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance, located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use.
Oil and gas extraction means any uses that create an oil or gas well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended
or actual production of natural gas or other hydrocarbons.
Outside display means outside temporary display of finished goods that are specifically intended for retail sale
but not displayed outside overnight.
Outside storage means the keeping, displaying or storing, outside a building, of any goods, materials,
merchandise or equipment on a lot or tract for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Also referred to as open
storage.
Paint shop means a commercial establishment where painting services are performed, but not automotive-related
painting services. (For automotive-related painting services see “Automobile repair, major.”)
Park or playground (private). See “Private recreation facility.”
Park or playground (public). See “Public recreation.”
Parking lot means an off-street, ground level area, paved in accordance with city parking lot standards, for the
short-term or long-term storage of motor vehicles.
Parking lot or structure, commercial (auto) means an area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of
automobiles that may or may not charge a fee.
Parking space means an off-street area, paved in accordance with city parking lot standards, that is used for
parking a vehicle, and that is accessed from a paved driveway which connects the parking space with a public
street.
Pawnshop means an establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the
keeping of the owners (pawnbroker). Retail sales of primarily pre-owned items are also allowed, provided that
the sale of such items complies with local, state and federal regulations.
Payday advance/loan business: An establishment that makes small consumer loans, usually backed by a
postdated check or authorization to make an electronic debit against an existing financial account, where the
check or debit is held for an agreed-upon term, or until a customer's next payday, and then cashed unless the
customer repays the loan to reclaim such person's check. Such establishments may charge a flat fee or other
service charge and/or a fee or interest rate on the size of the loan amount.
Personal service shop or custom personal services means establishments less than 2,000 square feet in gross
floor area, primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person or his apparel and
including, but not limited to, barber/beauty shops, dressmaking, shoe shining and repair, dry cleaning and
laundry pickup stations, tailor or seamstress services, and other similar types of uses. No outside storage
permitted.
Pet and animal grooming shop means a retail establishment offering small animals, fish and/or birds for sale as
pets, where such creatures are housed within the building, and which may include the grooming of dogs, cats
and similar animals.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/536
Petroleum distribution/storage/wholesale facility means a facility for the long-term storage and distribution of
petroleum that may also involve wholesale sales, but not retail sales, of petroleum and petroleum-based
products. No manufacturing or refining of petroleum or petroleum-based products occurs on the premises, only
storage and/or distribution functions.
Planned development district means planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units, such as
industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential
developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate
combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated as integral land use units either by a single
owner or by a combination of owners.
Plat means a plan showing the subdivision of land, creating building lots, showing all essential dimensions and
other information in compliance with the subdivision standards of the city, and which is approved by the city and
recorded in the plat records of the county.
Platted lot. See “lot” and “lot of record.”
Portable building sales means an establishment which displays and sells structures capable of being carried and
transported to another location, but not including manufactured housing, as defined by this Ordinance.
Porte-cochere: A roofed structure covering a driveway at the entrance of a building to provide shelter while
entering or leaving a vehicle.
Premises means land together with any buildings or structures situated thereon.
Primary use means the principal or predominant use of any lot or building.
Principal building. See “Main building.”
Private club means an establishment providing social and/or dining facilities which may provide alcoholic
beverage service, to an association of persons, and otherwise falling within the definition of, and permitted under
the provisions of, that portion of Chapter 32 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, as the same
may be hereafter amended, and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs.
Private recreation facility or private park means a recreation facility, park or playground which is not owned by
a public agency such as the city or school district, and which is operated for the exclusive use of private
residents or neighborhood groups and their guests and not for use by the general public.
Produce stand means a seasonal temporary use for which the primary purpose and design is to sell fruit, nuts,
vegetables and similar foods. No cooking or on-premises consumption of produce occurs on the site.
Professional service means work performed which is commonly identified as a profession, and which may be
licensed by the state.
Propane Sales: Retail or wholesale sales of gaseous substances commonly used for household purposes such as
propane and/or butane; does not include the storage, sale or distribution of other types of combustible substances
or alternative fuels such as containerized natural gas, liquid propane, etc.
Propane Sales as an Accessory Use to a Retail Facility: Principally a retail establishment that derives 10 percent
or less of its gross revenue on an annual basis from the sales of gaseous substances commonly used for
household purposes such as propane and/or butane; does not include the storage, sale or distribution of other
types of combustible substances or alternative fuels such as containerized natural gas, liquid propane, etc.
Public agency building, shop, yard or facility means any building, land, area and/or facility (including
maintenance/storage yards and shops) which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or occupied by any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/536
governmental entity or agency of the following: the state, the United States, or other public utility or agency.
Any facility which is owned, leased, used and/or occupied by the city is defined as “municipal facility or use.”
Public Entertainment Establishment: An establishment which is open to the general public wherein the
occupation is to primarily provide entertainment to adult customers to include such activities as dancing,
billiards/pool, karaoke, and may include an arcade and other similar entertainment activities.
Public recreation means publicly owned and operated parks, recreation areas, playgrounds, swimming pools and
open spaces that are available for use by the general public without membership or affiliation. This land use
shall include special event type uses such as rodeos, concerts, festivals and other special events requiring special
event permits, as set forth in this Ordinance.
Public view means areas that can be seen from any public street.
Rear yard. See “Yard, rear.”
Recreation center means a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and
other customary and usual recreational activities.
Recreational vehicle/camper sales and leasing means an establishment that sells, leases and/or rents new and/or
used recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers, boats/watercraft, and similar types of vehicles.
Recreational vehicle (RV) means a self-propelled, mobile living unit which is typically used for temporary
human occupancy away from the users' permanent place of residence. A recreational vehicle may also be
utilized as a permanent place of residence within districts that allow them to be used as such. (See also “Heavy
load vehicle.”)
Recreational vehicle (RV) park means an area or commercial campground for users of recreational vehicles,
travel trailers, and similar vehicles to reside, park, rent or lease on a temporary basis. (See also “Manufactured
home park.” [sic])
Recycling kiosk means a small uninhabited structure, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet, or
temporary container which provides a self-service location for the depositing of recyclable materials such as
aluminum cans, glass bottles, magazines/newspapers, metal or plastic containers, etc. Recyclables are picked up
periodically from the site. This definition does not include large trailers or manned collection centers.
Rehabilitation care facility (halfway house) means a dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not
more than nine persons regardless of legal relationship who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism,
drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct living together with not more than two supervisory
personnel as a single housekeeping unit.
Rehabilitation care institution means a facility which provides residence and care to ten or more persons,
regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental
illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct together with supervisory personnel.
Religious Institution means a building for regular assembly for religious worship which is used primarily and
designed for such purpose and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the
place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises. For the purposes of this Ordinance,
religious study and other similar activities which occur in a person's primary residence shall not apply to this
definition.
Residence means the same as a dwelling; also, when used with district, an area of residential regulations.
Residential district means a district where the primary purpose is residential use.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/536
Restaurant: An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of food on the premises. (This use does
not include a restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service.)
Restaurant - Drive-Through or Drive-In: A restaurant with drive-in service is an establishment principally for
the sale and consumption of food where food service is provided to customers in motor vehicles for consumption
on the premises. A restaurant with drive-through service is an establishment principally for the sale and
consumption of food which has direct window service allowing customers in motor vehicles to pick up food for
off-premises consumption.
Retail or service, incidental, means the rendering of retailing or services incidental to the primary use. Such
retail or service use shall be operated for the benefit of convenience of the employees, visitors or customers of
the primary use. Incidental uses shall mean uses which occupy less than fifteen percent (15%) of the main use.
Retail store or shop means an establishment engaged in the selling of goods and merchandise to the general
public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. (Also
see “General retail stores.” [sic])
Room means a building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living
or sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities.
Roominghouse. See “Boardinghouse.”
Salvage or reclamation of products means the reclamation and storage of used products or materials. (See also
“Wrecking yard.” [sic])
Sand, gravel or stone or mineral extraction and/or storage means the process of extracting and/or storing sand,
gravel, stone, topsoil, compost or other products from the earth.
School, business, means a for-profit business that offers instruction and training in a profession, service or art
such as a secretarial or court reporting school, barber/beauty college or commercial art school, but not including
commercial trade schools.
School, commercial trade, means a for-profit business that offers vocational instruction and training in trades
such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation/repair, and similar trades.
School, private (primary or secondary), means a school under the sponsorship of a private agency or
corporation, other than a public or religious agency, which offers a curriculum that is generally equivalent to
public elementary and/or secondary schools.
School, public or parochial, means a school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency which
provides elementary and/or secondary curricula, but not including private business or commercial trade schools.
Screened means shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from the view of a person standing at ground level
on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm or similar
architectural or landscape feature.
Seasonal uses means the sales of items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, snow cones, fresh produce, and other
items which are typically only available at certain times of the year.
Self-Storage Facility means small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of
items. The conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage,
shall be prohibited.
Shopping center means a group of primarily retail and service commercial establishments that is planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity, and which provides customer and employee parking on-site,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/536
unloading/delivery areas which are separated from customer access, and aesthetically appropriate design and
protection from the elements.
Side yard. See “Yard, side.”
Single-family dwelling, attached, means a dwelling that is part of a structure containing more than two
dwellings, which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a shared wall, which is designed for
occupancy by one family, and which is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines.
Single-family dwelling, detached, means a dwelling designed and constructed as a freestanding structure for
occupancy by one family, and located on a lot or separate building tract having no physical connection to a
building located on any other lot or tract.
Small engine repair shop means a shop for the repair of lawnmowers, chainsaws, lawn equipment, and other
machines with one-cylinder engines.
Stable, commercial, means a stable used for the rental of stall space or for the sale or rental of horses or mules.
Stable, private, means an area used solely for the owner's private purposes for the keeping of horses, mules or
ponies which are not kept for hire or sale.
Storage or wholesale warehouse means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
Story means that portion of a building (above grade) that is included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
above it. For the purposes of computing building height pursuant to this Ordinance, the average height for a
story shall be defined as twelve feet (12'). The definition of a story does not include parapets, gables and other
normal roof structures. In cases where the site has a significant slope, the number of stories of a building shall be
measured from a point representing the average slope from front to back, or side to side, of the building.
Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face
not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area
is finished off for use. A half-story containing an independent apartment or self-contained living quarters shall
be counted as a full story.
Street means any dedicated public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Street intersection means any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other.
Street yard means the area between the building front line and the front property line.
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load-bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
Structure: Anything constructed or built, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or
attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground.
Studio, health/reducing/fitness, means, but is not limited to, an establishment which provides facilities and
equipment which are intended to promote health, fitness, weight reduction and/or similar health-related
activities. Such facilities may include such accessory uses as food service, sales of sundries and apparel, and
child care services, provided that such accessory uses are clearly incidental to the primary use and are for the use
of studio patrons only. No outside signage may be used to advertise accessory uses.
Studio, tattoo or body piercing, means a building or portion of a building used for selling and/or applying
tattoos, permanent cosmetics, and/or for piercing the skin with needles, jewelry or other paraphernalia, primarily
for the purpose of ornamentation of the human body.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/536
Swimming pool, commercial, means a swimming pool with accessory facilities which is not part of the municipal
or public recreational system and which is not a private swim club, but where the facilities are available for use
by the general public for a fee.
Swimming pool, private, means a swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a onefamily,
two-family or multiple-family dwelling and located and fenced. A private swimming pool shall not be
operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
Telephone, internet, wireless, server farm and exchange, switching/relay or transmitting station means a line for
the transmission of telephone signals and a central office in which telephone lines, internet connections/servers
are connected to permit communication including a business office, storage (inside or outside) or repair yards.
Temporary means used or lasting for only a limited period of time; not permanent.
Temporary building means any nonresidential prefabricated structure which is not originally manufactured or
constructed at its use site, and does not require on-site installation of utilities and/or foundation.
Temporary field office or construction yard or office means a structure or shelter used in connection with a
development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory functions
and for sheltering employees and equipment. Temporary permits for one year for a specific time and location as
determined may be issued by the City Manager or his/her designee and shall be subject to review and renewal
for reasonable cause.
Tennis court, private, means a surface designed and constructed for playing the game of tennis along with all
fencing, nets and related appurtenances but excluding lighting for nighttime play in residential areas except as
may be otherwise provided or restricted by the specific use permit.
Tool and machinery rental shop means a building or a portion of a building used for the display and rental of
tools, machinery and instruments.
Tractor sales. See “Heavy machinery sales and storage.”
Trailer, hauling, means a vehicle or device which is pulled behind an automobile or truck and which is designed
for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats.
Trailer rental means the display and offering for rent of trailers designed to be towed by automobiles and light
load vehicles.
Transportation and utility structures/facilities means permanent facilities and structures operated by companies
engaged in providing transportation and utility services including but not limited to railroad track rights-of-way,
sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, transit station turnarounds, water reservoirs and water pumping
stations.
Truck means a light or heavy load vehicle (see definitions for “Light load vehicle” and “Heavy load vehicle”).
Truck and bus leasing means the rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles or
motor-driven buses in operable condition and where no repair work or intensive cleaning operations are
performed.
Truck and bus repair means an establishment providing major and minor automotive repair services to heavy
load vehicles.
Truck sales (heavy trucks) means the display, sale or rental of new or used heavy load vehicles in operable
condition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/536
Two-family dwelling (duplex) means two attached dwellings in one structure, each designed to be occupied by
one family.
Usable open space means an open area which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or
recreation purposes, and may include landscaping, walks, recreational facilities, water features and decorative
objects such as artwork or fountains.
Use means the purpose for which land or buildings are or may be occupied in a zoning district.
Variance means an adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of this Ordinance to a particular
parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular
parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels
in the same vicinity and zoning district. Only the board of adjustment of the city can grant a variance.
Veterinarian clinic means an establishment where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical
treatment (also see “Kennels”).
Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed
by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this
Ordinance that the building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In
measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth
of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending
across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property
line and the outside wall of the main building.
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied area extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and
being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main
building. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot
from the front yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/536
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied area between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the
front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the
outside wall of the side of the main building.
Zoning district means a classification applied to any certain land area within the city stipulating the limitations
and requirements of land usage and development.
Zoning district map means the official map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn
and which is an integral part of this Ordinance. (See Section 2.3 regarding the zoning district map and Section
2.4 regarding zoning district boundaries.)
(Ordinance 480-14 adopted 11/20/14)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A1.001 Permits required
Failure to obtain a permit may result in the permit fee being doubled.
ARTICLE A2.000 ADMINISTRATIVE AND MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Sec. A2.001 Miscellaneous permits and fees
(a) Garage sale. $5.00.
(b) Return check charge. $35.00.
(c) Document copies. $0.10 per page.
(d) Copies of audio CDs. $1.00 each.
(e) Notary fee. $5.00 per document.
(f) Household hazardous waste program permit fee. $50.00.
ARTICLE A3.000 FIRE, POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY FEES
Sec. A3.001 Fire department fees
(a) Fire inspections based on square footage:
(1) 0–1,199 sq. ft.: $200.00.
(2) 1,200–1,499 sq. ft.: $225.00.
(3) 1,500–2,499 sq. ft.: $250.00
(4) 2,500–4,999 sq. ft.: $275.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/536
(5) 5,000–9,999 sq .ft.: $300.00.
(6) 10,000–24,999 sq .ft.: $350.00.
(7) 25,000 sq. ft. and over: $450.00.
(b) Annual fire inspection – commercial (same ownership): $25.00 administrative fee.
(c) Fire department plan review: See plan review under article A5.000 buildings.
Sec. A3.002 Police department fees
(a) Impounds.
(1) Tow fee (one time charge): $200.00.
(2) Storage: $20.00 per day or part of a day.
(3) Impound fee (one time charge): $20.00.
(4) Tax for first 24 hours: Tax for impound fee and daily storage 8.25% ($1.65 each 24 hours).
(5) Certified letter fee (if applicable): $50.00.
(b) Police reports. $6.00.
Sec. A3.003 Public safety
(a) Alarm initial fee. $50.00.
(b) Annual renewal. $50.00.
(c) False alarm fees.
(1) 4–5: $50.00.
(2) 6–7: $75.00.
(3) 8 and over: $100.00.
ARTICLE A4.000 ANIMALS
Sec. A4.001 Animal control fees
(a) Adoptions. $30.00.
(b) Disposal/deceased pickup. $20.00 (no charge for deceased strays).
(c) Euthanasia. $15.00 (does not include disposal of animal).
(d) Owner surrender.
(1) Dogs/cats: $35.00.
(2) Dogs/cats litter: $45.00.
(3) Other small animals: $15.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/536
(e) Registration.
(1) Neutered dog/cat: $3.00 annual.
(2) Unaltered dog/cat: $5.00 annual.
(f) Rabies quarantine. $135.00 (10 day stay).
(g) Impound dog/cat.
(1) 1st occurrence: $35.00.
(2) 2nd occurrence: $50.00.
(3) 3rd occurrence: $100.00.
(4) 4th occurrence: $500.00.
(5) Plus $10.00 each day held, on 4th occurrence city takes ownership of animal.
(h) Dangerous dog/guard dog registration. $50.00.
(i) Livestock registration. $5.00.
(j) Livestock, circus or zoological impoundment.
(1) 1st occurrence: $50.00.
(2) 2nd occurrence: $200.00.
(3) 3rd occurrence: $350.00.
(4) 4th occurrence and thereafter: $500.00.
(k) Rabies deposit. $20.00.
(l) Spay/neuter deposit: $25.00.
ARTICLE A5.000 BUILDINGS
Sec. A5.001 Building/construction
(a) New building/construction.
(1) Residential. Includes carports, patio, accessory building, decks, roofing/decking, subdivision,
fencing, in-ground swimming pools new construction.
$500.00 or less $45.00
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $45.00 for the first $500.00 plus $3.00 for each
additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $2,000.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/536
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $90.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $14.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $412.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.10 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $664.50 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $100,000.00
$100,000.00 to $500,000.00 $1,014.50 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $500,000.00
$500,000.00 and above $3,254.50 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.75 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
(2) Commercial. Includes apartments:
$500.00 or less $75.00
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $75.00 for the first $500.00 plus $5.00 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $2,000.00
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $150.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $15.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $495.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $8.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $695.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $6.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $100,000.00
$100,000.00 to $500,000.00 $995.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.00 for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/536
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, and
including $500,000.00
$500,000.00 and above $3,395.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
(b) Additions/alterations/repairs – residential. Based on value of construction:
(1) $500.00 or less: $70.00.
(2) $501.00–$2,500.00: $75.00.
(3) $2,501.00–$5,000.00: $80.00.
(4) $5,001.00–$7,500.00: $85.00.
(5) $7,501.00–$10,000.00: $90.00.
(6) Increments of value up to $2,500.00 above $10,000.00: $90.00 + $10.00 @ $2,500.00.
(c) New construction, residential and commercial. Remodel/additions/alterations/repairs:
(1) Electrical.
(A) Permits:
(i) Residential: $80.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(ii) Commercial: $100.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(B) Release:
(i) Residential: $25.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(ii) Commercial: $50.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(2) Plumbing.
(A) Permits:
(i) Residential: $80.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(ii) Commercial: $100.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(B) Gas release:
(i) Residential: $25.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(ii) Commercial $50.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(3) HVAC permits.
(A) Residential: $80.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/536
(B) Commercial: $100.00 + $0.10 per square foot.
(d) Contractor registration fees. Renewal must be received within thirty (30) days of registration expiration
date to receive renewal rate. (d) Contractor registration fees. Renewal must be received within thirty (30) days
of registration expiration date to receive renewal rate.
Contractor Type Annual Registration Initial
Fee
Annual Registration
Renewal Fee
Irrigation $100.00 $50.00
Mechanical $100.00 $50.00
Backflow testers $100.00 $50.00
Electrical No fee No fee
Sign electrical $100.00 $50.00
Sign contractor $100.00 $50.00
Home builder $100.00 $50.00
Home remodler $100.00 $50.00
General
(commercial) $100.00 $50.00
Water well $100.00 $50.00
Roofing $100.00 $50.00
Swimming pool $100.00 $50.00
Fire suppression $100.00 $50.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/536
Fuel tank $100.00 $50.00
Fire pump $100.00 $50.00
Fire standpipe
system $100.00 $50.00
Fire alarm No fee No fee
Fire sprinkler No fee No fee
Plumbing No fee No fee
(e) Inspections.
(1) Outside normal hours: $65.00.
(2) Reinspections: $30.00.
(3) Plan review (building official and fire marshall):
(A) Residential: 30% of permit fee.
(B) Commercial (in-house): 65% of permit fee.
(C) Commercial (consultant): $100.00 + cost of professional fees.
Sec. A5.002 Miscellaneous building/construction permits
(a) Demolition permit. (Deposit will be returned after final inspection verifies trash, rubbish, etc. and any
damages to property has been cleared/corrected.)
(1) Residential: $50.00 + deposit $250.00.
(2) Commercial: $260.00 + $500.00.
(b) Moving structures permit. $50.00 + deposit $250.00. (Deposit will be returned after final inspection
verifies trash, rubbish, etc. and any damages to property has been cleared/corrected.)
(c) Fence permit.
(1) Residential: $50.00.
(2) Commercial: Valuation: See commercial fee table.
(d) Concrete work.
(1) Drive approach: Single: $40.00; double: $50.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/536
(2) Driveway and other flat work: $50.00.
(e) Temporary building construction trailer. $150.00.
(f) Irrigation system. $65.00.
(g) Swimming pools.
(1) Above ground/hot tubs: $65.00.
(2) Electrical permits: $65.00.
(3) Plumbing permits: $65.00.
(h) Mobile home park/annual permit. $100.00.
Sec. A5.003 Certificate of occupancy
(a) Required. Requires building official inspection and fire marshal inspection.
(b) Residential. $75.00.
(c) Commercial. Based on square footage:
(1) 0–1,199 sq. ft.: $200.00.
(2) 1,200–1,499 sq. ft.: $225.00.
(3) 1,500–2,499 sq. ft.: $250.00.
(4) 2,500–4,999 sq. ft.: $275.00.
(5) 5,000–9,999 sq. ft.: $300.00.
(6) 10,000–24,999 sq. ft.: $350.00.
(7) 25,000 sq. ft and above: $450.00.
Sec. A5.004 Sign permit fees
(a) Sign permit fee schedule. (All permanent signage permits will be assessed a plan review of 65% of the
permit fee. This fee is in addition to the sign permit fee.)
(1) Permanent signage. Permanent type: canopy, hanging, projecting, monument, pylon, wall,
multi-tenant.
(A) 1 to 50 square feet in area:
(i) Sign permit fee: $50.00.
(ii) Sign plan review fee: $32.50.
(B) 51 to 100 square feet in area:
(i) Sign permit fee: $100.00.
(ii) Sign plan review fee: $65.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/536
(C) 101 to 200 square feet in area:
(i) Sign permit fee: $200.00.
(ii) Sign plan review fee: $130.00.
(D) 201 to 300 square feet in area:
(i) Sign permit fee: $300.00.
(ii) Sign plan review fee: $195.00.
(E) 301 square feet and over in area:
(i) $300.00 + $1.00 per square foot.
(ii) Sign plan review fee: To be determined by permit fee.
(2) Temporary/grand opening/banner signage. Only one type of permit is allowed at any one
specific time.
(A) Temporary signs (temporary type: balloons, banners, freestanding, wind devices):
(i) Sign permit fee: $50.00.
(ii) Permit valid for: According to type of sign.
(B) Grand opening.
(i) Sign permit fee: $100.00 (deposit).
(ii) Permit valid for: 60 days.
(C) Banners (a banner advertises the business's name, opening dates, telephone number,
hours of operation, and/or type of products offered or sold).
(i) Sign permit fee: $50.00.
(ii) Permit valid for: 30 days (2 per calendar year).
ARTICLE A6.000 PUBLIC WORKS FEES (INCLUDES STREET DEPARTMENT)
Sec. A6.001 Mowing
(a) Residential: $250.00.
(b) Commercial: $300.00.
Sec. A6.002 Tree removal
(a) 2"–4": $250.00 per tree.
(b) 4"–8": $500.00 per tree.
(c) 8"–10": $1,000.00 per tree.
(d) 10"–12": $1,500.00 per tree.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/536
(e) 12"–24": $3,000.00 per tree.
(f) 24" and over: $4,000.00 per tree.
Sec. A6.003 Code enforcement clean up
(a) Administrative fee: $100.00.
(b) Certified mail: U.S. postal rates.
(c) Any city staff labor fee applicable.
Sec. A6.004 Labor
(a) Director: $150.00 per hour.
(b) Superintendent: $100.00 per hour.
(c) Crew member: $75.00 per hour.
Sec. A6.005 Permits in ROW
(a) $1.75 linear foot.
(b) $200.00 registration.
Sec. A6.006 Traffic and vehicle signs
(a) Replace stop/yield signs. $100.00 + labor.
(b) Replace street identification/speed limit signs. $75.00 + labor.
Sec. A6.007 Permit for oversized load/equipment on city streets
(a) Single trip: $10.00.
(b) Up to 60 days: $100.00.
(c) Over 60 days: $100.00 + additional $25.00 for each 30 days.
ARTICLE A7.000 BUSINESS FEES
Sec. A7.001 Peddler/solicitor
(a) Nonprofit or itinerant vendors: Application fee of $25.00 plus $100.00 permit fee for 90 days.
(b) Nonprofit: No charge.
Sec. A7.002 Alcohol beverage permits
(a) A fee in the maximum amount allowed by state law is hereby adopted and imposed upon each original or
renewal license or permit issued to sell alcoholic beverage.
(b) A fee imposed under this section shall be collected for each license or permit issued regardless of whether
the amount of the fee is set forth in this fee schedule.
(c) Annual fee for wine and beer retailers off-premises: $60.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/536
(d) Annual fee for a mixed beverage permit: $375.00. (Pursuant to section 11.38(d) of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code, the annual fee for a mixed beverage permit shall not be charged during the three (3) year period
following issuance of the permit.)
Sec. A7.003 Gas/oil wells
(a) Drill gas/oil well: $5,000.00.
(b) Annual fee per well: $500.00.
(c) Disposal well for salt water: $25,000.00.
(d) Annual fee for salt water well: $2,000.00.
Sec. A7.004 Food establishments
(a) Mobile food carts. $200.00.
(b) Seasonal permits. $50.00.
Sec. A7.005 Amusement machines
(a) Annual occupation tax. 1/4 of the amount [levied by the state on coin-operated machines.]
(b) New occupation tag. $0.25.
(c) Release of seal for nonpayment of occupation tax. $10.00.
(d) Annual license fee.
(1) 50 or fewer: $100.00.
(2) 51–200: $200.00.
(3) Over 200: $250.00.
ARTICLE A8.000 UTILITY FEES
Sec. A8.001 Water/sewer department
(a) Water user rates.
(1) Residential rates with 5/8" meter.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $30.00
1,001–2,999 gallons $2.00 per 1,000 gallons
3,000–4,999 gallons $5.00 per 1,000 gallons
5,000–6,999 gallons $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/536
7,000–8,999 gallons $9.00 per 1,000 gallons
9,000–11,999 gallons $10.00 per 1,000 gallons
12,000–infinity gallons $12.00 per 1,000 gallons
(2) Commercial rates.
(A) With 5/8" meter.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $50.00
1,001–9,000 gallons $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
10,000–50,000 gallons $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
50,001–infinity gallons $10.00 per 1,000 gallons
(B) With 1" meter.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $60.00
1,001–9,999 gallons $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
10,000–50,000 gallons $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
50,001–infinity gallons $10.00 per 1,000 gallons
(C) With 2" meter.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $100.00
1,001–9,999 gallons $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/536
10,000–50,000 gallons $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
50,001–infinity gallons $10.00 per 1,000 gallons
(D) With 3" meter.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $140.00
1,001–9,999 gallons $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
10,000–50,000 gallons $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
50,001–infinity gallons $10.00 per 1,000 gallons
(b) Sewer user rates.
(1) Residential rates.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $26.00
1,001–29,999 gallons $4.00 per 1,000 gallons
30,000–49,999 gallons $4.00 per 1,000 gallons
50,000–infinity gallons $4.00 per 1,000 gallons
(2) Commercial rates. Sewer rates based on actual consumption.
(A) With 5/8" meter.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $50.00
1,001–29,999 gallons $6.00 per 1,000 gallons
30,000–49,999 gallons $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/536
50,000–infinity gallons $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
(B) With 1", 2", or 3" meter.
Base (includes 1,000 gallons) $50.00
1,001–29,999 gallons $6.00 per 1,000 gallons
30,000–49,999 gallons $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
50,000–infinity gallons $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
(c) Water/sewer deposit.
(1) Residential: $175.00 (deposit $150.00 + nonrefundable $25.00 service fee).
(2) Commercial: $325.00 (deposit $300.00 + nonrefundable $25.00 service fee).
(d) Late charge: $10.00.
(e) Cutoff list fee (to be imposed at 5:00 p.m. on cutoff day): $60.00.
(f) Reconnection fees:
(1) Business hours fee (Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.): $20.00.
(2) After hours fee (after 5:00 p.m. weekdays, weekends and holidays): $40.00.
(g) Request for meter switch-out (customer request). $200.00.
(h) Customer re-read request.
(1) Two (2) free per calendar year.
(2) On the third (3) re-read request: $25.00 if reading correct.
(3) No charge for a misread.
(i) Water test.
(1) For five (5) to ten (10) gallon test: $50.00.
(2) Market price if a meter is sent out for a bench test.
(j) Hydrant meter deposit. $2,000.00.
(k) Hydrant water fee. $50.00 per month plus $9.00 per 1,000 gallons.
(l) Replace plastic meter box (customer damaged). $150.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/536
(m) Replace concrete meter box (customer damaged). $250.00.
(n) Camera scope (customer request). $200.00.
(o) Snake/jetter.
(1) Snake fee: $100.00.
(2) Jetter fee: $150.00.
(p) Water tap.
(1) 5/8" meter plus market price of meter and meter box: $1,000.00.
(2) 1" meter plus market price of meter and meter box: $1,500.00.
(3) 2" meter plus market price of meter and meter box: $2,500.00.
(4) 3": Market price from vendor.
(5) No impact fee from Fort Worth.
(q) Sewer tap. See exhibit B attached to the rate schedule for the Fort Worth sewer tap rates.
(1) City sewer tap/tie into city sewer system: $1,200.00.
(r) Deposit for sewer only customers.
(1) Residential: $125.00.
(2) Commercial: $225.00.
(s) Meter tampering. $100.00 plus actual cost for replacement.
(t) Northern Trinity Conservation District fees. $0.25 per thousand gallons of water consumed.
(u) Stormwater utility district fees.
(1) Residential: $2.50.
(2) Commercial: $5.00.
Sec. A8.002 Waste collection services
Fees for waste collection services shall be the rate established in the agreement with Progressive Waste for waste
collection services effective, January 1, 2015, as may be amended.
Sec. A8.003 Grease traps
Permit issuance: $100.00 for 1st vehicle and $50.00 for each additional vehicle.
ARTICLE A9.000 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
(a) Cost of professional fees (consultants used (city attorney, city planner, city engineer) for review purposes):
Deposit $1,000.00.
(b) Plan review: Cost of professional fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/536
(c) Preliminary plat: $400.00 + $5.00 per lot.
(d) Final plat: $500.00 + $5.00 per lot.
(e) Plat revision/replat: $450.00 + $5.00 per lot.
(f) Amended plat: $150.00.
(g) Minor plat: $150.00.
(h) Concept plan: $150.00.
(i) Vacating plat: $75.00.
(j) Zoning change request:
(1) Straight zoning request: $400.00.
(2) Planned development zoning request: $600.00.
(k) Zoning variance request: $250.00.
(l) Special use permit: $300.00.
(m) Appeal to city council: $50.00.
(n) Development plat: $500.00.
(o) Annexation: $400.00.
(p) Development agreement: $150.00.
(q) Development plan: $150.00.
(r) Site plan: $150.00.
(Ordinance 534-18, ex. A, adopted 1/18/18)