7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/418
San Juan
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 5
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 18-18 adopted 11/27/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of San Juan, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of San Juan, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
(a) In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city commission, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
city commission:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/418
City and town. Each means the City of San Juan, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of San Juan, Texas.
City commission. Whenever the term “city commission” is used, it shall mean the city commission of the City of
San Juan, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Hidalgo, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/418
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/418
(b) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandoned. A building or structure which has been left without maintenance or forsaken completely.
Abandoned motor vehicle.
(1) A motor vehicle that is inoperable, and more than five years old;
(2) A motor vehicle that has remained on public property for a period of more than 48 hours;
(3) A motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or
person in control of the property for more than 48 hours;
(4) A motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal
highway within this city more than 48 hours; or
(5) A motor vehicle left unattended for more than 24 hours on a controlled-access highway.
(See definition for junked motor vehicle.)
After-hours reconnection clerk. A city employee authorized to order and/or undertake the reconnection of utility
services between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays.
Alteration. The construction, replacement, addition, or modification of a structure or mobile home, HUD-code
manufactured home or travel trailer after its installation in the city, including an additional structure, building or
shelter in connection with or attached thereto.
Alternative tower structure. Man-made trees, water towers, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar
alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Animal shelter. Any facility lawfully operated for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals.
ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
Antenna. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in
communications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
Antique auto. An auto at least 35 years old.
Arterial highway. Any road or thoroughfare used primarily for regional travel and referred to as “highway,”
“expressway” or “freeway.”
Backhaul network. The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone
switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
Brush. Grass trimmings, leaves and limbs, yard cleanings, and other similar items.
Building. Any structure with three (3) or more outside walls and a roof covering at least fifty (50) percent of the
space encompassed by the outside wall. The term includes portions of a building which remain or result from
damage caused by any man-made or natural hazard.
Business. An activity of, or caused by, a person for the purpose of a direct or indirect monetary gain, benefit, or
advantage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/418
Central business district. An area within the city bordered by the following streets: Business Highway 83 on the
north, Seventh Street on the south, Standard Avenue on the west and Kansas Street on the east.
Chief building official. An official designated by the city to administer and enforce the building codes and
regulations.
Collection agreement. A determination by a hearings officer, after hearing, of how the arrearage on a delinquent
utility account shall be paid.
Collector. An owner of antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes
of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve, and maintain
an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Commercial motor vehicle. Every motor vehicle which singularly or in combination has either:
(1) An overall height in excess of one hundred and twenty (120) inches;
(2) An overall length in excess of one hundred and forty (140) inches; or
(3) An overall width in excess of eighty (80) inches.
Commercial unit. A separate and identifiable structure where commercial, industrial, religious, and/or
educational activity is conducted, whether for profit or not.
Curbline. The line established by the city for the particular street.
Current account. A utility account in the city's receivable ledgers that has been made current as a result of the
transfer of the delinquent balance to the delayed collection accounts receivable ledgers.
Delayed collection status. The procedure established in section 13.03.223 of chapter 13.
Demolisher. A person who converts a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal, or who otherwise
dismantles a motor vehicle.
Department. The state department of licensing and regulation.
Dilapidated. A building or structural condition resulting from disrepair by misuse or neglect.
Drilling block. One of the spaced areas into which the city is subdivided for the purpose of permitting the
drilling of wells for oil and/or gas therein.
Employee. Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration or profit.
Employer. Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity that employs one or more persons.
Enforcement officer. An employee of the city, designated to enforce this code.
FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Flea market. The collection, storage, display and sale of new and/or used goods by more than one vendor,
peddler, canvasser or solicitor in vehicles, carts, tents, and other temporary structures such as awning or canvas
or other materials on unimproved lots.
Garagekeeper. An owner or operator of a storage facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/418
Garage or porch sale. A sale of new and/or used merchandise from any residence in any single- or multi-family
residential zone classification; shall include auctions.
Garbage. All animal and vegetable matter, such as, but not limited to, waste material and refuse from kitchens,
grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, drugstores, hotels, rooming and boarding houses, or other places,
including, but [not] limited to, such items as meat scraps, other food scraps, bread, bones, fruit and vegetable
peelings and remains, and other deleterious substances.
Gathering lines. All pipelines operated as an incident to the development and operation of oil and/or gas fields
and secondary recovery projects.
Half-tap fee. An initial fee imposed at the time a new service connection is made for the water system where an
existing service lateral to the property line is available for meter installations.
Height. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel
to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
House-trailer. A vehicle equipped with living quarters, which may include sleeping and food preparation
facilities, and which may be pulled from place to place over a public highway by a motor vehicle.
HUD-code manufactured home. A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected onsite,
is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is
defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
Installation.
(1) The transport of manufactured homes or manufactured home components to the place where
they will be used by the consumer;
(2) The construction of the foundation system, whether temporary or permanent; and
(3) The placement and erection of a manufactured home or manufactured home components on the
foundation system, including the supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, anchoring, and proper
connecting of multiple or expandable sections or components and the installation of air conditioning,
and minor adjustments.
Installer. Any person, including a retailer or manufacturer, who performs installation functions on manufactured
housing.
Interior access drive. Any street within a manufactured home park and/or travel trailer park which allows access
from a manufactured home and/or travel trailer lot to a public road.
Junk. All worn-out, discarded, or secondhand material or equipment, in general, including any scrap metal,
bottles, glass, paper, cordage, junked, worn-out, or wrecked vehicles, machinery and equipment and/or parts
thereof which are kept, collected, or stored for purposes of selling, trading, bartering, or exchanging for value.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. III)
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/418
(A) An unexpired license plate; and
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Junkyard. A yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, containing two or more pieces of junk upon which occurs
one or more acts of buying, trading, exchanging for value, collecting, storing or keeping, dismantling,
processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole or by parts, whether for a profit or not. This
definition does not include garage sales, or secondhand retail outlets which may be authorized in commercially
zoned districts of the city.
Kennel. Any facility wherein any person, partnership or corporation engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs.
Label. A device or insignia issued by the state commissioner of licensing and regulation to indicate compliance
with the standards, rules, and regulations established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
and permanently affixed to each transportable section of each HUD-code manufactured home constructed after
June 15, 1976, for sale to a consumer.
Lease. Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas, and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or
any unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one lease, and any tract of land in which the
minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership, is
developed and operated as a separate tract.
Licensing authority. The city shall be responsible for annually administering animal licenses, but may choose to
assign, delegate or contract for this responsibility, if the city so desires. The city, or its authorized agent
administering animal licenses, is the licensing authority.
Manufactured home and/or travel trailer park. A plot or tract of ground in which one or more manufactured
homes or travel trailers occupy for dwelling or sleeping purposes, whether or not a charge is made for such
accommodations, but usually designed and/or set aside to be rented or leased.
Manufactured home lot. A plot of ground within a manufactured home park or subdivision designed to be sold,
rented, leased or otherwise used for the accommodation of one manufactured home.
Manufactured home subdivision. A subdivision designed and intended for sale or use in individual plots of land
for residential use, where residence is permitted in manufactured homes, each manufactured home being located
on a separate lot. Such subdivision may retain a central management and may be operated as a condominium,
retaining ownership of streets and common open spaces, or as a planned unit development.
Manufactured housing or manufactured home. A HUD-code manufactured home.
Mobile home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/418
a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Motor vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act, chapter 501
Transportation Code, including a motorboat, outboard motor or vessel subject to registration under chapter 31,
Texas Parks and Wildlife Code.
Non-standard service. Utility service provided for any unit that does not qualify for standard utility service.
Occasional sales. One or two sales of sales-taxable items, other than amusement service, at retail, during a 12-
month period by a person who does not habitually engage, or hold himself out as engaging, in the business of
selling taxable items at retail.
One well. One well for each reservoir or sand from which production is sought or obtained within a particular
drilling block.
Owner. With respect to the drilling regulations herein, the owner in fee simple or a mineral owner by a good and
merchantable title of or in and to the particular real estate referred to, subject only to liens to secure debt. A
lienholder shall not be considered an “owner.”
Owner or occupant. Any person owning, renting, leasing or subleasing property, whether for remuneration or
not, in a zone classification under the city zoning regulations.
Park. A tract of land upon which manufactured homes or travel trailers have been authorized to be placed
temporarily, the fee simple title of which remains in one person.
Permittee. The person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling, completion, and operation of a well and/or the
construction, installation, and operation of any pipeline facility, and his heirs, legal representatives, successors,
and assigns.
Pipeline. Trunkline pipelines, gathering lines, and discharge lines as defined in this section, but not when used as
part of the terms “gathering lines” and “trunkline pipelines.”
Place of business. For purposes of taxicab regulations herein, a place where persons shall stop, place, or station
themselves for the purpose of engaging in a sale or purchase, taking orders, or receiving calls by telephone or
other means of communication for taxicabs or delivery of other services.
Place of employment. Any enclosed indoor area under the control of an employer to which employees have
access during the course of employment, including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, employee
restrooms, conference rooms, and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment.
Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use
permit has been properly issued, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.
Railroad commission. The state railroad commission.
Recreational vehicle or travel trailer. Either a self-propelled motor vehicle or a towable recreational trailer that
may also accommodate sleeping and eating quarters. It is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel
or recreational purposes. It includes a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
Residential dwelling unit. A separate and identifiable apartment, house or other place of abode.
Right-of-way. A public right-of-way or street or other public thoroughfare within the city.
Sale or purchase. Any of the following when performed for consideration or for a contribution:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/418
(1) A transfer of title or possession of tangible personal property or the segregation of tangible
personal property in contemplation of a transfer of its title or possession;
(2) The exchange, barter, lease, or rental of tangible personal property;
(3) The performance of a taxable service pursuant to the Texas Tax Code;
(4) The production, fabrication, processing, printing, or imprinting of tangible personal property
for consumers who directly or indirectly furnish the materials used in the production, fabrication,
processing, printing or imprinting;
(5) The furnishing and distribution of tangible personal property by a social club or fraternal
organization to anyone; or
(6) The furnishing, preparation, or service of foods, meals or drinks.
Seal. A device or insignia issued by the state commissioner of licensing and regulation to be affixed to used
manufactured homes for titling purposes, as required by the commissioner.
Secondary thoroughfare. Any road or thoroughfare used primarily for travel between an arterial highway and
local residential streets and commonly referred to as “collector” streets.
Seller or retailer. A person engaged in the business of making sales of taxable items of a kind the receipts from
the sale of which are included in the measure of the sales and/or use tax imposed by chapter 151 of the Texas
Tax Code. Seller and retailer shall include:
(1) A person in the business of making sales at auction of tangible personal property owned by the
person or by another;
(2) A person who makes more than two sales of taxable items during a 12-month period; and
(3) A person regarded by the comptroller as a seller or retailer under section 151.008 of the Texas
Tax Code.
Semi-trailer. Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some
part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle.
Sewer tap. A new service connection made to the sewer system.
Sewer tap fee. An initial fee imposed by the city at the time a sewer tap is made.
Smoke or smoking. Includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other
lighted smoking equipment or device, and the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or
cigarette of any kind.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
Standard service. Utility service provided for up to a maximum of 2 residential units with a meter less than 1
inch in diameter.
Storage facility.
(1) Garage;
(2) Parking lot; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/418
(3) Any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing, or parking of motor
vehicles.
Street. Any public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city designed primarily for accommodating
vehicular traffic, including any unpaved portions.
Substandard. The condition of a building or structure fails to meet the minimum standards set out in the city's
building codes or in these regulations.
Technical words. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined
shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry.
Titles. When the title of any city official is used herein, it shall include any duly authorized representative.
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support.
Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed or used for carrying property or passengers wholly on its
own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
Trash. Rubbish such as, but not limited to, feathers, tin cans, bottles, papers, rags, grass, boxes, cartons, and
clothes.
Truck. Any and all vehicles whose body weight or whose rated or licensed combined body and load weight
exceeds ten thousand pounds, whether such vehicle constitutes a single unit or is composed of two or more
vehicles.
Truck route. A way over certain streets over and along which trucks may operate within the corporate limits of
the city.
Truck-tractor. Every motor vehicle used primarily for drawing other vehicles, and not to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, except that the term includes a motor vehicle that is
otherwise a truck-tractor, that is engaged with a semi-trailer in the transportation of automobiles or boats, and
that transports motor vehicles or boats on part of the truck-tractor.
Trunkline pipeline. Common carrier pipelines and other main pipelines not included in the definition of
gathering lines, expressly including their rights-of-way as defined and established by instruments of record in
the office of the county clerk.
Unfit for human habitation. A residential building which, because of its size, construction, and/or location or
lack of amenities, fails to meet the minimum standards of habitability in the city.
Unimproved lot. Any lot or tract of land lacking a building or utilities such as water, plumbing or electricity in
compliance with the city's building, plumbing and electrical permits or which has not been subdivided in
compliance with the city's subdivision regulations.
Unoccupied. With respect to a building or structure, means:
(1) Remaining without a resident, tenant, or other lawful possessor; or
(2) Remaining unused for any commercial endeavor.
Unsafe. A hazard to the health, safety or welfare of its occupants or users, or of the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/418
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. III)
Vehicle. Every mechanical device in which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway, which may be required to be registered or licensed under the laws of this state, including:
(1) Motor vehicles;
(2) Truck-tractors;
(3) Trailers;
(4) House trailers; or
(5) Semi-trailers.
Except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. III; Ordinance adopting Code)
Water meter and tap fee. An initial fee imposed by the city at the time a new service connection is made to the
water system where installation of a service lateral from the main line is required.
Well. Any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, formation, strata, or depth, for the purpose of producing any
oil, gas, or liquid hydrocarbon or used as an injection well for secondary recovery, or any of them.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. III)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall
be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in the code
of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city commission for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of,
or additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/418
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during
the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall
be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/418
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Prior offenses and liabilities
All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective date of this code shall be treated as
though all prior applicable regulations and amendments were in full force and effect for the purposes of
sustaining any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and liabilities. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 1, art. II, sec. 3.00(a))
Sec. 1.01.011 More restrictive standards
Wherever higher or more restrictive standards are established by the provisions of any other applicable statute,
ordinance or regulation than are established by the provisions of this code, the provisions of such other statute,
ordinance or regulation shall govern. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. II, sec. 3.00(b))
Sec. 1.01.012 Nuisances
(a) Nothing in this code shall be construed as repealing any ordinance of the city regulating nuisances or
permitting uses which were prohibited prior to the adoption of this code unless provided otherwise.
(b) In addition to the other remedies provided for the enforcement of this code, the city commission is
authorized and empowered to hear and determine the facts in cases of alleged nuisances, and where it finds that
facts exist which constitute a nuisance as specified in subsection (a) above the city commission may order the
cessation and abatement of such nuisance.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. II, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 1.01.013 Applicability
Except as specifically provided, the regulations as set out shall apply to all persons within the corporate
boundaries of the city. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. I, sec. 5.00)
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Conflict of interest of members of city commission
(a) A member of the city commission who has a substantial interest in a matter that is before consideration of
the city commission shall file, before a vote or decision, an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the interest
and shall abstain from further participation in the matter. The affidavit must be filed with the city secretary.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a person with substantial interest is one who:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/418
(1) Has an equitable or legal ownership interest in a tract of land with a fair market value of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more which will be directly impacted by [the vote or
decision];
(2) Acts as a developer;
(3) Owns ten percent (10%) or more of the voting stock or shares of or owns either percent (10%)
or more or $5,000.00 or more of the fair market value of a business entity that:
(A) Has an equitable or legal ownership interest with a fair market value of $2,500.00 or
more; or
(B) Acts as a developer; or
(4) Receives in a calendar year funds from a business entity described by subsection (3) that
exceed ten percent (10%) of the person's gross income for the previous year.
(c) A person also is considered to have a substantial interest if the person is related in the first degree by
consanguinity or affinity to another person who, under subsection (b), has a substantial interest.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. I, sec. 8.00)
Charter reference–Personal financial interest of city officers or employees, sec. 12.02.
State law reference–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171.
Sec. 1.02.002 Administrative officials
The administrative official for the purposes of this code shall be the city manager and his or her assistants,
deputies, and department heads insofar as they may be charged by the city manager and the provisions of this
code with duties and responsibilities with reference thereto. Without limitation, the directors or heads of
departments responsible for planning, public works, water and wastewater, finance and building inspections
shall ordinarily administer and enforce the provisions of this code. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 1, art. II,
sec. 1.00)
Sec. 1.02.003 Contracts for depository services with financial institutions outside city
The city hereby adopts a policy expressly permitting the consideration of applications received by the city from
financial institutions doing business outside the city for depository contract services. (Ordinance 2001-004
adopted 3/14/01)
Sec. 1.02.004 Agenda items
Final decision to place any item on any city commission meeting agenda, regular or special, shall be determined
by suggestion of the city manager to the mayor. However, the mayor shall have final authority to determine what
item, if any, shall be placed on any meeting agenda of the city commission. (Ordinance 08-08 adopted 8/5/08)
Secs. 1.02.005–1.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Claims Against City*
Sec. 1.02.041 Notice required
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, unless the person
damaged or injured provides notice in writing to the mayor and city commission within sixty (60) days, or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/418
within six (6) months for good cause shown, from the date the damage or injury was received, of the following
facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property
was at the time when the injury was received;
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained;
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained;
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred;
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle;
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the
claim is presented;
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according
to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part
thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed; and
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was
submitted along the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 10, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 1.02.042 Refusal by city required prior to suit
No suit shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff shows that prior to the filing of the
original petition the plaintiff applied to the city commission for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as
the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city commission refused. (1999 Unified General Code, ch.
10, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 1.02.043 Service of notice
All notices shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary or city manager at the following location:
709 Nebraska Ave., San Juan, Texas 78539. All such notices shall be effective only when actually received in
the office of the person named above. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 10, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 1.02.044 Waiver of notice requirements
The notice requirements shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage
likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual knowledge unless that
knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the authority to investigate
and/or settle claims against the city. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 10, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 1.02.045 Notice to be sworn
The written notice shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by
him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure
to so verify the notice may be considered by the city commission as a factor relating to the truth of the
allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 10, sec.
5.00)
Secs. 1.02.046–1.02.060 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/418
Division 3. Records Management
Sec. 1.02.061 Definition of municipal records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received
by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this division or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ordinance 07-01, sec. 1,
adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.062 Additional definitions
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated under section 1.02.065 of this division.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.02.066 of this division.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 07-01, sec. 2, adopted 11/13/07; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.063 Municipal records declared public property
All municipal records as defined in section 1.02.061 of this division are hereby declared to be the property of the
city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to
such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 07-01, sec. 3, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.064 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management from creation to ultimate disposition,
consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management
practice. (Ordinance 07-01, sec. 4, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.065 Designation of records management officer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/418
The city secretary's office, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer
for the city, as provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the
director and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as
applicable. (Ordinance 07-01, sec. 5, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.066 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to
the city commission. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve
the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality and to properly
preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the
records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this division effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city commission, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
division and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a
basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 07-01, sec. 6, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.067 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation.
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures.
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense.
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city.
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies.
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a form design
and control system for the city.
(7) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records
control schedules are in compliance with state regulations.
(8) Disseminate to the city commission and department heads information concerning state laws
and administrative rules relating to local government records.
(9) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the
records of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program and the requirements of state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/418
(10) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed
or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition.
(11) Report annually to the city commission on the implementation of the records management
plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data complied
under subsection (10).
(12) Bring to the attention of the city commission noncompliance by department heads or other
municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the
Local Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 07-01, sec. 7, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.068 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this division;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this division.
(Ordinance 07-01, sec. 8, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.069 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records series created or received by the department
and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information
regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the city commission.
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(Ordinance 07-01, sec. 9, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.070 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/418
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.02.069
shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management
plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open record request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city commission.
(Ordinance 07-01, sec. 10, adopted 11/13/07)
Sec. 1.02.071 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has been listed on an approved record control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been
approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management
officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization
request. (Ordinance 07-01, sec. 11, adopted 11/13/07)
Secs. 1.02.072–1.02.090 Reserved
Division 4. City Commission
Sec. 1.02.091 Definitions
Governing body. Shall be defined for the purpose of interpreting and enforcing this division as the City of San
Juan, board, commission, committee, or any authorized group of persons elected or appointed that serve the
interests of the city by official means in a final or advisory capacity.
Meetings of the governing body. Are public meetings; however, there shall be no provision for public
participation unless specified or unless a meeting, portion of a meeting, or item for consideration, requires a
public hearing in accordance with state, federal or local laws. All matters included herein will further the public's
health, safety, and welfare.
Public hearings; those affected; public hearing sign in requirement. If a public hearing is listed on a legally
posted agenda, a person or entity that may be positively or adversely affected physically, by use or damage to
property, or to any other legally recognizable interest, may be allowed to address the governing body during the
public hearing portion of the meeting. Persons desiring to speak during a public hearing shall sign in with the
city secretary no later than 5:00 p.m. or the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled public
hearing. A sign-in form for participation in a public hearing shall be promulgated by the city secretary and be
made available at the city secretary's office. The public hearing sign-in form shall include the person or entity's
name, address, telephone number, other contact information, organization if applicable, and other notices,
authorizations, and acknowledgments as may be allowed by law from time to time. Participants in a public
hearing shall also identify on the form whether they are for or against an item to be considered by the governing
body.
Sec. 1.02.092 Procedures
(a) The order of any meeting shall follow the order of the posted agenda. However, the governing body, by
motion and majority approval, shall have the sole authority to vary the order of procedure in order to expedite
the proceedings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/418
(b) No person shall address the governing body without first being recognized by the governing body, by
motion and majority approval.
(c) Any person, either individually or in a representative capacity, shall not address the governing body on an
agenda item that is under consideration by the governing body unless recognition is allowed as specified in
subsection (b) of this section.
(d) Any member of the governing body may make a motion pertaining to the subject matter of such agenda.
All motions, authorizations, decisions, and actions, except those requiring a greater number as set out in the
charter or under state law, shall be approved by a majority vote of the governing body so voting thereon.
(e) Any posted meeting of the governing body may be recessed to another time and place for the purposes of
consideration and action on any items not acted on during such meeting by majority vote of the governing body.
(f) Each person addressing the governing body shall give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for
the record, state the subject he wishes to discuss, state who/whom the person is representing if representing an
entity, organization or other persons. All remarks shall be addressed to the governing body as a whole and not to
any member thereof. No person shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a
member of the governing body. No question may be asked a member of the governing body, or a member of the
city staff, without the permission of the governing body, by motion and majority approval.
(g) In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any identifiable group of
persons wishes to address the governing body on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the governing
body to request that a spokesman be chosen by the group to address the governing body and, in cause additional
matters are to be presented by any other member of such group, to limit the number of such persons addressing
the board.
(h) After a motion has been made or a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address
the governing body on the matter under consideration without first securing permission to do so by a majority
vote of the governing body.
(i) Any person, business, corporation, or other entity that desires to solicit services to the city shall not use a
public hearing agenda item for discussion or consideration of such services. The governing body will consider
solicitations only if placed on the agenda and, if applicable, after such legal requirements have been satisfied for
the purchasing and contracting of such services.
(j) Should the governing body deem it appropriate, any portion of any regular meeting may be dedicated to
recognizing comments from the general public. Any agenda item authorizing such public comments shall be the
last item on any regular meeting's agenda.
Sec. 1.02.093 Order and decorum
(a) Board members. While the governing body is in session, the members must observe order and decorum,
and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the
governing body, nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the agenda. However,
every member of the governing body shall have the opportunity to speak on any issue.
(b) Employees. Members of the city staff and employees shall observe the same rules of order and decorum as
are applicable to the board of commissioners.
(c) Persons addressing the board. Any person who willfully utters loud, threatening or abusive language, or
engages in any disorderly conduct which would impede, disrupt or disturb the orderly conduct of any meeting,
hearing or other proceeding, shall be called to order by the governing body or designee, or immediately
removed. If such conduct continues, the governing body or designee may at its discretion order that any violator
be barred from further participation before the governing body. It shall be unlawful for a person to address the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/418
governing body unless a person or business representative has an item on a legally posted public hearing. Only
persons authorized to address the governing body may use exhibits, displays, and other visual aids as they may
related to the subject of the presentation.
(d) Members of the audience; search. All persons in close proximity to members of the governing body and
official meeting areas shall be subject to a search of purses, bags, backpacks, and other items used for carrying
personal possessions. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct such as: hand clapping,
stomping of feet, whistling, yelling and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs the peace and good order
of the meeting. Use of placards, banners, signs, exhibits, displays, clothing, and other visual aids or devices that
display sentiments are not permitted in the governing body's meeting area during meeting times. No
conversation among persons in the audience shall take place that may disturb the order of business. All mobile
and other communication devises including telephones shall be on silent or a nonaudible mode. Hand clapping
may be allowed as an exception to this provision in instances allowed by the governing body such as celebratory
or positive acknowledgment.
Sec. 1.02.094 Disturbance abatement
(a) Warning. All persons at the meetings of the governing body shall, at the request of the governing body, be
silent. If, after receiving a warning from the governing body or designee, a person persists in disturbing the
meeting, the governing body or designee may order him/her to remove himself/herself from the meeting. If
he/she does not remove himself/herself, any member of the governing body or designee may order that the city
manager or a law enforcement officer have the person removed.
(b) Removal. The city attorney, with assistance from the city's police department, shall be the sergeant-at-arms
of the commissioners meetings. The city attorney shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the
governing body for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the meeting. Upon instruction of the
governing body, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to remove from the meeting any person who disturbs
the proceedings of the governing body. The city's police department shall assist the commissioners, city attorney,
and city staff with the intent of this section.
(c) Necessitating removal. It shall be unlawful for any person or group at a meeting of the governing body to
resist or even debate removal by the sergeant-at-arms.
(d) Motions to enforce. Any member of the governing body may move to require the presiding officer to
enforce the terms of this section, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the governing body shall require him
to do so.
(e) Adjournment. If any meeting of the governing body is willfully disturbed by a group of persons so as to
render the orderly conduct of such meeting unfeasible and when order cannot be restored by the removal of
individuals who are creating the disturbance, the meeting may be adjourned and the remaining business
considered at a later time or the next regular meeting.
Sec. 1.02.095 Use of cameras and recorders
Cameras, including television and motion picture cameras, electronic sound recording devices and any other
mechanical, electrical or electronic recording devices may be used in a reasonable manner in the public section
of the commission chamber.
Sec. 1.02.096 Provisions applicable to boards and committees
The rules and procedures set out herein shall be applicable to the city's elected body, and other boards and
committees unless otherwise indicated herein.
Sec. 1.02.097 Notice shall be placed in conspicuous place
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/418
All or part of the provisions of this division may be placed in an area to be viewed by the public at or near the
meeting site.
Sec. 1.02.098 Closed session deliberations
It shall be unlawful for any person present during a closed session meeting of the governing body to disclose the
matters discussed or any information received during the closed session to a nonprivy third party unless
otherwise ordered by a court of law. Violation of this provision by an elected or appointed official shall be
deemed a failure to faithfully execute the duties of office under all applicable laws and statutes of the city
charter. Violation of this provision may also result in the maximum fine allowed by law as well as other relief at
law or equity allowed by law for violation and enforcement of ordinances.
Sec. 1.02.099 Enforcement; punishment; penalties
(a) Should any person or business violate the prohibitions contained herein, the city attorney and/or the city's
police department may take any action to enforce this or any ordinance to prevent and summarily abate the
action, and any and all other relief as may be necessary.
(b) Any violation of this division shall be subject to both civil and criminal penalties. A criminal conviction
shall be a class C misdemeanor. A violator shall also be subject to the maximum penalties allowed by law for
failing to appear in court when charged with an offense as described herein. If conduct constituting an offense
under this division also constitutes an offense under another law, the person may be prosecuted under all
applicable laws.
(c) A liable party shall be subject to a civil penalty up to $200.00 per violation, in addition to court costs, and
other fees allowed by law.
(Ordinance 10-29 adopted 8/2/10)
ARTICLE 1.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.03.001 Organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for
execution; however, final authority shall remain with the director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 04-002, sec. 1, adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.002 Powers and duties of director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city, and
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/418
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city commission all mutual aid arrangements deemed
necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city commission. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located, and with
other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which
could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (chapter 418 of the Government
Code).
(Ordinance 04-002, sec. 2, adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/418
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (Ordinance 04-002, sec. 3,
adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in
the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county and shall have the
authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the
appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a
countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. (Ordinance 04-002,
sec. 4, adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.005 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 04-002, sec. 5, adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.006 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or
practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not
be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 04-
002, sec. 6, adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city commission, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city
commission unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit
public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property.
(Ordinance 04-002, sec. 7, adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.008 Offenses; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless the proper
officials have granted authority.
(c) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/418
(Ordinance 04-002, sec. 8, adopted 2/24/04)
Sec. 1.03.009 Limitations
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval
order, rule, or regulation. (Ordinance 04-002, sec. 10, adopted 2/24/04)
ARTICLE 1.04 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.04.031 Statement of policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit discrimination, and to provide, through fair,
orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color,
religion, age, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
(b) It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition of the inalienable right of each
individual to provide for himself and his family dwelling according to his own choosing, and, further, that the
denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color, religion, age, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an
unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of
government to prevent.
(c) The city has no administrative organization to investigate complaints under this division. Complaints are
referred to the Hidalgo County Urban County Program.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 1.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.032 Definitions
As used in this division:
Discriminatory housing practice. An act that is unlawful under this regulation.
Dwelling. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
Family. Includes a single individual living alone.
Person. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
To rent. To lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not
owned by the occupant.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 2.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.033 Housing discrimination violations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/418
It is a violation of this division for any person to discriminate by:
(1) Refusing to sell, lease, rent or otherwise make available any offered real property;
(2) Expelling a purchaser, lessee or renter from any real property;
(3) Altering the price, terms, conditions or privileges relating to the sale, rental, lease or occupancy
of real property, or in the furnishing of any facilities or services in connection with real property;
(4) Attempting to discourage the sale, rental or lease of any real property to a purchaser, lessee or
renter;
(5) Publishing, circulating, issuing or displaying, or causing to be published, circulated, issued or
displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement or sign of any kind relating to the sale, rental or
lease of real property which indicates any preference, limitation or specification with respect thereto;
(6) Assisting, inducing, compelling or coercing another person to commit an act or engage in a
practice that violates this division;
(7) Coercing, intimidating, threatening or interfering with any person in the exercise or enjoyment
of, or on account of having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise of, any right granted
or protected by this division.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 3.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.034 Exemptions
(a) Nothing in this division shall apply to:
(1) A single-family house rented or leased by the owner if the owner does not own or have an
interest in the proceeds of the rental or lease of more than three such single-family houses at one
time, the rental or lease occurred without the use of a real estate broker or salesperson, and the rental
or lease occurred without the publication, posting, or mailing of any advertisement, sign, or statement
in violation of this division;
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by
no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner maintains and occupies
one of the rooms or units as his or her residence;
(3) The sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which a religious organization, association, or
society or any nonprofit institution or organization owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, unless such membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national
origin;
(4) The rental or occupancy of lodgings by members or giving preference to members of a private
club owned or operated by a private club not open to the public;
(5) Private individuals seeking a roommate in leased or owned residences in which they reside.
(b) The prohibition against discrimination because of sex in this division does not apply if the real property
involved is such that the application would necessarily result in common use of bathroom or bedroom facilities
by unrelated persons of the opposite sex.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 4.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.035 Real estate business violations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/418
(a) No person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions may
discriminate in making available or in the terms and conditions of such a transaction. “Residential real estate
related transaction” means the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or securing residential real estate, or
the selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
(b) No real estate licensee may accept or retain a listing of real property for sale, lease or rental with an
understanding that a purchaser may be discriminated against with respect to the sale, rental or lease.
(c) No person may for profit induce or attempt to induce any other person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, religion, color, sex, national origin, marital status, familial status, age, sexual orientation, or disability.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 5.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.036 Discrimination based on mental illness
For purposes of this division, receipt or alleged receipt of treatment for a mental disorder does not constitute
evidence of a person's inability to acquire, rent or maintain property. (Ordinance 99-006, sec. 6.00, adopted
7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.037 Discrimination based on disability
For purposes of this division, discrimination includes:
(1) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability, reasonable modification of
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modification may be necessary
to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for such modification on the renter
agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;
(2) A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when
such accommodation may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 7.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.038 Housing for older persons
(a) The prohibitions against discrimination because of familial status and age in this division do not apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
(b) For purposes of this regulation, “housing for older persons” means housing which satisfies one or more of
the following criteria:
(1) Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons, as defined by the state or federal program;
(2) Intended for and solely occupied by persons sixty-two years of age or older; or
(3) Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five years of age or older per
unit.
(c) Housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this section if:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/418
(1) Significant facilities and services are specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs
of older persons or, if provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, such housing is
necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons;
(2) At least eighty percent of the dwellings are occupied by at least one person fifty-five years of
age or older per unit; and
(3) Policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide
housing for persons fifty-five years of age or older are published and adhered to.
(d) Housing does not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons if:
(1) Persons residing in such housing as of the date of adoption of this division do not meet the
requirements of subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section; however, new occupants of such
housing must meet the age requirements of subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3); or
(2) The housing includes unoccupied units; [provided] however, such units are reserved for
occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 8.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.039 Applicability of restrictions regarding maximum number of occupants
Nothing in this division limits the applicability of any local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum
number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. (Ordinance 99-006, sec. 9.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.040 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate, or interfere with:
(1) Any person because he or she is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling,
or applying for or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of
selling or renting dwellings;
(2) Any person because he or she has been:
(A) Participating, without discrimination, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities; or
(B) Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection to participate; or
(3) Any person because he or she has been, or in order to discourage such person or any other
person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities, or participating lawfully in speech or
peaceable assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 10.00, adopted 7/14/99)
Sec. 1.04.041 Complaint procedure
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he
or she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory practice that is about to occur may file a written complaint
with the city secretary, which shall immediately be forwarded to the fair housing center at the Urban County
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/418
Program office. Such complaints shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to commit the
discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof.
(b) A complaint shall be filed no later than 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice
occurred. Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a complaint are based. The respondent
may file an answer to the complaint against him. Both complaints and answers shall be signed and may be
reasonably and fairly amended.
(Ordinance 99-006, sec. 11.00, adopted 7/14/99)
ARTICLE 1.05 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Sec. 1.05.001 Vital statistics department
(a) Birth certificate (full size copy): $23.00.
(b) Death certificate: $21.00.
(c) Death certificate (2nd copy): $4.00.
(d) Burial transit permit: $5.00.
Sec. 1.05.002 Police department
(a) Report copies: $6.00.
(b) Incident and offense: $0.10 cents per page.
(c) Fingerprint copies: $7.00 per card.
(d) Clearance letter: $7.00.
Sec. 1.05.003 Fire department
Fire incident reports: $15.00.
(Ordinance 16-25 adopted 10/11/16)
Sec. 1.05.004 San Juan library
(a) Black and white copies (per page): $0.15.
(b) Color copies (per page): $0.50.
(c) Fax machine (per page): $1.00.
(d) Book late fee (charged per day per book): $0.15.
(e) Movie late fee (charged per day per movie): $1.00.
(f) Lost or damaged book: Price of book plus $5.00 processing fee.
(g) Lost or damaged movie: Price of movie plus $5.00 processing fee.
(h) Scanning (per page): $0.25.
(i) Computer printouts (black and white per page): $0.15.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/418
(j) Computer printouts (color per page): $0.50.
(k) Disc cleaning (per disc): $1.50.
(l) Lost library card:
(1) First time: $1.00.
(2) Second time: $2.50.
(3) Third time and thereafter: $5.00.
(Ordinance 18-17 adopted 11/13/18)
Sec. 1.05.005 Amigos del Valle rental
(a) Deposit (refundable): $100.00.
(b) Security: $80.00.
(c) Rental: $700.00.
(d) Day rental: $500.00.
(e) Nonprofit: $350.00.
(f) Rental for city employee: $350.00.
Sec. 1.05.006 San Juan Memorial Park
(a) Deposit (refundable): $100.00.
(b) Rental for city resident: $125.00.
(c) Rental for noncity resident: $175.00.
(d) Rental for city employee: $125.00.
(e) Rental of kitchen: $50.00.
(f) Noise permit: $10.00.
Sec. 1.05.007 Mayfield Park
(a) Deposit (refundable): $100.00.
(b) Rental for city resident (per field): $250.00.
(c) Rental for noncity resident (per field): $300.00.
(d) Noise permit (per field): $10.00.
(e) Small field: $100.00.
* The city will allow the tournament organizers to charge at the gate but the city will operate the concession
stand.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/418
Sec. 1.05.008 Planning department
(a) Building permits will be based on current International Code Council building schedules of valuation
amounts per square foot of improvement adopted every year.
(b) Electrical subcontractor license: $60.00.
(c) Occupational license: $40.00.
(d) Reinspection: $40.00.
(e) Zone change request: $300.00.
(f) Conditional/special use permit: $300.00.
(g) Variance request: $250.00.
(h) New subdivision infrastructure inspections: $4% of value.*
(i) Escrow funds must be paid for geotechnical services for new subdivisions prior to the scheduling of the
pre-construction meeting. The amount to be determined by the city engineer assigned to the subdivision. Any
remaining funds after that subdivision is completed will be reimbursed to the developer.
(j) Subdivision application (preliminary and final): $300.00 + $50.00 per acre.
(k) Weedy lot mowing fee: Varies by square foot.
(l) Weedy lot administrative fee: $50.00.
(m) Weedy lot lien processing fee: $175.00.
(n) Mobile home and house inspections outside the city: $50.00 plus IRS mileage rate.
(o) Excavation permit on city right-of-way: $150.00.
(p) Garage sales: $10.00.
(q) Working clearance on residential (after 90% completion) $150.00.
(r) Zoning questionnaires: $100.00.
(s) Stormwater inspections fee: 5 percent of building permit value.
(t) Cell phone tower processing fee: $500.00.
*To be paid at the time of the pre-construction meeting.
Sec. 1.05.009 Parks and recreation department
(a) Pavilions rental: $35.00.
(b) Youth football registration: $60.00.
(c) Youth soccer registration: $30.00.
(d) Youth flag football registration: $30.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/418
(e) Youth basketball registration: $30.00.
(f) Youth baseball registration: $30.00.
(g) Youth girl softball registration: $30.00.
(h) Youth volleyball registration: $30.00.
(i) Youth swimming registration: $30.00.
(j) Adult men's softball team: $250.00.
(k) Summer program activity fee: $30.00.
(l) Swimming pool admission: $1.00.
(m) Swimming pool rental: $160.00.
(n) Softball field rental: $175.00.
* Nonresidents shall incur an additional $10.00 surcharge on all youth activities.
** A sports convenience fee of 2% plus 48 cents shall be added to the cost of any parks and recreation
transaction. The sports convenience fee shall be based on the cost of the on-line gateway and merchants services.
Sec. 1.05.010 Administration
(a) Public information requests: As regulated by the office of the attorney general.
(b) Maps regular size (black and white): $0.50.
(c) Maps regular size (color): $1.00.
(d) Maps big size (per sq. ft. black and white): $3.00.
(e) Maps big size (per sq. ft. color): $5.00.
Sec. 1.05.011 On-line convenience fee
An online payment convenience fee of $2.00 shall be added to the cost of any utility bills, city permits, license,
fines, reports or other items that are paid or purchased from the city through the use of the online payment
system. The convenience fee is based on the cost of the equipment, personnel and network connections that are
required to provide the online payment service.
(Ordinance 16-25 adopted 10/11/16)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/418
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
This definition is unique to this regulation.
Owner. Any person owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be
“harbored” if it is fed or sheltered or found on the premises of such person on three (3) consecutive days or
more.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. I, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 2.01.002 Vicious animals
Vicious animals are declared to be public nuisances. Any vicious animal shall be immediately picked up and
impounded. Vicious animals shall be destroyed if:
(1) Necessary to prevent immediate injury to a human being or another animal;
(2) Such animal, in the opinion of the city officer and one licensed veterinarian, is likely, if
released, to again commit any act which alone or in conjunction with other similar acts would satisfy
the definition of the term “vicious” as used in this regulation;
(3) Such animal and its owner come within the terms of section 2.02.136; or
(4) Such animal has previously injured any person prior to the act in question.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. I, sec. 1.01)
Sec. 2.01.003 Keeping of livestock, poultry, swine or reptiles prohibited
It shall be unlawful to raise, keep or pen any:
(1) Livestock;
(2) Swine;
(3) Poultry; or
(4) Any type of reptiles;
upon any premises within the city.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. I, sec. 1.02)
Sec. 2.01.004 Livestock running at large
It shall be unlawful to knowingly allow any livestock to run at large within the city, and it is declared to be a
nuisance. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. I, sec. 1.03)
State law references–Animals running at large on highways, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, sec. 143.101 et seq.; estrays, V.T.C.A.,
Agriculture Code, ch. 142.
ARTICLE 2.02 DOGS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.02.001 Violations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/418
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or harbor any dog in the city except as provided in this
chapter, and any failure, neglect or refusal to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any act or omission to
the terms shall be deemed a violation. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. II, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 2.02.002 Dogs running at large
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any keeper or owner of any dog to permit said dog to run at large
within the city. “To run at large” is to be free of restraint, upon and/or beyond the boundaries of the premises of
the keeper or owner. All owners at all times shall restrain their dogs with a leash or within a building or adequate
fence.
(b) Impoundment. Any dog found running at large shall be immediately impounded by an officer of the city.
Animals so impounded shall be disposed of.
(c) Citation; penalty. In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, said officer may issue
to the owner of such animal a citation for a regulation violation. Such citation shall impose upon the owner a
penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), which shall be paid within seventy-two (72) hours of issuance.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. II, sec. 2.01)
Sec. 2.02.003 Barking or howling dogs
It shall be unlawful to keep an animal in the city which by loud, frequent, or habitual barking or howling shall
cause annoyance and/or disturb the peace and quiet of any person. Any person who believes that there has been
a violation of this provision shall have the right, and it shall be his duty, to file a complaint against the owner or
keeper of such dog in the municipal court of the city, whereupon a hearing within a reasonable time shall be held
and a determination made as to whether such alleged loud, frequent or habitual barking annoyed and disturbed
the peace of such person. If so, the court may declare such loud barking or howling dog to be a public nuisance
and order such dog to be picked up, impounded and/or destroyed or the owner to be fined up to two hundred
dollars ($200.00). (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. II, sec. 2.02)
Secs. 2.02.004–2.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. License*
Sec. 2.02.041 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor or have custody of a dog over three (3) months of age
in the city without having obtained a license. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 2.02.042 Exceptions
(a) Dogs with nonresident owner. Licensing shall not be required for dogs belonging to and kept by a
nonresident keeping such dog within the city for no longer than sixty (60) days.
(b) Seeing Eye and law enforcement dogs. Licensing shall not be required for Seeing Eye dogs or law
enforcement dogs owned by the city.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.01)
Sec. 2.02.043 Time of application
Application for a license must be made within:
(1) Thirty (30) days after obtaining a dog over three (3) months old; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/418
(2) Thirty (30) days after a dog has become three (3) months old.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.02)
Sec. 2.02.044 Application requirements
Application for a license shall:
(1) Be made to the licensing authority;
(2) Include the name and address of the applicant, and a description of the animal;
(3) Be accompanied by the fee; and
(4) Be accompanied by a rabies certificate.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.03)
Sec. 2.02.045 Term
(a) If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs shall be for the calendar year period. The licensing period
shall begin January 1 and shall end December 31 of each year.
(b) The owner of a dog shall be in violation of this regulation if application for a license is not made on or
before the thirty-first (31st) day of January of the calendar year for which the license is sought, unless such
owner comes within an exception as set out in section 2.02.042(a) or (b).
(c) The owner of a dog licensing such dog in the month of December of a calendar year shall be entitled to
obtain a license effective for the remainder of the month and for the entire next calendar year.
(d) In all cases not covered in subsections (b) and (c), licenses shall be valid and in effect only from the time
of issuance until the end of the calendar year, December 31.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.04)
Sec. 2.02.046 Certificate of vaccination
No license shall be issued unless the application is accompanied by a certificate from a veterinarian licensed to
practice in the state showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies within the preceding ninety (90)
days. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.05)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.047 Tags
(a) The licensing authority shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying number and the year of
issuance upon approval of the license application and fees.
(b) The owner shall secure such tag to the dog so licensed by use of a collar, harness or other similar suitable
method. Such owner shall be required to have such tag on such dog at all times.
(c) The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued and the dogs to
which such numbered tags apply, and shall make this record available to the public.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.06)
Sec. 2.02.048 Fee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/418
The licensing authority shall collect and deposit in the general fund of the city a license fee of two dollars
($2.00) for each license issued pursuant to this regulation. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III,
sec. 3.07)
Sec. 2.02.049 Duplicates
A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a two dollar ($2.00) replacement fee. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.08)
Sec. 2.02.050 Use for other dog
No owner may use any license for any dog other than the dog for which it was issued. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.09)
Sec. 2.02.051 Penalty for failure to obtain license
Dog owners who fail to obtain a license for a dog shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00), exclusive of other amounts as allowed by law. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4,
art. IV, div. III, sec. 3.10)
Secs. 2.02.052–2.02.090 Reserved
Division 3. Impoundment*
Sec. 2.02.091 Authority
It shall be the duty of the city animal control officer to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this
division, all dogs found in violation of the provisions of this regulation within the city, whether such dog shall be
in the immediate presence of its owner or custodian or otherwise. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div.
IV, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 2.02.092 Right of entry
The city animal control officer is authorized to enter upon any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the
purpose of seizing and impounding any dog found in violation of this regulation. (1999 Unified General Code,
ch. 4, art. IV, div. IV, sec. 4.01)
Sec. 2.02.093 Notification of owner
If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the officer or his agent
shall attempt immediately upon impoundment to notify the owner by telephone or in the most efficient and
speedy manner. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. IV, sec. 4.02)
Sec. 2.02.094 Period of redemption
Impounded dogs shall be kept for not less than three (3) business days. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art.
IV, div. IV, sec. 4.03)
Sec. 2.02.095 Redemption and adoption requirements
(a) Current city license. The owner of any impounded dog shall present evidence of a current city license for
such animal before it shall be released from impoundment.
(b) Vaccination and sterilization. No unclaimed dog shall be released for adoption without being vaccinated
for rabies and sterilized or without a written agreement from the adopter guaranteeing that such animal will be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/418
vaccinated for rabies and sterilized.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. IV, sec. 4.04)
State law reference–Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 828.
Sec. 2.02.096 Fees
An owner reclaiming an impounded dog shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), plus two dollars ($2.00) for each
day the dog has been impounded. Additional impoundment of the same dog within a twelve-month period shall
carry a reclaiming fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. IV, sec. 4.05)
Sec. 2.02.097 Disposition of unclaimed animals
Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within three (3) working days shall become the property of the city and
shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art.
IV, div. IV, sec. 4.06)
Secs. 2.02.098–2.02.130 Reserved
Division 4. Dangerous Dogs*
Sec. 2.02.131 State law adopted
Dangerous dogs, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.041, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter D, section 822.041
et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.03 RABIES CONTROL†
Sec. 2.03.001 Quarantine of animal biting or scratching person
(a) Any animal which bites or scratches a person shall be immediately reported to the city health officer and
shall be securely quarantined at the direction of the city health officer for a period of ten (10) days for a domestic
dog, cat or ferret or thirty (30) days for other animals, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by
written permission of the city health officer or under his direction. At the discretion of the city health officer,
such quarantine may be:
(1) On the premises of the owner;
(2) At the shelter designated as the city pound; or
(3) At the owner's option and expense, in a veterinarian clinic of his choice.
(b) In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine
shall be at the shelter designated by the city.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.00; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.03.002 Duty of owner to surrender animal
(a) The owner, upon demand by the city health officer, shall surrender any animal which:
(1) Has bitten a human; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/418
(2) Is suspected as having been exposed to rabies;
for supervised quarantine, the expense of quarantine which shall be borne by the owner.
(b) The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees
determined therefor by the city commission.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.01)
Sec. 2.03.003 Disposition of dead rabid animal
The city health officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the department of state health services
for pathological examination and shall notify the proper health officer of reports of human contacts and the
diagnosis when rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or suspected by a licensed veterinarian
and the animal dies while under observation. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.02)
Sec. 2.03.004 Areawide quarantine authorized
When the report indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the city health officer may order an areawide quarantine
for a period of sixty (60) days, and, upon the invoking of such quarantine, no pet animal shall be taken into the
street, or permitted to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may
be taken or shipped from the city without permission of the city health officer. (1999 Unified General Code, ch.
4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.03)
State law reference–Area rabies quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.045.
Sec. 2.03.005 Vaccination requirements during areawide quarantine
During the areawide quarantine period and as long afterward as he decides it is necessary to prevent the spread
of rabies, the city health officer may require that all dogs, three (3) months of age and older, shall be vaccinated
against rabies. All vaccinated dogs shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for thirty
(30) days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the city health officer is empowered to provide for a
program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics
strategically located throughout the city. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.04)
Sec. 2.03.006 Adoption of strays from animal shelter during areawide quarantine
No animal which has been impounded by reason of being a stray or unclaimed shall be allowed to be adopted
from any animal shelter during the period of rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the
city health officer. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.05)
Sec. 2.03.007 Destruction or isolation of animals bitten by rabid animal
Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy
the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel designated by the city health officer, for six (6)
months, shall be enforced. If the animal has been previously vaccinated within the time limits established by the
public health service based on the kind of vaccination used, revaccination and restraint (leashing and
confinement) for thirty (30) days shall be carried out. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec.
5.06)
Sec. 2.03.008 Extension of areawide quarantine
Such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional period of time in the event there are additional
cases of rabies occurring during the period of areawide quarantine. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV,
div. V, sec. 5.07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/418
Sec. 2.03.009 Unlawful destruction or removal of suspected rabid animal
No person shall kill, cause to be killed, or remove from the city:
(1) Any rabid animal;
(2) Any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies; or
(3) Any animal biting a human.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.08)
Sec. 2.03.010 Surrender of carcass of animal exposed to rabies
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the city health officer.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.09)
Sec. 2.03.011 Failure to surrender animal
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction when demand is made by the
city health officer. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.10)
Sec. 2.03.012 Reporting of bite cases
It shall be the duty of every physician, or other medical practitioner, to report to the city health officer the names
and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be
helpful in rabies control. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 5.11)
Sec. 2.03.013 Reporting of suspected rabies
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the city health officer any animal considered by
him to be a rabies suspect. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. IV, div. V, sec. 10.5.12)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.02.001–3.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/418
Sec. 3.02.051 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Building Code. The adoption of this
code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to maintenance of
buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Building Code - 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 04-006, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/04; Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 3.02.052 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ordinance 04-006, sec. 2, adopted
6/8/04)
Sec. 3.02.053 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 04-006, sec.
3, adopted 6/8/04)
Secs. 3.02.054–3.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Residential Code*
Sec. 3.02.101 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Residential Code. The adoption of
this code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to maintenance
of buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Residential Code - 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 04-007, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/04; Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 3.02.102 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ordinance 04-007, sec. 2, adopted
6/8/04)
Sec. 3.02.103 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 04-007, sec.
3, adopted 6/8/04)
Secs. 3.02.104–3.02.150 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/418
Division 4. Energy Conservation Code†
Sec. 3.02.151 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code. The
adoption of this code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to
the maintenance of buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Energy Conservation Code - 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 2004-012, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/04; Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 3.02.152 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail. (Ordinance 2004-012,
sec. 2, adopted 6/8/04)
Sec. 3.02.153 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 2004-012,
sec. 3, adopted 6/8/04)
Secs. 3.02.154–3.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 3.02.201 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Plumbing Code. The adoption of
this code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to maintenance
of buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Plumbing Code - 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 04-010, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/04; Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 3.02.202 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ordinance 04-010, sec. 2, adopted
6/8/04)
Sec. 3.02.203 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 04-010, sec.
3, adopted 6/8/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/418
Sec. 3.02.204 Cross-connection control program
(a) General. No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual
contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems (290 rules) and this section.
The water purveyor shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed,
maintained and tested in accordance with the 290 rules and this section.
(b) Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance.
(1) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a licensed backflow
prevention assembly tester and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention
assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested and
certified to be operating within specifications at least annually by a recognized backflow prevention
assembly tester.
(2) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14) or The University of Southern
California Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
(3) Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever
said assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be
kept and submitted to the city within five (5) working days of the test, repair or overhaul of each
backflow prevention assembly.
(4) No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other
assembly or device substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly or
device is moved from the present location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or device
shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this section, The
American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-
Connection Control (Manual M14), current addition, University of Southern California Manual of
Cross-Connection Control, current addition, or the current plumbing code of the city, whichever is
more stringent.
(5) Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be tested for accuracy at least
annually in accordance with The American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current addition, or The
University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition. The
original calibration form must be submitted to the city within five (5) working days after calibration.
(6) A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current license from the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (Commission).
(c) Customer service inspections.
(1) A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service
to all new construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that
cross connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction,
or addition to the private water distribution facilities.
(2) Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a
customer service inspection:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/418
(A) Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that have been licensed by
the state board of plumbing examiners.
(B) Customer service inspectors that have been licensed by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
(3) The customer service inspection must certify that:
(A) No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of
contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public
water system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly.
(B) No cross connection between the public water supply and a private water source exists.
Where an actual properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply
and a private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly
is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by a
recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.
(C) No connection exists which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water
supply is permitted.
(D) No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8% lead may be used for the installation
or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use.
(E) No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% lead can be used for the installation or
repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one
lead test shall be performed for each inspection.
(Ordinance 12-01 adopted 2/6/12)
Secs. 3.02.205–3.02.250 Reserved
Division 6. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 3.02.251 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Mechanical Code. The adoption of
this code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to maintenance
of buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Mechanical Code - 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 04-009, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/04; Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 3.02.252 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ordinance 04-009, sec. 2, adopted
6/8/04)
Sec. 3.02.253 Enforcement officers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/418
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 04-009, sec.
3, adopted 6/8/04)
Secs. 3.02.254–3.02.300 Reserved
Division 7. Fuel Gas Code†
Sec. 3.02.301 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code. The adoption of this
code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to maintenance of
buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Fuel Gas Code - 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 04-011, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/04; Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 3.02.302 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ordinance 04-011, sec. 2, adopted
6/8/04)
Sec. 3.02.303 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 04-011, sec.
3, adopted 6/8/04)
Secs. 3.02.304–3.02.350 Reserved
Division 8. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 3.02.351 Adopted
(a) The following code shall be adopted by the city's planning department and inspections division, in its
entirety with appendixes, by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Property Maintenance Code - 2009 edition.
(b) To assure that the city is utilizing the most current code as identified above, the city commission further
ordains that any subsequent updates to the aforementioned code, be hereby adopted in its entirety with
appendixes as they become available.
(Ordinance 11-03 adopted 2/22/11)
Secs. 3.02.352–3.02.400 Reserved
Division 9. Electrical Code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/418
Sec. 3.02.401 Adopted
(a) The following code shall be adopted by the city's planning department and inspections division, in its
entirety with appendixes, by reference as if copied herein fully:
National Electrical Code (NEC/NFPA) - 2014 edition.
(b) To assure that the city is utilizing the most current code as identified above, the city commission further
ordains that any subsequent updates to the aforementioned code, be hereby adopted in its entirety with
appendixes as they become available.
(Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
ARTICLE 3.03 UNSAFE BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.03.001 Statement of policy
All buildings which are determined to be unsafe, unsanitary, or not provided with adequate egress, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are unsafe buildings. These unsafe
buildings are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in
accordance with the following procedures. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I)
Sec. 3.03.002 Minimum standards for use and occupancy
An owner of a building or structure that fails to comply with the requirements of the codes and the regulations
herein shall be subject to abatement:
(1) When the exterior walls or other vertical structural members of said building, dwelling or
structure list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing though the center of gravity
does not fit inside the middle 1/3 of the base;
(2) Whenever the building, dwelling, or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows:
(A) More then 50% damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members; or
(B) 50% damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or
coverings;
(3) Whenever the building, dwelling or structure has improperly distributed loads upon the
foundation or roofs or when said foundation or roofs are overloaded or have insufficient strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used, to the general public or possible occupants;
(4) Regardless of structural condition, remains unoccupied and unsecured so as to become:
(A) An attractive nuisance to children;
(B) A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or
(C) As to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral
acts;
(5) Is manifestly unsafe and dangerous to the life, safety, or general health and welfare of possible
occupants or the general public;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/418
(6) Intended to be used for habitation, is determined by the building standards and renewal board
(see section 3.03.004) to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely
to cause sickness or disease;
(7) Has inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic; or if the door, aisle, passageway,
stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size; or if it is not arranged to provide
safe and adequate means of exit for said purposes;
(8) Any portion thereof is likely to fall, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and
thereby injure person or damage property;
(9) Any portion thereof is likely to partially or completely collapse because of:
(A) Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
(B) Faulty construction;
(C) The removal, movement or inability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building;
(D) The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
(E) Any other cause;
(10) Has a floor, exterior wall or roof with holes, cracks or loose, rotten, warped or protruding
boards therein so as not to give reasonable protection to any occupants or possible occupants from
weather elements or danger of collapse;
(11) Has interior walls or ceiling with holes, cracks, loose plaster, defective materials, or structural
deterioration to the extent that it is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used or so
as not to give reasonable protection to any occupants from danger of collapse or fire;
(12) Because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack
of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus,
or other cause, is determined by the chief building official to be a fire hazard;
(13) Whenever any portion of said building, dwelling, or structure remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building, dwelling, or structure, or portion thereof, [and is] an
attractive nuisance to children or hazard to the public or their property.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 3.03.003 Duties of chief building official
The chief building official shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) As a first order of business, the chief building official shall undertake a window survey for the
purpose of identifying abandoned and dilapidated buildings and structures;
(2) Aggressively inspect all abandoned or unoccupied buildings or structures which may come to
his attention as a violation of this article;
(3) Upon completion of the survey, the chief building official shall report his findings to the
director of planning and community development, the building standards and renewal board and the
city commission;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/418
(4) Compile and maintain a current inventory of unsafe buildings which may be in violation of this
article;
(5) Issue a notice of complaint and intent to abate under the procedures set out herein; and
(6) File complaints with the building standards and renewal board.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 3.03.004 Building standards and renewal board established
(a) There is hereby created a building standards and renewal board (BSRB) to serve at the pleasure of the city
commission. The BSRB shall consist of five (5) persons. The BSRB shall be composed of three members from
the general public and two members from any facet of the construction industry.
(b) The mayor shall nominate and the city commission shall ratify the appointment of members of the BSRB.
Three of the original appointees shall serve two-year terms; the remaining two appointees shall serve three years.
The initial terms shall be determined by lot. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three-year terms, based on a
calendar year. An appointee to the BSRB shall forfeit his appointment upon his failure to attend three
consecutive meetings in a calendar year.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 3.03.005 Abatement required
The BSRB shall require the vacation, relocation of occupants, securing, repair, removal, or demolition of a
building that is:
(1) Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation or a hazard to the public health, safety,
and welfare;
(2) Unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry
to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of
harborage or could be entered or used by children, regardless of its structural condition; or
(3) Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or
use of the building.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 3.03.006 First notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement
(a) Upon the determination by the chief building official that any building, structure or portion fails to meet
the minimum standards, he shall give the owner, agent or person in control or possession of such building or
structure, and all his holders of record, a written notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement by certified or
registered mail.
(b) The notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement shall:
(1) Identify the building and the property on which it is located, which is not required to be a legal
description;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/418
(2) Identify with specificity each of the defects or deficits in the building or structure which cause
the building to fail to meet the minimum standards;
(3) State the date on which the chief building official proposes to submit his complaint and intent
to seek abatement to the BSRB;
(4) Invite the owner, agent or person having control or possession of such building or structure,
and all of his holders of record, to attempt an informal resolution of the matter;
(5) Contain in bold letters the following language: “FAILURE TO CONTACT THE
UNDERSIGNED PUBLIC OFFICIAL IN TEN DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS LETTER MAY
RESULT IN THE WAIVER OF YOUR RIGHT TO INFORMALLY RESOLVE THIS COMPLAINT
PRIOR TO THE FILING OF FORMAL PROCEEDINGS TO ABATE.”
(6) State that the owner, agent or person in control or possession of such building or structure shall
have the right to request a hearing before the BSRB concerning abatement of violations without first
attempting informal resolution of the matter. This request shall be communicated in writing to the
chief building official not later than the 10th day after receipt of the notice.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 5.00)
Sec. 3.03.007 Second notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement
If the owner does not contact the chief building official within ten days or if no informal resolution is agreed to
within 30 days from the date the first notice is given, the chief building official shall give a second notice of
complaint and intent to seek abatement by certified mail return receipt requested, hereinafter to be referred to as
the “second notice,” to the owner or agent or person in control over such building or structure and all lienholders
of record of said property involved, stating that a complaint has been filed with the BSRB and that a hearing
shall be held by said board to allow the owner, in person or through his attorney, to respond to the notice. A copy
of the “second notice” shall be filed with BSRB and shall constitute a complaint. Said hearing shall be held more
than ten (10) days after mailing of said second notice. The date, time and place for said hearing shall be
contained in the second notice letter. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 6.00)
Sec. 3.03.008 Published notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement
If the address of the owner or owner's agent is unknown, the notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county once a week for two (2) consecutive
weeks, with an affidavit being returned to the chief building official of the city showing publication of same. If
within ten (10) days from the date the notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement is published on the
second week, the owner or owner's agent does not comply with the requirements of the original notice, a second
notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county once a week for two (2) consecutive
weeks, with an affidavit being returned to the chief building official of the city showing publication of same. On
publication of the second notice, the city official shall file a written complaint with the BSRB. The date for the
hearing in said published second notice shall be more than ten (10) days after the last day of the second week of
publication of the second notice. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 7.00)
Sec. 3.03.009 Title search
To determine the ownership of interests, liens or claims on the property, the chief building official shall
diligently search the following records:
(1) County real property records of the county in which the building is located;
(2) Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located;
(3) Records of the secretary of state;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/418
(4) Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located;
(5) Tax records of the city; and
(6) Utility records of the city.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 8.00)
Sec. 3.03.010 Informal resolution of complaints
(a) If the record owner of the property, or his agent, on which the building or structure is located timely
responds to the notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement, the chief building official shall have the
discretion to do the following:
(1) Enter into a voluntary abatement agreement providing for the repair/rehabilitation of the
building or structure or removal/demolition of the building or structure or portion thereof for a period
of time not to exceed 90 days;
(2) Modify and reissue the notice of complaint and intent to seek abatement and submit it to the
BSRB; or
(3) Withdraw the notice altogether.
(b) The chief building official's informal resolution of all complaints shall be submitted to the BSRB. It shall
be incorporated into an order of the BSRB and a record made.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 9.00)
Sec. 3.03.011 Responsibilities of building standards and renewal board
The BSRB shall have the following responsibilities and abide by the following procedures:
(1) Prior to initiating proceedings on a complaint, the chairman of the BSRB shall inquire of each
BSRB member whether the member knows of a conflict or potential conflict of interest with respect
to the complaint to be adjudicated. A member with a conflict or potential conflict shall not sit in
adjudication of the complaint. The BSRB shall refer all legal questions to the city attorney.
(2) The BSRB shall have no power to incur any expense for the demolition of any building or
structure, or portion thereof, but in appropriate cases may recommend action to the city commission.
(3) The BSRB shall have the power to refer the adjudicated claim to the municipal court for the
purpose of imposing a fine in connection with any abatement order.
(4) A hearing under this section may be held by the municipal court or a hearings officer
designated by the BSRB, but any abatement order shall be issued solely by the BSRB.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 10.00)
Sec. 3.03.012 Record of hearing
The chairman shall call out the complaint number and identify for the record all persons present at the hearing
having an interest in the property, the subject of the complaint, the attorneys and the witnesses. All documentary
evidence shall be marked and become part of the record. A party to a complaint hearing may call witnesses,
including expert witnesses. An audio, video or stenographic record shall be made of all proceedings before the
BSRB. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 11.00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/418
Sec. 3.03.013 Burden of proof at hearing
In all cases presented to the BSRB, the chief building official shall have the burden of proving, by the greater
weight of the evidence, that:
(1) The building or structure does not conform to one or more of the minimum standards;
(2) The plan proposed by the chief building official to abate the violations is an efficient and
reasonable one; or
(3) Demolition of the building or structure is the only way of abating the unsafe condition.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 12.00)
Sec. 3.03.014 Conduct of hearing
The hearing shall be conducted by the presiding officer of the BSRB and shall hear evidence presented by the
chief building official and any other witnesses on behalf of the city in support of the complaint. The owner, or
his attorney, shall have the right to cross-examine the city's witnesses and to call witnesses and present evidence
in defense. Each side may also present rebuttal evidence. At the close of the evidence, the BSRB shall make its
determination as whether or not a building, dwelling, or structure is in violation of this regulation. If the BSRB
determines that a violation exists, the BSRB shall further determine what corrective action shall be necessary to
abate this violation and shall order the owner of the property to take such corrective action. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 13.00)
Sec. 3.03.015 Abatement order
(a) After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation, the BSRB may order that the building be
vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within 30 days or a reasonable time as
determined by the BSRB. The BSRB also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time.
(b) If the BSRB allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish
the building, the BSRB shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the
work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from
unauthorized entry while the work is being performed.
(c) The BSRB may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or
demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee:
(1) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(2) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days
because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(d) If the BSRB allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the
work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the BSRB shall require the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the city to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work.
The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the hearing official or the hearing
official's designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
(e) The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that
may be required to comply with these regulations and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/418
(f) As an alternative to the procedure prescribed by this section, the city may make a diligent effort to discover
each mortgagee and lienholder before conducting the public hearing and may give them a notice of and an
opportunity to comment at the hearing. In addition, the city may file notice of the hearing in the official public
records of real property in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and
address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined, a legal description of the
affected property, and a description of the hearing. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees,
lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the
notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who
acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. If the city operates under this subsection, the order issued by
the city may specify a reasonable time as provided by this section for the building to be vacated, secured,
repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner or for the occupants to be relocated by the owner and an
additional reasonable time as provided by this section for the ordered action to be taken by any of the
mortgagees or lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for
action by the owner. Under this subsection, the city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or
lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 14.00)
Sec. 3.03.016 Failure to comply with order; securing of building
(a) If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not
relocated, within the allotted time, the BSRB may request that the city vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the
building or relocate the occupants at its own expense.
(b) The BSRB may secure a building if the abatement order is not complied with and the BSRB determines
the building or structure:
(1) Violates the minimum standards; and
(2) Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the
building.
(c) Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured, the BSRB shall give notice to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice; or
(2) Depositing the notice in the U.S. mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address.
(d) If the owner is unknown, the BSRB shall give notice by publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-
day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county if personal service cannot be obtained and the
owner's post office address is unknown, or posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal
service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown.
(e) The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A statement that the BSRB will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and
(3) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
BSRB's securing of the building.
(f) The BSRB shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written
information about any matter relating to the BSRB's securing of the building if, within 30 days after the date the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/418
BSRB secures the building, the owner files with the BSRB a written request for the hearing. The BSRB shall
conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed.
(g) If the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the BSRB shall make a diligent
effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or in the property on which
the building is located. The BSRB shall send to each identified mortgagee and lienholder a notice containing:
(1) A description of the violation of municipal standards that is present at the building; and
(2) A statement that the BSRB will vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 15.00)
Sec. 3.03.017 Written decision required
A determination shall not be construed to have been made until it has been put into the form of a written
decision and reviewed by the board for clarification and verification of intent and purpose. Such review shall be
deemed to be completed upon said written form being signed by the board's chairman or other board member
and attested to by the recording secretary. Said written form shall include the following:
(1) The date of the hearing;
(2) The name and address of the owner, if known;
(3) The legal description of the property (in the form of an actual address or a physical location);
(4) The specific date by which the board's determination must be fully and completely complied
with;
(5) The determination of the board, including action to be taken by owner; and
(6) The decision of the board as per the motion made, whom made by, whom seconded by, and
votes in favor of and against said motion.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 16.00)
Sec. 3.03.018 Determination to include specific time for compliance
If a determination is made by the board requiring that the owner abate the nuisance or that he demolish the
building or structure, such determination shall include a reference to a specific date by which such abatement or
demolition is to be completed. Said date shall be such as to provide reasonable time for full compliance with the
board's determination. Such time, however, shall be at the total discretion of the BSRB, and shall not be
overridden by the time allotted by any building permit required and/or issued for the process of complying with
the board's determination. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 17.00)
Sec. 3.03.019 Applicability of determination to subsequent owners
The board's determination, including the allotted time for compliance with such determination, shall bind any
subsequent owner(s) of subject property if said property is sold prior to expiration of the allotted time. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 18.00)
Sec. 3.03.020 Mailing of notice of decision; application for rehearing
(a) Notice of the decision of the board upon original hearing shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, within seven (7) days of the hearing, to the owner and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/418
or the subject property, stating in said letter that said owner has ten (10) days from the date of postmark of said
letter to apply for a rehearing (said rehearing to be set by the board within ten (10) days of the application date,
but to be held more than ten (10) days from said application date).
(b) The BSRB shall use its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee of the building. If a notice is mailed and the U.S. Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be deemed as delivered.
(c) Certified mail notice or actual personal notice of the date for rehearing, if applied for, will be served upon
the owner.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 19.00)
Sec. 3.03.021 Finality of decision; public notice of decision
The decision of the board upon original hearing shall be final after the tenth day after said decision has been
reached, if no motion for rehearing has been applied for. The decision of the board shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation if the certified mail letter containing the decision of the board is refused for any
reason, or if the owner's address is unknown. Additionally, a copy of said notice letter shall be kept publicly
posted in the office of the chief building official for two (2) weeks after the decision on original hearing of the
board has been reached, and an additional copy shall be posted, for the same two (2) weeks, upon the city
bulletin board of the city hall. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 20.00)
Sec. 3.03.022 Failure to appear at hearing
If the owner or his attorney or his agent fails to appear at the original hearing of the board, or at the rehearing or
special hearing after having applied for same, the original hearing, rehearing, or special hearing shall be deemed
to have waived by the owner. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 21.00)
Sec. 3.03.023 Decision upon rehearing
Upon rehearing, if the board reaches the same decision as in its original hearing, the decision shall become final
upon such decision being reached by a majority of said board. Upon reaching the same said decision, the board
may make an allowance for elapsed time. Should the board reach a different decision or grant an extension of
time, such determination shall be deemed to be a final decision upon such decision being reached by a majority
of said board. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 22.00)
Sec. 3.03.024 Trial de novo
(a) After said decision becomes final, the owner shall have fifteen (15) days to file suit for a trial de novo in a
court of appropriate jurisdiction. Failing to do so within said fifteen (15) days, the city will consider the owner to
be in agreement with the finding of the BSRB and that said owner waives any judicial action since said time is a
reasonable time for filing said suit.
(b) If the owner has failed to abate the condition or demolish the structure within the time specified in the
final decision of the board, the city will move to abate the condition or demolish the structure and assess the cost
of proceeding, including publication expenses and/or certification of mail expenses and/or demolition expenses,
against said property, and affix a lien thereto. Said lien shall be superior to all other liens except tax liens.
Service of process upon an officer of the city naming the city as a party in a judicial determination of said
condition will automatically suspend action on behalf of the city in abating said condition.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 23.00)
Sec. 3.03.025 Statement of city's expenses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/418
Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under the provisions hereof, the chief
building official, on behalf of the city, shall file a statement of the expenses incurred thereby with the county
clerk. Such statement shall give the amount of such expenses and the date or dates on which the work was done
or the improvements were made. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 24.00)
Sec. 3.03.026 Lien for city's expenses
After the statement is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which the work was
done or improvements made to secure the expense thereof. Such liens shall be second only to tax liens and liens
for street improvements. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and
foreclosures of the lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses, or a certified copy,
shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. (1999 Unified General Code,
ch. 9, art. I, sec. 25.00)
Sec. 3.03.027 Alternative procedure; civil penalty
(a) In addition to any authority exercised by the BSRB, after the expiration of the time allotted under the
abatement order, the city may:
(1) Repair the building at the expense of the municipality and assess the expenses on the land on
which the building stands or to which it is attached and may provide for that assessment, the mode
and manner of giving notice, and the means of recovering the repair expenses.
(2) Assess a civil penalty against the property owner for failure to repair, remove, or demolish the
building and provide for that assessment, the mode and manner of giving notice, and the means of
recovering the assessment.
(b) The repair of a building may be made only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance
with the minimum standards and only if the building is a residential building with 10 or fewer dwelling units.
The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds minimum housing standards.
(c) The city shall impose a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a homestead
as protected by the state constitution, to secure the payment of the repair, removal, or demolition expenses or the
civil penalty. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the municipality must file for record, in recordable form,
in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the land is located, a written notice of the imposition of
the lien. The notice must contain a legal description of the land.
(d) Except as provided by Texas Local Government Code section 214.001, the city's lien to secure the
payment of a civil penalty or the costs of repairs, removal, or demolition is inferior to any previously recorded
bona fide mortgage lien attached to the real property to which the municipality's lien attaches if the mortgage
lien was filed for record in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the real property is located
before the date the civil penalty is assessed or the repair, removal, or demolition is begun by the municipality.
The municipality's lien is superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens.
(e) Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed accrues interest at the rate of 10 percent a year from the
date of the assessment until paid in full.
(f) The city's right to the assessment lien may not be transferred to third parties.
(g) In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of municipal rights, the prevailing party is entitled to
recover reasonable attorney's fees from the nonprevailing party.
(h) A lien acquired under this section by a municipality for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the
property on which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or
older.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/418
(i) [An assessment of a civil penalty] Is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty
in any suit brought by a municipality in a court of competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with
the assessed penalty.
(j) To enforce a civil penalty under this article, the city secretary must file with the district clerk of the county
a certified copy of an order issued under subsection (i) stating the amount and duration of the penalty. No other
proof is required for a district court to enter a final judgment on the penalty.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 9, art. I, sec. 26.00)
ARTICLE 3.04 MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Purpose
To improve the general welfare and safety of owners of manufactured housing as well as of owners of standard
housing by adopting these regulations, the city seeks:
(1) The eventual elimination of mobile homes and manufactured homes from individual lots in
conventional single-family residential neighborhoods;
(2) The development of separately designated areas for manufactured housing to permit
compatibility; and
(3) Coordination with state regulatory agencies with preemptive jurisdiction over regulation of the
manufacture and installation of manufactured housing.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I)
Sec. 3.04.002 Violations
(a) No person shall permit, or cause to be permitted, the installation of, and no person shall install, a mobile
home within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) No person shall permit, or cause to be permitted, the installation of, and no person shall install, a HUDcode
manufactured home within the corporate limits of the city without a permit as required by these
regulations.
(c) It shall be a violation of these regulations for a person designated as a registrar to fail to register
manufactured homes and travel trailers or file the register as required by section 3.04.128.
(d) No alteration of any type shall be permitted on a mobile home or manufactured home except a
manufactured home placed in an existing mobile home subdivision or park prior to 1994.
(e) A person shall not occupy a travel trailer or recreational vehicle for residential use.
(f) A person shall not rent or lease a travel trailer or recreational vehicle for residential use.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. VI, sec. 6.00)
Sec. 3.04.003 Occupancy of travel trailers or recreational vehicles
(a) Except as hereinafter expressly provided, travel trailers and recreational vehicles shall not be occupied for
residential uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/418
(b) A person shall not connect a travel trailer or recreational vehicle to water, sewer or electrical services
unless the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is located in a travel trailer or recreational vehicle park duly
licensed pursuant to the provisions of these regulations.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 3.04.004 Mobile homes prohibited
The installation of a mobile home for use or occupancy within the corporate limits of the city as a residential
dwelling is hereby strictly prohibited. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.01)
State law reference–Authority to prohibit installation of mobile homes used for residences, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec.
1201.008.
Sec. 3.04.005 Manufactured homes restricted
The installation of a HUD-code manufactured home for use or occupancy within the corporate limits of the city
as a residential dwelling is hereby strictly prohibited except as expressly provided. (1999 Unified General Code,
ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.02)
Sec. 3.04.006 Permitted locations for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles
(a) No manufactured home or travel trailer shall be used or occupied on any tract of land within the corporate
limits of the city except within a manufactured home subdivision or park.
(b) No recreational vehicle or travel trailer shall be used or occupied in the city except within a travel trailer
park or subdivision approved by the city and conforming to the standards and requirements set forth herein.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.03)
Sec. 3.04.007 Nonconforming uses
(a) Any manufactured home or mobile home used or occupied within the corporate limits of the city prior to
December 7, 1994 (the passage of this article) shall be considered a nonconforming use. A mobile home that is
removed from a property that is not a park or a subdivision authorized under the 1994 manufactured home
regulations shall not be replaced.
(b) A mobile home that is removed from a property that is a park or a subdivision authorized prior to
December 7, 1994, may only be replaced by a HUD-code manufactured home.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.04)
Sec. 3.04.008 Installation of manufactured homes
(a) Upon application, the installation of a HUD-code manufactured home shall be permitted as a residential
dwelling only as follows:
(1) An application to install a new HUD-code manufactured home for use or occupancy within the
city shall be made in writing to the city planning department, and shall contain at a minimum the
following information:
(A) A label or seal number issued by the state commissioner of licensing and regulation;
(B) A copy of the certificate of title of the manufactured home;
(C) The name, address, and telephone of the owner and installer; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/418
(D) The address of the proposed location of installation.
(2) The application shall be granted or denied by the planning department no later than 45 days
from receipt thereafter.
(3) If denied, an employee of the planning department shall state in writing the reasons for denial
of the permit, which may include any of the following:
(A) Lacking a seal or label as defined herein;
(B) Plumbing deficiencies;
(C) Electrical deficiencies;
(D) Air conditioning or mechanical deficiencies;
(E) Proposed location not approved;
(F) Failure to comply with off-street parking requirements; and
(G) Tie-down plans missing.
(b) The owner of the park or manufactured home, or the installer, shall, prior to transporting or placing a
manufactured home within the city limits, apply for and receive an installation permit.
(c) Inspections required by all building codes of the city shall be concluded as a condition of approval, and
permits shall be issued only upon full compliance with the requirements of those codes.
(d) All manufactured housing shall be installed in compliance with the standards, rules, or regulations of the
city's planning department and state law. If the installation provisions of this section are preempted by state law,
pending express approval by the state commissioner of licensing and regulation of installation standards which
have been recommended by the city's planning staff, all manufactured housing shall be installed in compliance
with the standards, rules, regulations, or administrative orders of the state commissioner of licensing and
regulation.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.05)
(e) There is hereby imposed a fee in the amount as established in the fee schedule in chapter one of this code
for the pre-installation application [inspection] of a HUD-code manufactured home, which shall be paid to the
city before a HUD-code manufactured home is brought to or placed within the city limits. The application fee
shall be exclusive of all standard inspection fees imposed by the city's building codes. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.05; Ordinance adopting Code)
(f) In addition, there shall be a separate fee charged on an hourly basis for inspections which require more
than one hour. The person applying for the inspection shall also be charged for the actual cost of travel for
representatives of the city to and from the place of inspection. In this connection, the city manager is charged
with the responsibility to adopt and maintain a schedule of reasonable fees and charges.
(g) Subsection (e) of this section shall not apply if the manufactured home has affixed to it the appropriate
seal, label or decal required by the state commissioner of licensing and regulation and the requirements of
subsection (a) of this section have been satisfied. The requirements of subsections (b) through (d) of this section
shall be imposed in all cases.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.05)
Sec. 3.04.009 Water, sewer and electrical systems
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/418
All manufactured homes are to be properly connected to water, sewer, and electrical systems approved by the
city. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. V, sec. 5.00.)
Sec. 3.04.010 Fuel supply and storage
From the effective date of this code, the following shall apply:
(1) Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual manufactured home or travel
trailer lots unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing.
(2) Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place.
(3) No cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located in a manufactured home or travel trailer or
within five feet of a door.
(4) State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil must be
followed.
(5) Bottled gas shall not be used by manufactured homes in a manufactured subdivision or by
mobile homes in a nonconforming use.
(6) Bottles must be removed from a trailer if natural gas is available.
(7) In a manufactured home or travel trailer subdivision, natural gas piping systems shall be
installed underground and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing
such system.
(8) Each manufactured home and travel trailer space provided with piped gas shall have a cap on
the outlet when not in accordance with the city plumbing code, as applicable.
(9) Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed only if an available natural gas system is
more than one thousand (1000) feet from the mobile home park. The liquefied petroleum gas systems
shall be maintained in accordance with applicable codes of city governing such systems and
regulations of the state railroad commission pertaining thereto.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. V, sec. 5.01)
Sec. 3.04.011 Alterations
(a) A person shall not in any way alter a manufactured home or travel trailer without a permit issued for that
purpose. No permit shall be issued for the alteration of a mobile home, manufactured home or travel trailer
unless it is issued for the following alterations.
(b) Awnings of canvas or metal, suitably constructed, may be attached to said mobile home, manufactured
home or travel trailer, as well as portable, prefabricated, temporary rooms, for the express purpose of increasing
mobile home or travel trailer living areas, commonly called “cabanas,” which meet the following requirements:
(1) Of metal only, fire resistive double wall, mechanical joint panels (no welded joints between
panels permitted);
(2) Strength of materials and structures to meet minimum standards of the city building code;
(3) Capable of being dismantled when moved;
(4) Such rooms shall be completely dismantled and removed from the site at the time the mobile
home, manufactured [home] or travel trailer to which it is accessory is moved;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/418
(5) Finish and appearance to be as near the same as possible to one manufactured or travel to
which it is necessary [the manufactured home or travel trailer to which it is accessory];
(6) The length must not exceed the length of the manufactured [home] or travel trailer to which it
is accessory; and
(7) Only one such room per mobile home, manufactured [home] or travel trailer shall be permitted.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. III, sec. 3.04)
Secs. 3.04.012–3.04.050 Reserved
Division 2. Manufactured Home and Travel Trailer Parks
Part I. In General
Secs. 3.04.051–3.04.080 Reserved
Part II. License
Sec. 3.04.081 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the limits of the city any manufactured home
and/or travel trailer park unless such person shall first obtain a license as required herein. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 3.04.082 Fee
The annual license fee for a manufactured home and/or travel trailer park shall be $100.00 per year and shall be
payable no later than January 10th of each year. The fee for the transfer of ownership of such license, as
provided for in this division, shall be $25.00. The city commission hereby finds that the annual license fee is a
reasonable amount to cover costs of annual inspections and the maintenance of records in connection with the
park. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.01)
Sec. 3.04.083 Application; approval
(a) Application for a manufactured home and/or travel trailer park license shall be filed with the city secretary,
and upon final approval by the city commissioners the city secretary shall issue the license. Applications shall be
in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home and/or travel trailer park;
(3) A complete plan of the park showing compliance with part III of this division;
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed off-site, or to be
constructed within the park;
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the city commission to enable it to determine
if the park will comply with the legal requirements of these regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/418
(b) The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. The city's
planning and zoning commission shall review the proposed plans and specifications for compliance with the
provisions of these regulations and the city's subdivision regulations set out in chapter 3 of the development
code. For purposes of the subdivision regulations, the park may be considered a “one-lot” subdivision. The
planning and zoning commission shall then make a report to the city commission concerning such applicant and
include therein their recommendations relative to the approval of the plat. If the park will be in compliance with
all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations or statutes, the city commission may approve
the plat contingent upon the completion of the park according to the plans and specifications submitted with the
application. Approval of the plat and the plans shall not be considered a waiver of the application of the city's
building codes to all construction. The city commission shall have authority, in its discretion, to grant variances
and deviations from the provisions of these regulations in cases in which a strict application of these regulations
would cause undue hardship.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.02)
Sec. 3.04.084 Issuance
Upon completion of development of the park, the planning director shall make a site visit and shall proceed to
document violations of these regulations, if any, and recommend revocation of the application, or, upon
compliance, recommend immediate issuance of a license to operate a park. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7,
art. I, div. II, sec. 2.03)
Sec. 3.04.085 Revocation
The city commission may revoke any license issued hereunder for violations. However, before said license may
be temporarily suspended or revoked, the city commission shall give thirty (30) days' notice to the holder of the
license of proposed revocation and hold a hearing thereon. A revocation shall be based on specific findings of
fact. A revoked license may be reissued if the reasons found for said revocation have been corrected. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.04)
Sec. 3.04.086 Transfer; duration
Upon application for a transfer of the license, the city commission may issue a transfer upon payment of a
transfer fee. Such original license and transfer may be granted at any time during the year and shall expire at the
end of the year, unless previously revoked or terminated. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. II, sec.
2.05)
Secs. 3.04.087–3.04.120 Reserved
Part III. Design and Operation
Sec. 3.04.121 Site and lot requirements
The manufactured home and/or travel trailer park shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) General site requirements. The plat shall generally conform to the requirements of the
subdivision regulations. In addition to placement in an authorized zone pursuant to the zoning
regulations, no park shall be approved unless all access to the park is from a primary arterial or
secondary thoroughfare.
(2) Drainage. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid
drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/418
(3) Minimum area. The minimum width and/or depth of the mobile home park shall be two
hundred sixty-five (265) feet, and the minimum total area shall be four (4) acres.
(4) Lot size. There shall be no minimum lot area for a manufactured home or travel trailer site in a
manufactured home park or travel trailer park, except that manufactured homes or travel trailers shall
be so harbored on each space so that there shall be at least a twelve-foot unobstructed clearance
between mobile homes or travel trailers parked end to end and at least a twenty-foot clearance
between mobile homes or travel trailers parked side to side. The planning director shall recommend
minimum size lots and designs in each specific case.
(5) Interior access drives. All manufactured home and/or travel trailer lots shall abut upon an
unobstructed interior access drive of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width, which shall have
unobstructed access to a public street, alley or other thoroughfare. If this minimum requirement is
used, no parking shall be allowed on an interior access drive at any time. All interior access drives
shall be hard surfaced, well-marked in the daytime, and lighted at night. Their construction shall
comply with subdivision regulations in the development code and street improvement policies of the
city.
(6) Sidewalks. Sidewalks not less than two (2) feet wide shall be provided from the mobile home
and/or travel trailer lots to the service buildings and along all interior access drives. The sidewalks
shall be hard-surfaced (concrete or asphalt), well marked in the daytime and lighted at night. When
clearly designated, sidewalks may be contiguous with interior access drives.
(7) Recreation area. Unless the city's subdivision [regulation] otherwise provides, a minimum of
five (5) percent of the gross land area of the manufactured home park, travel trailer park or mobile
home subdivision shall be set aside for a recreation area.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. III. sec. 3.00)
Sec. 3.04.122 Distance of park boundary from residential buildings outside park
Each boundary of the park must be at least one hundred (100) feet from any permanent residential building
located outside the park. This provision shall not apply to manufactured home and/or travel trailer parks already
in existence and in operation at the time of the passage of this code, and such existing and operating parks shall
be treated as a nonconforming use insofar as these requirements are concerned. (1999 Unified General Code, ch.
7, art. I, div. III, sec. 3.01)
Sec. 3.04.123 Design standards; conversion to manufactured home subdivision
(a) Access. Access to the manufactured home or trailer park shall be from an arterial highway or secondary
thoroughfare. The number and location of interior access drives shall be controlled for traffic safety and
protection of surrounding properties, and no mobile home or trailer space shall be designated for direct access to
a street outside the boundaries of the manufactured home or trailer park.
(b) Landscaped strip. Manufactured home parks and travel trailer parks shall be surrounded by a landscaped
strip of open space a minimum of ten (10) feet wide along the street frontage with an arterial highway or
secondary thoroughfare and ten (10) feet wide along all other property lines or street frontage.
(c) Design and construction of internal streets. The city commission may impose greater requirements for
internal streets. The city commission shall take into consideration access to garbage collection, fire protection,
and utility vehicles, and the projected traffic. All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications established
by the city in its subdivision regulations, and shall be maintained by the owner or agent free of cracks, holes, and
other hazards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/418
(d) “No parking” signs. On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited, the owner or agent
shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, and height and location shall be approved by the
public works director prior to installation.
(e) Additional requirements for internal streets. Internal streets and interior access driveways, “no-parking”
area signs, street lighting, and street name signs shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. Streets shall be
designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of park residents. Internal
streets and interior access driveways shall be kept open and free of obstruction in order that police and fire
vehicles may have access to any areas of the mobile home or travel trailer park. The police department shall be
authorized to issue citations for violation of provisions and to remove and impound offending vehicles.
(f) Water supply, sewers, fire protection, refuse collection and sanitary facilities. Proper provision shall be
made for public water supply, sanitary sewers, fire protection, refuse collection, and laundry, toilet and bathing
facilities, and all such provisions shall be in full compliance with the department of public works and/or
department of state health services.
(g) Conversion to manufactured home subdivision. A manufactured home park and/or travel trailer park may
be converted to a manufactured home subdivision provided it is replatted and that all conditions pertaining to the
platting of subdivisions and regulations are met.
(h) Lighting. Outside lighting shall be erected in such a manner that it not be detrimental to or project onto
adjacent properties.
(i) Paving or ground cover. Except as prohibited by city drainage policies, exposed ground surfaces in all parts
of every mobile home park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material, or protected
with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust.
(j) Applicability to existing parks. The provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply
to mobile home or trailer parks in existence and operation in compliance with existing regulations and laws at
the time of approval and [such parks] shall be treated as nonconforming uses.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. III, sec. 3.02)
Sec. 3.04.124 Maintenance; screening
(a) Every person owning or operating a manufactured home and/or travel trailer park shall maintain such park,
and any facilities and fixtures, in sanitary condition and shall maintain said equipment in a state of good repair.
(b) Each manufactured home park and travel trailer park shall be screened by natural growth with landscaping
or fencing a minimum of four (4) feet in height along its boundary line.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. III, sec. 3.03)
Sec. 3.04.125 Office building; records
Each manufactured home and/or travel trailer park shall be provided with a building to be known as the office in
which shall be kept copies of all records pertaining to the tenants and users [and such records] shall be available
for inspection by the city upon reasonable request. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. III, sec. 3.05)
Sec. 3.04.126 Park rules; duties of manager
It shall be the duty of the owner or his agent, representative or manager to prescribe rules and regulations for the
management of the park, which shall be made available to the city upon reasonable request. In addition thereto,
it shall be the duty of the owner or his agent, representative or manager to comply strictly with the following:
(1) Provide for regular inspection of the water and sanitary conveniences;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/418
(2) Provide for the collection and removal of garbage and other waste material;
(3) Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of any kind.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. IV, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 3.04.127 Off-street parking
Off-street parking requirements shall apply to manufactured home and travel trailer parks, except that
congregate parking spaces shall be permitted as an option to the requirement that each residential space be
provided separate parking space. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.06)
Sec. 3.04.128 Registration of manufactured homes and travel trailers
(a) The city secretary may designate manufactured home and travel trailer park owners or operators as
registrars for purpose of the registration provisions of these regulations.
(b) The registrar shall, on or before January 10th of each year, register all manufactured homes and travel
trailers within the park and file the register with the city secretary.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 7, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.07)
ARTICLE 3.05 SIGNS*
Sec. 3.05.001 Purpose
(a) The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable regulations for all exterior signs and sign structures
within the incorporated limits of the city and billboard signs within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ),
in order to:
(1) Balance the right of individuals to identify businesses and convey messages with the right of
the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs;
(2) Protect the public, health, safety and welfare;
(3) Reduce traffic hazards; and
(4) Provide for an aesthetically pleasing community.
(b) Any sign which was not lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this article shall not become or be
made legal solely by adoption of this article. By the passage of this article, no presently illegal sign shall be
deemed to have been legalized.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 1.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.05.002 Definitions
Except where the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the following words and phrases shall have the
indicated meaning when used in this article:
Animated sign. A sign that contains animated, scrolling or moving images or text. (Ordinance 08-04-A adopted
5/31/08)
Apartment or mobile home park identification sign. A permanent on-premises sign for the identification of an
apartment building, housing complex, or mobile home park.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/418
Apartment or mobile home park information sign. A sign providing direction for access or parking of vehicle(s)
or direction to the office or the manager of the project, and may include public safety signs such as fire lane and
parking regulations.
Banner. A temporary sign composed of lightweight, flexible material on which letters, symbols or pictures are
painted or printed.
Billboard. An off-premises sign with a sign area exceeding 400 square feet.
Building frontage. The length of a building wall which faces a street.
Canopy. A permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building or independent of a building,
including any rigid material, cloth or fabric supported by a structural frame.
Canopy sign. A sign that is permanently affixed to a canopy by paint, glue, sewing, or any other type of
nonstructural type of attachment.
Central business district. An area within the city bordered by the following streets: Expressway 83, Wyoming
Avenue, Eighth Street and San Antonio Avenue.
Construction sign. An on-premises sign, which may be erected for a limited time as defined under section
3.05.009(2), identifying any or all of the property owners, engineers, architects, mortgagees or other participants
in the construction or improvement of the premises.
Development sign. An on-premises sign, which may be erected for a limited time as defined under section
3.05.011(6)(F), identifying and promoting one or more developments, projects or buildings proposed or
currently under construction.
Dilapidated or deteriorated condition. Any sign where:
(1) The message or wording can no longer be clearly read;
(2) The structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented, or torn;
(3) The sign face is visibly cracked or, in the case of wood and similar products, splintered in such
a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition;
(4) The sign or its elements are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it was
originally erected (such as may result from being blown or the failure of a structural support); or
(5) The sign or its elements are not in compliance with the requirements of the current electrical
code and/or the building code of the city.
Directional sign. A sign which contains only information designed to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to the
location of a facility on the property on which the sign is located. Such signs may include, but are not limited to,
arrows, words or logos. No goods or services for sale may be listed on a directional sign.
Double-faced sign. Any two adjacent signs on a single structure or separate structures with both faces oriented in
the same direction and not more than 10 feet apart at the nearest point between the two faces. May be referred to
as a side-by-side or stacked sign.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 2.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Electronic variable message sign. A sign, display or device that changes its message, copy or image by
electronic or mechanical processes, including any sign which permits light to be intermittently turned on and off
or changed in color or intensity. Electronic variable message signs shall not include signs erected by the city,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/418
county, state or federal government, functioning as a traffic-control device, and included in the Manual on
Uniform Traffic-control Devices or signs that display only time and temperature. (Ordinance 08-04-A adopted
5/31/08)
Flag. A sign made of cloth, bunting or similar material, often attached to a pole, with specific colors, patterns, or
symbolic devices, used as a national, state or local symbol, or to indicate membership in an organization. The
term “flag” shall also include any such display placed for decorative purposes only, with no commercial logo or
advertising message.
Freestanding sign. A sign which is attached to or a part of a completely self-supporting structure such as a frame
or one or more poles which is not attached to any building or any other structure and which is permanently
affixed to the ground.
Gasoline price sign. An on-premises sign with changeable copy letters and numbers or an electronic display
without movement affixed to a gasoline pump canopy or its supports or a freestanding sign with the intent to
display the current price of motor fuels.
General business sign. An on-premises sign which identifies a business or which advertises or promotes a
commodity or service offered on the premises where such sign is located.
Government sign. A sign indicating public works projects, public services or other programs or activities
conducted by any governmental agency.
Ground sign. Any permanent sign which is affixed to the ground with a maximum height not to exceed 48
inches above adjacent grade.
Incidental sign. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is
located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” an address, and other such directives.
Institutional identification sign. A permanent on-premises sign for the identification of a public or private
school, university, church, or hospital or other similar use.
Institutional information sign. A sign erected on the premises of the institution to provide information as to the
programs and services of the institution or to provide direction for access, parking of vehicles or guidance to
various elements or units or to provide public safety information.
Logo. An identifying symbol used for advertising purposes, which may or may not be a registered trademark or
service mark of the entity identified.
Menu board. A sign displaying the menu for drive-up window service.
Monument sign. A permanent sign with a display surface that is an integral part of the support structure. Any
ground sign exceeding four feet in height or any pole sign with less than nine feet of ground clearance shall be
considered a monument sign.
Nameplate sign. An on-premises sign showing only the name and/or address of the occupant.
Noncommercial message sign. A sign conveying a civic, political, religious, seasonal or personal message, or a
regulatory message or warning.
Office identification sign. An on-premises sign which identifies an office building or any or all of the owners,
occupants or tenants of an office building and the services related thereto.
Off-premises sign. A sign which advertises or directs attention to a business, product, service, or activity which
is not usually available on the premises where the sign is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/418
On-premises sign. A sign which advertises or directs attention to a business, product, service or activity which is
usually available on the premises where the sign is located.
Pennant. A temporary sign made of lightweight material which tapers to a point, hung individually or in a series,
with or without a logo or an advertising message printed or painted on it.
Pole sign. A permanent sign with a display surface that is attached to a completely self-supporting structure
which has at least nine feet of ground clearance.
Political sign. A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any
national, state or local election.
Portable sign. A temporary sign which is designed to permit removal and reuse, and which includes but is not
limited to signs converted to A- or T-frames and signs mounted on a trailer, wheeled carrier, motorized and
nonmotorized vehicle, or other portable structure. The term “portable sign” shall specifically include an outdoor
advertising display, such as a banner, located in or on a vehicle, except where:
(1) Such a sign merely identifies the vehicle as belonging to such business by displaying the name,
address and/or telephone number of such business and/or identifies the type of product or service
offered by such business;
(2) The primary use of such vehicle is for the daily transportation of products or the delivery of
services in connection with such business; and
(3) Such vehicle is currently licensed and inspected in the state and is in operable condition.
However, if such vehicle remains parked for longer than 48 consecutive hours on the same lot, it shall be
deemed a portable sign.
Projecting sign. A sign which is attached or affixed to a building, wall or structure other than a pole and which
extends more than 15 inches from such wall or structure. Such signs must provide a minimum vertical clearance
of nine feet.
Reader board. An on-premises sign announcing events or identifying products and services offered, including
cinema signs, which is oriented to a street, the message of which is periodically or continuously changed through
manual or electronic means. “Reader board sign” does not include time-temperature devices.
Real estate sign. A temporary sign pertaining to the sale, rental or lease of the premises, or a portion of the
premises, on which the sign is located.
Roof sign. A sign erected or painted upon or above the roof of a building.
Setback. The distance measured from a property line to the closest point of the sign or its supporting structure.
Shopping and/or office center. A group of four or more retail and office establishments which is planned and
developed as a business center with common access and parking.
Sign. Any structure, object, device, display or advertising artwork, situated outdoors or in a window, visible
from a public or private street or alley, which is used entirely or in part to advertise, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, designs, logos, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
Sign area. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the actual message or display area of a
sign, and shall include the border and trim, but excluding supports.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/418
Sign face. That portion of the sign that is or can be used to identify, display, advertise, or communicate
information, or for a visual representation which attracts or intends to attract the attention of the public for any
purpose.
Sign height. The vertical distance between the highest point of the sign or its supporting structure and the natural
grade directly below the sign.
Sign structure. Any structure which is designed specifically for the purpose of supporting a sign, has supported
or is capable of supporting a sign. This definition shall include any decorative covers, braces, wires, supports, or
components attached to or placed around the sign structure.
Snipe or bandit sign. A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, stakes,
fences, or other like objects, the advertising matter of which is not applicable to the present use of the premises
on which the sign is located.
Spectacular sign. Any sign that rotates, oscillates, is animated, contains any moving parts, or contains flashing
lights, including lights flashing in sequence to simulate movement. A reader board shall not be considered a
spectacular sign.
Sponsor panel. A portion of a sign displaying the name of a product, service or company offering goods or
services on-site or having a promotional relationship for events occurring on the premises.
Streamers. A temporary display made of lightweight, flexible materials, consisting of long, narrow, wavy strips
hung individually or in a series, with or without a logo or advertising message printed or painted on them.
Street frontage. The length of the property line of a lot or tract immediately adjacent to a public or private street,
measured in feet.
Subdivision identification sign. An identification sign at the main entrance or entrances to a residential
subdivision or planned development project.
Temporary sign. A sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building or other structure.
Time-temperature sign. An electronic or mechanical device which shows time and/or temperature but contains
no business identification or advertising.
Visibility clearance areas. Triangular-shaped areas which are located at the intersection of streets, or streets and
alley rights-of-way, and the intersection of streets and driveways.
V-type sign. A sign structure composed of two signs with the faces oriented in opposite directions and in the
general shape of the letter “V,” provided, however, that only one face can be viewed from any one direction from
any public street, and with a maximum angle between the faces of 60 degrees.
Wall sign. A permanent sign which is attached directly to a building surface, including window areas
(translucent areas which are visible from a street or alley), that extends not more than 15 inches from the face of
the fence or wall.
Window sign. A temporary sign placed on, affixed to, painted on or located within the frame of a transparent
opening in the wall of a building.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 2.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.05.003 Penalty
Any person found in violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties and procedures found in chapter 1,
article II, section 4.00, in the city development code. (Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 14.00, adopted 12/10/02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/418
Sec. 3.05.004 Appeals
(a) Any person who receives notification of a sign found in violation of this article may appeal the action or
decision by requesting in writing, within a ten-day period after the service of notice is given, a hearing to
determine whether he or she is in violation of this article may be held if requested by the person [sic]. If a person
does request the hearing, it will be held before the planning director within five (5) business days of the date the
request for appeal is received, at a time to be determined by the planning director.
(b) If the planning director, after considering the evidence, decides that the sign in question is in fact in
violation of this article, then the sign shall be removed or brought into compliance within 72 hours from the time
the planning director's decision is rendered. Any further appeal of the planning director's decision may be made
to the board of adjustments. This process shall in no way negate the right of the city to immediately remove any
sign creating real and immediate danger to life or property.
(c) Any person aggrieved by the action of the planning director in the denial of an application for a sign
permit, or a master sign plan, shall have the right to appeal to the board of adjustments. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the board of adjustments, not later than 14 days after notice of the action complained of has
been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. The board of adjustments shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such
hearing shall be mailed to the appellant. The decision and order of the board of adjustments on such appeal shall
be final and conclusive.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 15.00, adopted 12/10/02)
(d) An appeal of a decision by the city's planning and zoning commission regarding an animated or electronic
sign may be taken to the city commission. The request for the city commission to review the decision of the
planning and zoning commission shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the written notice of the
planning and zoning commission of its decision. (Ordinance 08-04-A adopted 5/31/08)
Sec. 3.05.005 Enforcement
(a) The community development department is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all
terms and conditions of this article. The community development department is further authorized to render
interpretations of this article which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
(b) The provisions of chapter 1 of the International Building Code, 2003 edition, shall apply to this article
regarding the administration of this code, including but not limited to right of entry, stop work orders, revocation
of permits, issuance of permits, inspections, submittal of drawings and specifications, and appeals.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 16.00, adopted 12/10/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.05.006 Notice of violation; impoundment of signs
(a) The owner or occupant of any property upon which there is located a sign in violation of this article shall
be given written notice by the planning director or duly authorized representative stating the nature of the
violation and ordering that the violation be corrected or removed from said property within ten (10) days. Such
notice shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee or applicant at his or her last known address at least five (5)
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(b) If the owner, lessor, lessee, or the representative of the lessor of the sign fails to correct or remove such
sign within ten (10) days of written notification from the planning director or duly authorized representative, the
sign may be removed by the planning director or duly authorized representative. Such sign shall be transported
to a location to be designated by the community development department for storage at the expense of the sign
owner or the person installing, leasing, using, or maintaining it.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/418
(c) The custodian of the storage area shall maintain records of where such signs were located when they were
so impounded and the date on which they were so impounded and shall hold the same in the storage area for a
period of not more than thirty (30) days.
(d) Any sign so held may be redeemed by the owner thereof upon the payment of a fee to the city consisting
of a total of $50.00 for hauling the same to storage plus $10.00 per day storage fee for each day the sign is
stored. Such fee shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any fine imposed upon such owner for violation of this
article.
(e) Any sign not redeemed within 30 days shall be considered abandoned property and shall become the
property of the city. Any such signs shall either be destroyed or transferred to surplus and sold or disposed of in
the same manner as surplus property of the city. In calculating the length of the storage period and the storage
fee, the first working day after the date of the impoundment shall be considered day number one; thereafter, all
days including weekends and holidays shall be counted.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 13.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.05.007 Prohibited signs
All signs not expressly permitted under this article or exempt from regulation are prohibited in the city. Such
signs include, but are not limited to:
(1) Portable signs, banners, streamers, pennants, and other such temporary signs, except as allowed
under sections 3.05.015 and 3.05.016.
(2) Signs which contain or have attached thereto banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
balloons, strings of lights, spinners or other similar devices, except as allowed [under] sections
3.05.015 and 3.05.016.
(3) Snipe or bandit signs.
(4) Signs violating the visibility clearance area restrictions.
(5) Off-premises signs in the city limits, except billboards, which shall be regulated in
conformance with section 3.05.012.
(6) Billboards in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
(7) Signs which advertise an activity, business, or service no longer conducted on the premises
upon which the sign is located. After a period of three months following cessation of the business,
activity, or service on the premises, the sign face shall be obscured.
(8) Signs or portions thereof which are located on, or project or extend over, any public right-ofway,
any public sidewalk, street, or alley, or other public property, except as outlined below:
(A) The sign is located in the central business district;
(B) The sign does not extend outward from any building face to the public right-of-way for a
distance of more than ten feet or less than 18 inches from the back of the street curb, whichever
is more restrictive; and
(C) The sign has a minimum clearance of nine feet above the sidewalk grade or ground level.
(9) Signs which are placed on a berm or other structure so as to artificially increase the height
above the maximum allowed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/418
(10) Signs which make use of any word, phrase, symbol, character, or illumination in such manner
as to interfere with, mislead, or otherwise constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(11) Signs which resemble official traffic-control signs, signals, or devices, which bear the words
“stop,” “go slow,” “caution,” “danger,” “warning,” or similar words.
(12) Signs which contain reflectors or glaring, strobe, or rotating lights, beacons, beams or flashing
illumination resembling an emergency signal.
(13) Signs placed on the side or rear of any building or property when such sign is adjacent to a
residential area from which such sign is visible.
(14) Any sign or advertising device attached to any motor vehicle or any trailer parked on a public
right-of-way, on public property, or on private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way,
the basic purpose of which sign or advertising device is to provide advertisement of a product or to
direct people to a business or activity located on the same property or other property or premises. The
subsection shall not be construed so as to prohibit typical vehicular signs lettered on a commercial
vehicle, or to prohibit a “for sale” sign advertising the vehicle on which the sign is placed.
(15) Any stereopticon or motion picture machine used in conjunction with or attached to any sign
in such manner as to permit the images projected therefrom to be visible from any public street or
sidewalk.
(16) Spectacular signs and signs which emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 3.00, adopted 12/10/02)
(17) Off-premises electronic variable message signs and off-premises animated signs.
(18) On-premises electronic variable message signs and on-premises animated signs in any
residential district, including R-1 (single-family residential district), R-MF (multi-family residential
district), R-MH (manufactured home district), and any newly created residential district.
(Ordinance 08-04-A adopted 5/31/08)
Sec. 3.05.008 Permit, bond and license requirements
(a) Permit. A sign permit issued by the city community development department shall be required prior to the
erection, installation, repair, alteration or relocation of a sign except for routine maintenance and according to
section 3.05.009(1). Acceptance of the permit shall require compliance by the applicant with all applicable
regulations of the International Building Code, as well as the regulations set forth in this article.
(b) Sign contractor's bond. In addition to the sign permit requirements, a surety bond in the sum of $1,000.00
shall be filed with the city community development department and made conditional for the erection and/or
painting of signs in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. Such bond shall provide
for the indemnification of the city and for any and all damages or liabilities that may occur to or against the city
by reason of the erection/painting, maintenance, demolition, repair, removal, defects in or collapse of any sign
erected by or under the direction of any such person. Such bond shall further provide for the indemnification of
any person who shall, while upon public property of the city, incur damages for which the person erecting such
signs is legally liable by reason of the erection/painting, maintenance, demolition, repair, removal, defects in or
collapse of any such sign. On December 31 of each year all sign bonds, except continuous bonds, shall expire. A
certificate of continuation for continuous bonds shall be provided on or before December 31 of each year.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 4.00, adopted 12/10/02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/418
(c) License requirements. All sign contractors shall meet the licensing requirements as set out by the state
department of licensing and regulation in chapter 73 of the Texas Administrative Code. A copy of the electrical
sign company's state license and all other applicable licenses shall be kept on file at the city community
development department. (Ordinance 04-026, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/05)
Sec. 3.05.009 Exemptions from permit
The following signs are exempt from the permit requirement; however, such signs shall be located on private
property and shall comply with all other requirements of this article:
(1) Copy change and sign face replacement, when no increase in sign area or height is made, for
signs otherwise allowed under this article.
(2) Construction sign when placed upon the construction site following the issuance of a building
permit. Only one such sign shall be allowed per street frontage and each sign shall not exceed 64
square feet in area. Such sign must be removed not later than 30 days after a certificate of occupancy
is issued by the community development department.
(3) Contractor signs identifying the contractor or subcontractor performing work on the premises
where the sign is displayed. Such signs may not exceed a total of 6 square feet in area and must be
removed from the premises when the work is completed.
(4) Flags of the United States, the state, or any other political subdivision, any flag or banner of a
bona fide religious, fraternal or charitable organization, and flags of corporations, subdivisions, or
community associations or organizations.
(5) Gasoline price signs.
(6) Incidental signs, provided that such signs shall not exceed 4 square feet and shall comply with
all other requirements of this article.
(7) Noncommercial message signs, provided that such signs shall not exceed a total of 64 square
feet in area per lot and no single sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area per face and shall not exceed
five feet in height to the top from the surrounding finished grade.
(8) On-site directional signs and street identification signs not exceeding 4 square feet which
denote the entrance, exit, and direction of traffic flow, provided that such directional signs do not
contain advertising and are not used as such.
(9) Political advertising signs, but only if such signs conform to section 3.05.014.
(10) Professional nameplates and occupational signs, when attached to the building face and which
denote only the name and occupation of an occupant in a commercial building or public institutional
building and not exceeding four square feet per sign area.
(11) Real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which such signs
are located, provided that the dimension does not exceed:
(A) Ten square feet in area if located in a residential district; or
(B) 32 square feet if located in a nonresidential district.
(12) Signs on public fences or other locations in public parks and playfields as approved by the
city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/418
(13) Signs prepared by or for the local, state or federal government marking sites or buildings of
historical significance.
(14) Temporary signs advertising garage sales, provided that such signs shall be removed within
one day following the sale and shall not be placed on public property, right-of-way or utility poles.
(15) Traffic or street signs, legal notices, public utilities, railroad crossing signs, danger, and such
emergency, temporary or non-advertising signs as approved by the city may be located in the public
right-of-way.
(16) Window signs of a temporary nature only.
(17) Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 5.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.05.010 Master sign plan
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a master sign plan is to allow a property owner or developer, subject to approval
of the city, the option of designating an area that will allow flexibility in sign location due to peculiarities in the
location or configuration of parcels of real property, such as parcels with no street frontage, or multiple parcels
organized into combined uses, or to allow creative sign management in exchange for a cumulative reduction in
sign area, sign height or the total number of signs.
(b) Qualifications. To qualify for a master sign plan, an area must:
(1) Include one lot or parcel or two or more contiguous lots or parcels that are not included in any
other master sign plan.
(2) The owners, or the authorized representatives of the owners, of all lots within the proposed
master sign plan area must sign the application for a master sign plan.
(c) Required submittals. In order to obtain a master sign plan, the owner(s) of the property located within the
proposed master sign plan area must sign and submit an application to the city's planning department, on a form
provided by the planning department, in which the application must be accompanied by the following:
(1) A site plan showing the proposed boundaries of the master sign plan area.
(2) A site plan showing the location of all existing or proposed freestanding signs.
(3) A table showing the type, square footage and heights of each sign indicated on the site plan.
(4) The application fee established by the city for the processing of such applications.
Upon completion of the application, the community development department shall approve or disapprove the
application.
(d) When effective. A master sign plan shall not become effective until all owners of the property within the
master sign plan area have signed an agreement which indicates the property owners' agreement that:
(1) The master sign plan can be amended only by the written consent of all parties or their
successors, and the city.
(2) The agreement is binding on all successors in interest to the property within the master sign
plan area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/418
(3) Each party waives any right to apply for or install any sign inconsistent with the provisions of
the master sign plan, even though such sign might otherwise be allowed under this article.
(e) Signs deemed on-premises signs. Once approved, the area described in the master sign plan will be
deemed to be a single premises for the purpose of determining whether a sign is an on-premises sign. A sign
which advertises a use on a lot within the master sign plan area which is not a use which occurs on that lot shall
be termed a master sign plan (MSP) sign. The use advertised on an MSP sign shall be defined as an MSP use.
(f) City review of individual signs. All freestanding signs included within a master sign plan area shall be
individually subject to review and approval of placement, size and height, as approved by the city.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 6.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.05.011 Design standards and limitations
In addition to all permit requirements and other regulations contained in this article, the following regulations
shall be applicable to all permanent signs:
(1) Illumination. Light from any source intended to illuminate a sign shall be shaded, shielded, or
directed in such a way so that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect the vision of
pedestrians or vehicle operators on public or private streets, driveways, or parking areas, and shall
not adversely affect any of the surrounding premises. Illumination from any sign shall not interfere
with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, signal or device.
(2) Maintenance; removal of unsafe signs.
(A) All signs must be maintained in a safe, readable condition. Signs which are determined
by the building official to be in a dilapidated, deteriorated, or otherwise unsafe condition shall
not be allowed to remain on any premises.
(B) For any sign so designated as dilapidated, deteriorated, or otherwise unsafe, written
notice shall be given to remove the sign or bring the sign into compliance with this article, as
follows: Any written notice to alter or to remove a sign shall be given by the community
development department by certified mail, return receipt requested, or written notice served
personally upon the owner, lessee, or person responsible for the sign, or the owner's agent.
(C) If such order is not complied with within 10 days after the written notice is sent, the
building official may initiate proceedings to revoke the permit and remove the sign at the
expense of the owner, lessee, or person responsible for such sign.
(3) Foundation.
(A) All freestanding pole signs shall conform to the foundation requirements as required by
the community development department.
(B) All monument signs which exceed ten feet in height shall have the foundation plan
prepared by a professional engineer.
(4) Calculation of sign area.
(A) Back-to-back signs. Only one side of a back-to-back sign is measured in calculating sign
area.
(B) V-type signs. Only the largest face of a V-type sign shall be measured in determining the
total sign area of the sign. If a two-face sign is erected in a “V” shape, both faces of which can
be seen from the same public street, or are at an angle of greater than 60 degrees to each other,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/418
then such sign is not a V-type sign, and shall be considered two separate signs for all purposes
under this article.
(5) Setbacks.
(A) Ground and pole signs. Except as regulated elsewhere in this article, there shall be no
minimum setback from property lines for a ground or pole sign, provided that no portion of a
sign face shall overhang into the public right-of-way.
(B) Monument signs. All monument signs must be installed or constructed with a minimum
ten-foot setback from the property line.
(6) Standards for specific types of signs.
(A) Institutional identification and institutional information signs.
(i) No more than one freestanding identification sign or institutional information sign
may be installed on each street frontage.
(ii) The maximum sign area of all institutional identification or institutional information
signs located on any premises shall collectively not exceed 240 square feet.
(B) Apartment and mobile home park identification signs.
(i) No more than one freestanding apartment identification sign or mobile home park
identification sign shall be placed or installed on each street frontage of the premises.
(ii) The maximum sign area of each apartment identification sign or mobile home park
identification sign shall be 64 square feet.
(C) Subdivision identification signs.
(i) No more than one freestanding identification sign may be installed at each main
entrance to a residential subdivision.
(ii) The maximum sign area of each identification sign shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(iii) Such signs may be externally illuminated in accordance with subsection (1) of this
section and shall make no reference to the sale or lease of the lots or houses located within
said subdivision.
(D) General business/office signs.
(i) Maximum height. Except as permitted in subsections (6)(D)(vii) and (viii) of this
section, no portion of any freestanding general business or shopping center/office center
sign shall exceed a height of 30 feet above adjacent grade.
(ii) Maximum sign area. Except as regulated under subsection (6)(D)(vi) of this section,
the sum of the area of all wall and freestanding signs shall not exceed the maximum area
allowed on a single lot or tract, as set forth herein. Wall signs shall include canopy,
projecting, or roof signs and, except as prohibited under section 3.05.007(14), shall not
exceed the greater of 50 square feet or 15 percent of the area of the wall to which such
signs are affixed.
(iii) One single-tenant business on lot. When only one single-tenant business is located
on a single lot or tract:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/418
a. On property with a single street frontage of less than 150 feet in length, the
cumulative area of all signs shall not exceed the number of square feet equal to 1-1/2
times the length of street frontage of said lot or tract;
b. On property with a single street frontage of 150 feet or more in length, the
cumulative area of all signs shall not exceed 300 square feet;
c. On property with multiple street frontages, the length of each street frontage
shall be used to calculate total sign area according to subsection a. or b. above,
provided that the cumulative area of all signs shall not exceed 400 square feet.
(iv) Two or three single-tenant businesses on lot. When more than one but not more
than three single-tenant businesses are located on a single lot or tract, the cumulative area
of all signs that each owner, renter, or lessee may install shall not exceed the number of
square feet equal to 1-1/2 times the length of the building frontage in which the business
is located.
(v) One multi-tenant building on lot. When only one multiple-tenant office building is
located on a single lot or tract:
a. On property with less than 150 feet of street frontage, the cumulative area of all
signs shall not exceed the number of square feet equal to 1-1/2 times the length of
the street frontage;
b. On property with 150 feet or more of street frontage, the cumulative area of all
signs shall not exceed 400 square feet.
(vi) Shopping center/office center development. In a shopping center and/or office
center development (a group of four or more businesses with common access and
parking), only freestanding signs shall be calculated against the total sign area allowed on
the property. The property owner or user of the property may install no more than one
freestanding sign on each street frontage of which the sign area may not exceed the
number of square feet equal to 2 times the length of the street frontage of said property,
but in no case shall the total sign area of all freestanding signs on said property exceed
400 square feet.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 7.00, adopted 12/10/02)
(vii) Expressway 83 frontage. In addition to applicable standards listed above, any lot
or tract which has frontage within 800 feet of Expressway 83 may have one on-premises
freestanding sign which exceeds the 30-foot height specified in subsection (6)(D)(i) of
this section, subject to the following regulations:
a. The height of such sign shall not exceed 60 feet.
b. No portion of the sign or support shall be closer than 75 feet from the boundary
of a property zoned MF-2, multifamily dwelling district, or more restrictive.
c. All signs must be placed and comply with state and federal regulations, even if
more restrictive than the foregoing regulations.
(Ordinance 04-026, sec. 2, adopted 1/11/05)
(viii) Motor vehicle and heavy equipment dealerships. Car, truck, and motorcycle
dealerships, boat dealerships, recreational vehicle dealerships, mobile home dealerships,
or construction equipment dealerships located on an individual lot or combined lots or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/418
parcels may install one freestanding sign for each 100 linear feet of street frontage. The
sign area for each sign installed pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed 300 square
feet. In no case shall the sign area of all such freestanding signs installed by a single
dealership collectively total more than 750 square feet.
(E) Planned districts. Any property located within a planned district, or governed by a
specific use permit, may be subject to additional regulations beyond those in this section. Said
regulations may be either more or less restrictive than those set out herein.
(F) Development signs. Development signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts provided
that:
(i) Only one such sign shall be allowed per street frontage and each sign shall not
exceed 130 square feet;
(ii) Such signs may be placed no earlier than 90 days prior to construction; and
(iii) All such signs must be removed within 30 days upon the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy for the project or upon the completion of 90 percent of the project.
(G) Signs not counted against total sign area. The following signs shall be allowed in
nonresidential zoning districts only and shall require a permit but shall not be used in
computing total allowable sign area:
(i) Time and temperature signs without advertising matter.
(ii) Freestanding menu boards for drive-through service, provided that the sign
structures shall observe the same setbacks required for buildings or other structures in the
district in which they are located, the sign area does not exceed 32 square feet, and the
sign does not exceed six feet in height.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 7.00, adopted 12/10/02)
(H) Animated signs and electronic variable message signs.
(i) Animated signs and electronic variable message signs shall obtain the approval of
the planning and zoning commission and, if applicable, the city's historic preservation
commission. The proposed location, size, and number of electronic variable message and
animated signs that are proposed and any potential adverse impact on land uses in the
vicinity of the proposed sign or signs, including especially residential neighborhoods, uses
or districts, schools, parks, and churches, any potential adverse impact on traffic safety,
and any other issues that in its reasonable judgment is related to public health, safety and
general welfare of the residents, property owners, business owners and visitors to the city
shall be examined by the planning and zoning commission.
(ii) Electronic variable message signs shall not present a new message or image more
frequently than every eight seconds.
(Ordinance 08-04-A adopted 5/31/08)
Sec. 3.05.012 Billboards
(a) Generally. Billboards are hereafter prohibited from any area of the city except Expressway 83. All such
signs must be placed in conformity with state and federal regulations, even if such are more restrictive than the
following regulations. In addition, any land which is in the city's ETJ as of the effective date of this article and
henceforth is subsequently annexed by the city shall remain subject to the billboard prohibition under this article
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/418
regardless of any zoning classification established for said land. Any billboard which was legally in existence on
any property prior to annexation of said property into the city limits or prior to the expansion of the city's ETJ
shall become nonconforming and shall be subject to section 3.05.013.
(b) Minimum separation. No proposed billboard location may be approved if said location is:
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 8.00, adopted 12/10/02)
(1) Within 1,500 feet of an existing billboard sign on the same side of the expressway; or
(2) Within 1,500 feet of property zoned with a specific use permit with term for location of a
billboard on the same side of the expressway.
(Ordinance 04-026, sec. 3, adopted 1/11/05)
(c) Maximum height. Billboards located on property fronting on Expressway 83 may not exceed 42 feet in
height.
(d) Setback and side yard requirements. A billboard must be installed in such a manner as to comply with the
same side yard and setbacks required for buildings or other structures in the zoning district in which it is located,
provided that no portion of the billboard and its support shall be closer than 75 feet from the boundary of a
property zoned R-MF, multifamily residential district, or more restrictive.
(e) Limit on sign faces. A billboard may not consist of more than two sign faces (double-faced).
(f) Maximum sign area. The total area of the sign faces of a billboard collectively shall not exceed 676 square
feet.
(g) Nonconforming billboards. Any legally existing billboard which does not comply with these restrictions
shall become a nonconforming use and shall be regulated in conformance with section 3.05.013.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 8.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.05.013 Legal nonconforming signs
(a) Definition. A legal nonconforming sign is any sign which was lawfully placed or erected prior to the
effective date of this article governing signs in the city or in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, but which is no
longer in compliance with such regulations due to either a change in such regulations or a change in the city's
boundaries.
(b) Loss of legal nonconforming status. A legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal
nonconforming designation and must be brought into compliance with these regulations, or be removed, if:
(1) The sign structure is replaced; this shall not prevent the replacement of the face(s) to
accommodate a new business, express a different message, or upgrade conditions and appearance of
the sign;
(2) The sign is relocated;
(3) The sign is part of an establishment that discontinues its operation for a period of 1 year or
longer; or
(4) The sign is damaged or structurally altered to an extent greater than 50 percent of the current
estimated replacement value.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 9.00, adopted 12/10/02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/418
Sec. 3.05.014 Political signs
Political signs may be erected and maintained as follows:
(1) Stake signs. Signs with an area not exceeding 30 inches by 30 inches and installed on a stake at
a height not more than 36 inches above the adjacent grade may be located on any private property
within the city.
(2) Other political signs. Political signs with a sign area not exceeding four (4) feet by eight (8)
feet in size may be located on any private property within the city provided that:
(A) The bottom of said sign is not less than five feet above the adjacent grade;
(B) The sign is not closer than 20 feet from the back of the curb if located on a corner lot; and
(C) The sign is not closer than ten feet from the back of the curb on any other lot.
(3) Oversize political signs. Any political sign larger than that referred to in subsection (2) above
must be located in a C-2, commercial district or less restrictive zoning district and must conform to
subsection (2) of this section.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 10.00, adopted 12/10/02)
(4) Time limit for display. Political signs may be erected not earlier than 180 days preceding the
election to which the sign pertains and must be removed not later than 7 days following the day of
such election. The only exception will be to allow for signs to remain in case of runoff elections.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 10.00, adopted 12/10/02; Ordinance 11-11 adopted 10/25/11)
Sec. 3.05.015 Temporary signs
(a) Applicability. The following regulations shall be applicable to all temporary signs, as defined herein,
except as follows:
(1) Political signs or displays erected in accordance with section 3.05.014.
(2) Non-illuminated real estate signs, as specified in section 3.05.009(11).
(b) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or locate any temporary sign on any property
within the city, or allow the placement or location of any temporary sign on premises within the city owned or
controlled by such person, unless a permit for such temporary sign and such location has first been obtained
from the city community development department in accordance with all regulations, including the following:
(1) One temporary sign permit is required for the placement of a temporary sign on a lot or tract
within the city for a promotional period not to exceed:
(A) One 60-day period;
(B) Two 30-day periods; or
(C) Four 15-day periods;
each calendar year per legal business; provided that under options (B) and (C) no permit
shall be issued for the placement or location of any temporary sign for any tract of land
within the city stated in a previously issued permit until a period of 30 days has elapsed
since the term of duration of the previous permit has expired.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/418
(2) In the case of a special promotion for a grand opening celebration, one additional seven-day
period shall be allowed provided the promotion commences within the first two months of the date of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the grand opening is limited to the address noted on the
certificate of occupancy.
(3) A temporary sign may be one of the following: a portable sign, a banner, an inflatable sign,
pennants, streamers, balloons, or any legal on-premises sign allowed by this article.
(4) A legal business shall include apartment complexes and any commercial, industrial, or
institutional use for which the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy.
(5) When more than one legal business exists on the same lot or tract, one such business may place
one permitted temporary sign on said lot or tract, provided a period of 30 days has elapsed since a
previously permitted temporary sign was removed.
(6) A temporary sign which exceeds 30 square feet in area shall not be permitted for any location
within 150 feet of a legally existing temporary sign.
(7) A permit fee of $30.00 shall be charged to each business upon application for a temporary sign
permit.
(8) A separate temporary sign permit is required for each promotional period used. A fee of $30.00
shall be required.
(9) If a temporary sign is installed prior to issuance of a permit, an investigation fee of $50.00 will
be assessed in addition to the permit fee.
(10) A temporary sign remaining on display for a period of time in excess of that stated in the
permit shall be considered in violation of this article and shall be subject to sections 3.05.003 and
3.05.006.
(c) Standards. In addition to all other applicable regulations, temporary signs must conform to the following
restrictions:
(1) A temporary sign may be used for on-premises advertising only.
(2) The sign area of a temporary sign shall not exceed 35 square feet.
(3) A temporary sign shall be contained on the property of the legal business and shall not extend
into the city right-of-way or be located in any visibility clearance area. In no event shall such sign be
erected or placed less than ten feet from the back of the curb.
(4) Banners must be attached to the face of the building used by the business or organization to
which the banner relates.
(5) Portable signs shall be secured to the ground at a minimum of four separate points by metal
pins. Such metal pins must penetrate the ground by a distance of not less than ten inches.
(6) Any temporary sign which exceeds 30 square feet in area shall have permanently affixed
thereto the name and phone number of the owner of such sign.
(7) Temporary signs may be lighted with white light or lights only, and such light or lights shall not
be of a flashing, intermittent, moving or similarly lighted type.
(8) Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained within this code, all electrical
connections to temporary signs shall be three-prong (grounded) type using grounded, all7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/418
weatherproof outlets. Electrical cords must be all-weatherproof type and may not exceed ten feet in
length unless they are then run in conduit. In addition, such cords must be so positioned as to not
impact vehicular traffic.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 11.00, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.05.016 Special event signs
(a) Upon request, and subject to approval, the planning director may authorize a permit for the display of any
temporary sign, or any legal sign allowed by this article, to give notice of or direct the public to a special event
of civic interest, including but not limited to parades, organized community holiday festivities, and special
events organized by charitable and/or nonprofit organizations. In acting upon such request, the planning director
shall consider, among other things, the limitations on size, proposed location(s), materials, and construction of
such special event signs.
(b) If authorized, such signs shall be erected for a period of time no more than 30 days preceding the date of
the event and shall be removed within three days after the event.
(c) Such signs may be located or placed on or over private property only with the permission of the owner of
the property and may be located or placed on or over public property, including streets, only if authorized by the
community development department.
(Ordinance 2002-020, sec. 12.00, adopted 12/10/02)
APPENDIX 1. SIGN STANDARDS TABLE
Sign Type Permitted
District
Permit
Req'd
Number of
Signs
Max. Area Max.
Height
Setback Other
Req's
Time
Limitation
Off-premises
Billboard Expressway 83
Min. 1000
ft. apart on
same side
street
676 sq. ft.
combined
faces
42 ft. See section
3.05.012 (c)
See section
3.05.012
Term renew
every 2 yrs.
Temporary
*One temporary sign is allowed per business. See section 3.05.015.
Banner R-MF, C-1, C-
2, C-3, I-1, I-2
Yes 1 per lot or
tract
35 sq. ft.
See section
3.05.015
*
Streamers, or
pennants, or
balloons
R-MF, C-1, C-
2, C-3, I-1, I-2
Yes 1 type per
lot
N/A
”
*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/418
Inflatable R-MF, C-1, C-
2, C-3, I-1, I-2
Yes 1 per lot or
tract
35 sq. ft.
”
*
Portable R-MF, C-1, C-
2, C-3, I-1, I-2
Yes 1 per lot or
tract
35 sq. ft.
See section
3.05.015
*
Permanent
Apt. and mobile
home park
identification
Wherever such
use is allowed
Yes 1 per street
frontage
64 sq. ft.
See section
3.05.011 (5)
See section
3.05.011
(1), (6)
Institutional
identification
Wherever such
use is allowed
Yes 1 per street
frontage
See section
3.05.011(6)
” ”
Subdivision
identification
Wherever such
use is allowed
Yes 1 per main
entrance to
res.
subdivision
200 sq. ft.
” ”
Wall (including
canopy, roof, or
projecting)
Yes Calculate
with sum
total allowed
per business
sign
Greater of 50
sq. ft. or 15%
of the wall
area
See section
3.05.007
(14)
Sign Type Permitted
District
Permit
Req'd
Number of
Signs
Max. Area Max.
Height
Setback Other
Req's
Time
Limitation
General Business
Single-tenant
Yes See section
3.05.011 (6)
(D)
See section
3.05.011 (6)
(D)
30 feet See section
3.05.011 (5)
See
section
3.05.011
(1), (4)
Multi-tenant
Yes
30 feet ” ”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/418
Shopping/office
center
Yes 30 feet ” ”
Business with
Expressway 83
frontage
Yes Refer to
applicable
type of
business,
above
Refer to
applicable
type of
business,
above
40 feet See section
3.05.011 (6)
(D)(vii)
”
Motor vehicle and
heavy equipment
dealerships
Yes 1 per 100
linear ft. of
street
frontage
300 sq. ft.
each and 750
sq. ft.
collectively
See section
3.05.011 (6)
(D) (viii)
”
Development Permitted in all
districts
Yes 1 per street
frontage
130 sq. ft.
” Erect within 90
days of
construction;
remove within
30 days of
issue CO or
90% of project
Exempt
Construction Permitted in all
districts
No 1 per street
frontage
64 sq. ft.
Remove
within 30 days
of issue cert.
of occupancy
Contractor Permitted in all
districts
No
6 sq. ft.
Remove when
work is
completed
Flags (with no
commercial msg.)
Permitted in all
districts
Incidental
No
4 sq. ft.
Noncommercial Permitted in all
districts
No
32 sq. ft.
each; 64 sq.
ft. per lot
5 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/418
On-site
directional/street
identification
No 4 sq. ft.
Political
advertising
Permitted in all
districts
No See section
3.05.014
See section
3.05.014
Professional
nameplates/
occupational
No
4 sq. ft.
Real estate Residential No
10 sq. ft.
Remove when
sale is
complete
Nonresidential No
32 sq. ft.
Remove when
sale is
complete
(Ordinance 2002-020, app. 1, adopted 12/10/02)
ARTICLE 3.06 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.06.001–3.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Excavations and Curb Cuts†
Sec. 3.06.031 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or opening in any street, alley or public highway
right-of-way or make any curb break or cut on any curb on any street of the city without first having obtained a
permit to do so. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. III, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 3.06.032 Application for permit
(a) The application for a permit to make any excavation or opening on any of the streets, alleys or public
highways or any curb break or cut on any curb on any street of the city shall be made to the city engineer or
other person authorized by the city manager.
(b) The application shall state:
(1) The name of the street or highway in which it is proposed to make such opening, and include a
map;
(2) The exact location in said highway in which it is proposed to make said opening;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/418
(3) The purpose of making the opening;
(4) The name of the person or party who proposes to make such excavation or opening and who is
responsible ultimately; and
(5) The date and times during which the excavation will take place.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. III, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 3.06.033 Bond or cash deposit
The city engineer or other person authorized by the city manager shall estimate the probable cost of replacing
the soil and other material which may be removed from such public street, alley or highway and may require the
applicant to file a written bond in an amount sufficient to cover such cost and any other likely costs as a result of
such work, with two (2) or more sufficient sureties, conditioned that the street shall be restored in as good
condition as it was before the excavation or opening was made. Such bond, when required, shall be received and
approved by the city engineer or other person authorized by the city manager. If the applicant elects to do so, he
may make a cash deposit when required in such sum as may be fixed by the engineer or other person authorized
by the city manager in lieu of the written bond. These bond funds shall be kept by the city in trust as security.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. III, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 3.06.034 Supervision of work
All the work of excavating or making any kind of opening or curb out in any of the streets, alleys or highways of
the city shall at all times be under the supervision of the city engineer or other person authorized by the city
manager, and the person doing such work shall do the same in the manner directed by him to the end that the
streets and highways of the city shall not be unduly disturbed and traffic obstructed. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 3, art. III, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 3.06.035 Duties upon completion of work
After the excavation or opening has been made, the person so making it shall backfill the excavation with such
materials and in such manner as the city engineer or other person authorized by the city manager may require,
and leave the street or highway in at least the same condition as it was before the opening was made. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. III, sec. 5.00)
Sec. 3.06.036 Acceptance of completed work
(a) The conditions of the bond required by this regulation shall not be considered to have been complied with
until the engineer shall have accepted the street or highway as being in good condition. In the event that the
person making the opening fails to leave the highway in a good state of repair, satisfactory to the engineer, then
the engineer shall call upon the bondsmen to pay for the cost of repairing such highway.
(b) In the event of a cash deposit instead of a bond, the engineer may proceed to have the street or other
highway put in good condition, paying for same out of the deposit made with him, and if there be any remainder
of said deposit after paying for such work such remainder shall be refunded to the person making the deposit.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. III, sec. 6.00)
Sec. 3.06.037 Safety precautions; liability insurance
It shall be the duty of any permittee under the provisions of this regulation to cause any excavation or opening
made by him to be barricaded or otherwise made safe in such manner as may be satisfactory to the city engineer
and to cause such excavation or opening to be well lighted during any period of darkness. The city shall require
that the permittee obtain liability insurance in reasonable amounts in appropriate cases. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 3, art. III, sec. 7.00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/418
ARTICLE 3.07 WASTE FROM BUILDING OPERATIONS
Sec. 3.07.001 Definitions
Commercial unit. A separate and identifiable structure where commercial, industrial, religious, and/or other
educational activity is conducted regardless of profit or not-for-profit status.
Fill materials. Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural and manmade solid materials used to fill land if the object
of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements.
Industrial solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry or manufacturing, or
mining or agricultural operations, including discarded or unwanted solid materials suspended or transported in
liquids, and discarded or unwanted materials in liquid or semi-liquid form; the term “industrial solid waste” does
not include waste materials, the discharge of which is subject to the Texas Water Quality Act.
Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, trade, business and
recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles,
and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste.
Person. Both singular and plural and shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, and
their agents, servants, or employees.
Residential dwelling unit. A separate and identifiable apartment, house or other place of abode.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
waste materials; combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior (wood shavings) furniture,
rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery,
tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator
temperatures (1600° F to 1800° F).
Sanitary landfill. A controlled area of land upon which solid waste is disposed of in accordance with standards,
regulations or orders established by the Texas Commission of Environmental Quality.
Solid waste. All putrescible and nonputrescible discarded or unwanted solid materials, including municipal solid
waste and industrial solid waste; as used in this article, the term “solid waste” does not include, and this article
does not apply to:
(1) Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural and manmade inert solid materials used to fill land if the
object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or
(2) Waste materials which result from activities associated with the exploration, development, or
production of natural oil or gas and subject to control by the state railroad commission.
Trash. Rubbish, such as, but not limited to feathers, tin can bottles, papers, rags, grass, boxes and cartons, old
clothes and shoes, and ashes.
Sec. 3.07.002 Dumping garbage and trash unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, dump, deposit, or permit any garbage or trash upon or along
any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street or street right-of-way or vacant lot, or upon any public or private
premises within the city limits except as otherwise provided.
Sec. 3.07.003 Waste from building operations
(a) Rock, bricks, or parts thereof, waste building materials, scraps, or other trash resulting from building or
remodeling operations or resulting from general clean-up of vacant or improved property, just prior to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/418
occupancy or otherwise, will not be removed by the city. Such waste and trash shall be removed and disposed of
by the contractor, owner or occupant of the building or premises, at his own expense. The chief building
inspector is hereby authorized to levy a cash bond in the amount of $100.00 per 1,000 square feet of building to
be constructed, repaired or remodeled. Applicants must provide satisfactory proof of the removal of solid waste,
rubbish or fill material from the property and that it has been properly deposited at a sanitary landfill in order to
receive any reimbursement of the cash bond. Upon satisfactory proof that the removed solid waste, rubbish or
fill materials has been deposited at a sanitary landfill the city shall reimburse 90% of the cash bond.
(b) The applicant shall forfeit to the city the reimbursement of the cash bond if not redeemed within one year
of the issuance of a building, remodeling, or demolition permit. The applicant shall have the right to request a
six-month extension to the deadline within one month before the one-year anniversary of the issuance of the
permit. The six-month extension must be requested to the chief building inspector or his/her designee and a
document must be obtained from the inspections division of the planning department granting the applicant the
extension with the new deadline. Additional six-month extensions could be granted by the chief building
inspector if requested within one month before the deadline.
Sec. 3.07.004 Penalties
A violator of this article shall be fined no less than $50.00 and no more than $1,000.00 per each day the
violation continues.
(Ordinance 16-07 adopted 3/22/16)
ARTICLE 3.08 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Sec. 3.08.001 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.08.002 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/418
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.08.003 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvian [Alluvial] fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which
originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment
transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, Al-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AH, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/418
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/418
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
params which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/418
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/418
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
Sec. 3.08.004 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this article applies. The article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the city.
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Hidalgo County, Community Panel Number 480334 0425 C” with an effective date of
November 16, 1982 and Hidalgo County, Community Panel Number 480334 0500 B with an effective date
January 2, 1981, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM
and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
(c) Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this article.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/418
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 3.08.005 Administration
(a) Designation of the floodplain administrator. The planning director, and his/her designee, is hereby
appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other
appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program
regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties & responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.08.004(b),
the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of section 3.08.006.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/418
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and
the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures;
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.08.006(b)(2);
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1);
(2) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be
based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(d) Variance procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/418
(1) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests
for variances from the requirements of this article.
(2) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this article.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision
in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard
to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(1)(B) have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
and objectives of this article (section 3.08.001).
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(C) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood
elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/418
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements
and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in subsection (d)(1)–(10) above are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 3.08.006 Provisions for flood hazard reduction
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided
as set forth in section 3.08.004(b), section 3.08.005(b)(8), or subsection (c)(3) below, the following provisions
are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 3.08.005(c)
(1)(A), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/418
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the
base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/418
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.08.005(c)(1), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(c) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with section 3.08.001 and section 3.08.002 of this article.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section
3.08.004(c); section 3.08.005(c); and the provisions of this section.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater
than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.08.004(b)
or section 3.08.005(b)(8) of this article.
(4) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in section 3.08.004(b), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade
at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures; have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least 2 feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood
elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.08.005(c) are satisfied.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/418
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(e) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.08.004(b), are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (e)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.08.007 Penalties for noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court
order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$500.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ordinance 16-09 adopted 4/26/16)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 JUNKYARDS AND SALVAGE YARDS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Compliance; permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/418
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or use any property within the city limits as a junkyard unless its
operation and maintenance is conducted in accordance with these regulations and a permit to operate or maintain
such junkyard has been issued by the city. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.00; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 4.02.002 Application for permit; issuance
(a) Any person desiring to use or maintain any property within the city for the purpose of a junkyard shall
make written application to the city commission for a permit. Written application for such permit shall be filed
with the city secretary, and shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) A legal description of the property or premises upon which the junkyard is proposed or to be
conducted; and
(3) Any other information or evidence required or desired to be submitted by the city commission
deemed necessary to properly consider the application.
(b) Upon receipt of such application, the city commission shall decide in its discretion whether to approve or
reject the application within ninety (90) days of its submittal.
(c) The city commission's discretion shall be constrained by the provisions of the city's zoning regulations,
and where any provision of this regulation conflicts with any provision of the zoning regulations, the provisions
of the zoning regulations shall prevail.
(d) Any application which is not expressly rejected within ninety (90) days shall be deemed approved.
(e) If the city commission approves the application, the city secretary shall issue a permit to the applicant
upon the payment of the permit fee.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.01)
Sec. 4.02.003 Permit fee; term; revocation
(a) Before any permit is issued to operate or maintain a junkyard, the applicant shall pay an annual fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Any permit issued shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of its issuance but
may be renewed from year to year in a like manner as is provided for in the original permit.
(b) The city commission shall have the power to revoke any permit for a violation of any provisions of this
regulation, but only after notice has been given to the record owner(s) and a hearing held not less than ten (10)
days nor more than sixty (60) days after the service of such notice.
(c) The notice shall specify the alleged violations and the dates of the violations and shall state with
particularity the facts and identify witnesses who can testify with respect to the violations.
(d) A revocation of a permit shall be authorized only upon repeated knowing violations.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. I, sec. 1.02)
Sec. 4.02.004 Location
All junkyards shall be restricted to industrially zoned properties or districts of the city. Those junkyards in
operation prior to the effective date of this article shall be allowed to continue to operate even if located in
another zoning district, subject, however, to the permit requirements. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I,
div. I, sec. 1.03)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/418
Secs. 4.02.005–4.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Operation
Sec. 4.02.041 Violations
Violations hereof shall be punished by a fine as set out in the code. A violation of a non-penal regulation such as
the regulation of junkyards does not require a state of mind that rises to that of criminal intent. Therefore, an
owner or operator of a junkyard will violate the provisions hereof if a condition exists on the property which is
prohibited, whether or not he or she knew the condition existed, or knew that it was prohibited. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.12)
Sec. 4.02.042 Contents to be kept in orderly condition
The junk within the premises of a junkyard shall be kept in an orderly arrangement so as to allow sufficient
space for an individual to walk among junk and inspect the premises and to permit easy access to all areas for
firefighting purposes. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 4.02.043 Inspections
All junkyards shall permit inspection by law enforcement officials, health department representatives, fire
department officials and building inspectors of the city. Such inspections shall be for the purpose of ascertaining
whether any health, safety or sanitary violations exist and to assist in locating stolen or lost property. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.01)
Sec. 4.02.044 Vehicles and machinery to be drained of inflammable liquids
It is the duty of the owner(s) of the junkyards to drain all inflammable liquids and oils from the automobiles,
trucks, tractors, equipment or machinery of any kind which is kept within the premises. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.02)
Sec. 4.02.045 Screening fence
(a) The property and premises of such junkyards shall be enclosed by a fence at least eight feet (8') in height,
measured from ground level, and constructed of material which obscures the view. Said fence shall be kept in
good repair at all times, and no junk of any character, or parts or machinery of any kind, shall be allowed to
remain outside of such fence.
(b) Such fence enclosing the junkyard shall not be used for bill postings or for other advertising purposes,
except a space not larger than fifty (50) square feet which may be used for the advertisement of the junkyard, if
not in violation of the city's zoning or sign regulations.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.03)
Sec. 4.02.046 Standing water
It shall be unlawful to allow water to stand in any place on the premises, including the contents of the junkyard,
in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes or create other health hazards. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.04)
Sec. 4.02.047 Weeds
It shall be unlawful to keep weeds and other uncultivated growth on the premises, other than trees, shrubs and
bushes. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.05)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/418
Sec. 4.02.048 Garbage or other waste
It shall be unlawful to keep garbage or other waste on the premises. It shall be unlawful to keep refuse of any
kind on the premises, unless such refuse is defined as junk. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec.
2.07)
Sec. 4.02.049 Burning
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner of a junkyard to burn or permit the burning of rubbish, garbage, trash,
rubber products, hydrocarbons, motor vehicles or parts, or other junk within the confines of the junkyard.
(b) It shall be rebuttably presumed, upon the proof of burning, that the owner of the junkyard has carelessly
permitted the burning.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.08)
Sec. 4.02.050 Storage of junk
It shall be unlawful for any junk to rest upon or protrude over any fence or screen, public street, right-of-way,
walkway, easement, or curb or to become scattered or blown off the premises. The owner(s) shall not allow junk
to be stored at a height exceeding the height of the fence enclosing the premises. (1999 Unified General Code,
ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.09)
Sec. 4.02.051 Dismantling of appliances and other junk
All junk, including but not limited to refrigerators, stoves, washing machines and dryers, shall be inoperable in
such a manner to prevent entrapment of children. All refrigerators and freezers not stored in a lockable structure
shall have the doors removed. All junk stored or accumulated shall be dismantled so that the junk does not
constitute a public safety hazard. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.10)
Sec. 4.02.052 Combustible or flammable material
It shall be unlawful for combustible or flammable material of any kind, not necessary or integral to the operation
of the junkyard business, to be kept on the premises. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 6, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.11)
ARTICLE 4.03 GARAGE SALES AND FLEA MARKETS
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
Business. An activity of or caused by a person for the purpose of a direct or indirect gain, benefit, or advantage.
Flea markets. The temporary collection, storage, display and sale of new and used goods by more than one
vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor in vehicles, tents, and other temporary structures such as awnings of
canvas or other materials on improved lots.
Garage sale. A sale of new or used merchandise from any residence in any residential zone classification.
Owner or occupant. Any person owning or renting or leasing or subleasing property in any residential zone
classification.
Sale or purchase. Any of the following when done or performed for consideration:
(1) A transfer of title or possession of tangible personal property or the segregation of tangible
personal property in contemplation of a transfer of its title or possession.
(2) The exchange, lease, or rental of tangible personal property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/418
(3) The performance of a taxable service.
(4) The production, fabrication, processing, printing, or imprinting of tangible personal property
for consumers who directly or indirectly furnish the materials used in the production, fabrication,
processing, printing or imprinting.
(5) The furnishing and distribution of tangible personal property by a social club of fraternal
organization to anyone.
(6) The furnishing, preparation or service of foods, meals or drinks.
Seller and retailer. Includes:
(1) A person in the business of making sales at auction of tangible personal property owned by the
person or by another;
(2) A person who makes more than four sales of taxable items during a 12-month period; and
(3) A person regarded by the comptroller as a seller or retailer under section 151.024 of the Texas
Tax Code.
Seller or retailer. A person engaged in the business of making sales of taxable items of a kind the receipts from
the sale of which are included in the measure of the sales and or use tax imposed by chapter 151 of the Texas
Tax Code.
Unimproved lot. A lot lacking a building constructed after issuance of a building permit or lacking of any of the
utilities such as plumbing or electricity in compliance with the city's building plumbing and electrical permits.
Sec. 4.03.002 Permit required
(a) The owner or occupant of a house conducting a garage sale in any residential zone classified as such by the
city's zoning ordinance shall first obtain a permit from the planning department of the city, the cost of which
shall be ten and no/100 dollars ($10.00).
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of such premises or any other person to conduct thereon a
garage or porch sale without first having obtained a permit as herein required.
(c) Up to four (4) garage sale permits shall be issued per household or apartment in one calendar year.
(d) There shall be a 90-day minimum time separation between garage sale permits issued by the city.
(e) Anyone violating this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not less than twenty-five and
no/100 dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred and no/100 dollars ($200.00).
Sec. 4.03.003 Collection; storing; display and sale of goods in open and unimproved property
(a) The collection, storing, display and sale of goads in open and unimproved lots in the city is hereby
prohibited.
(b) A person commits an offense if he/she collects, stores, displays or sells goods in open and unimproved lots
in the city.
(c) An offense under this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Sec. 4.03.004 Use of street; street right-of-way or sidewalk as place of business
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/418
(a) It is unlawful for any person to use any street, street right-of-way, sidewalk, plaza or other public place
within the city as a place of business.
(b) A person commits an offense if he/she uses any street, sidewalk, plaza or other public place within the city
as a place of business are herein prohibited.
(c) An offense under this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Sec. 4.03.005 Flea markets
(a) The city commission, in the exercise of its discretion, shall grant special use permits for flea markets
taking into consideration the health, welfare and safety of the public, but no permit shall be issued for a period of
more than one (1) year.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to conduct a flea market within the corporate limits without first having
obtained a special use permit.
(c) An offense under this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day.
(d) Persons applying for a special use permit for a flea market must show the following:
(1) That the proposed area for the flea market has a paved parking area sufficient to accommodate
the needs of the flea market without obstructing surrounding roadways and traffic;
(2) That the noise level of the flea market will be controlled and will not be a nuisance to the
surrounding area; and
(3) That there are electrical, sanitation and plumbing facilities that are accessible to the flea market
and sufficient to meet the needs of the flea market clientele.
(e) Flea markets shall only be allowed in the following areas:
(1) Where the tract of land to be used for the flea market abuts a major thoroughfare being a
principal arterial or higher-classified roadway as shown in the adopted county thoroughfare plan.
(2) Where there are no residences or dwelling units within 500 feet.
(Ordinance 14-18 adopted 8/12/14)
ARTICLE 4.04 WRECKER BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
Owner. Any person who holds the legal title of a motor vehicle, who has the legal right of possession of a motor
vehicle or who has the legal right to such vehicle.
Vehicle. Every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes, but is not limited to, trailers and semitrailers.
Wrecker. Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing disabled or wrecked vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/418
Wrecker business. The business of towing or removing vehicles on the public streets when the towing is done to
remove a wrecked or disabled vehicle from the scene of a collision at the instance or request of the owner of the
vehicle or the police department or fire department, regardless of whether the purpose of the towing is to
remove, repair, wreck, store, trade or purchase such vehicle, or to remove a vehicle from an unlawfully parked
position at the instance or request of the police department or fire department.
Wrecker company. Any person or company engaged in the wrecker business.
Wrecker rotation list. The rotation list of companies prepared and used as provided in section 4.04.013.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 1.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.002 Penalty; additional remedies
(a) Any owner of a wrecker company, agent or employee of a wrecker company, driver or operator of a
wrecker found guilty of violating this article or any of its provisions on complaint filed in municipal court or in
any other court of competent jurisdiction shall, upon a finding of guilty, be fined as provided in section 1.01.009
of this code.
(b) In addition to the penal remedy provided for in this section, the city shall be entitled to injunctive or other
civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the laws of the state.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 16.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.003 Purpose
The operation of emergency wreckers and emergency wrecker service in the city requires regulation in order to
avoid competitive speeding by wreckers to the scene of accidents and collisions, and is necessary in order to
avoid traffic hazards and to minimize the danger of injury to persons and damage to property. (Ordinance 03-
006, sec. 2.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.004 Application for permit and certificate
Every person desiring to engage in the wrecker business in the city shall make application, in writing, on a form
provided for that purpose, to the chief of police for a permit to engage in the wrecker business and for a safety
and insurance compliance certificate for each wrecker proposed to be operated, and such application shall
contain the name, address, telephone number, the number and types of wrecker equipment to be operated, the
true owner of the company concerned, and a statement that the applicant does or does not desire to appear on the
wrecker rotation list. Every application, when filed, shall be sworn to by the applicant. (Ordinance 03-006, sec.
3.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.005 Standards for issuance of permit and certificate; fees
The chief of police, or his representative, shall issue a permit to engage in the wrecker business to all applicants
complying with the provisions of this article and shall issue a permit and safety and insurance compliance
certificate for all wreckers of such applicants so complying. No permit authorizing the operation of a wrecker
business and no safety and insurance compliance certificate authorizing the operation of a wrecker on the streets
of the city shall be issued unless the following requirements are met:
(1) Wrecker equipment and impound area. Every wrecker proposed to be used by the applicant
shall comply with the following minimum safety requirements:
(A) Each wrecker shall be not less than three-quarters ton in size and shall be equipped with
booster brakes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/418
(B) Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power winch line and boom with a factory-rated
lift capacity of not less than 5,000 pounds single line capacity.
(C) Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment tow bars, or roller bars, safety chains, a
fire extinguisher, wrecking bars, and an axe. The applicant shall have dollies if needed, but they
are not required equipment for each wrecker.
(D) Each wrecker shall provide that its impoundment area, if located in the city, shall, at
minimum, meet all of the city's development and general code requirements.
(E) The impoundment area, if located outside of the city, shall be within and not exceed a
seven-mile radius from the main police station.
(2) Insurance. All wrecker services shall procure and keep in full force and effect a policy of public
liability and property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do
business in the state and in the standard form approved by the board of insurance commissioners of
the state, with the insured provision of such policy including the city as an insured, and the coverage
provision insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by
reason of the operation of a wrecker of such company and providing that the amount of recovery on
each wrecker shall be in limits of not less than $500,000.00 for damages arising out of bodily injury
to or death of one person in any one accident, and $100,000.00 for injury to or destruction of property
in any one accident.
(3) Driver information. A list of all wrecker operators/drivers and a copy of their Texas operator's
license shall be submitted with the above insurance policies. It shall be the obligation of the wrecker
service to keep the operator/driver license information current pursuant to section 521.459
Transportation Code.
(4) Delinquent taxes. No delinquent taxes shall be due the city upon any wrecker for which such
permit or certificate is sought, and the owner thereof shall not have failed to render the amount due
for ad valorem taxation.
(5) Fees; renewal of permit.
(A) Annual fee. There is hereby imposed an annual fee of $100.00 per wrecker company.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 4.00, adopted 6/11/03)
(B) Inspection fee. There is hereby imposed an annual inspection fee of $35.00 per wrecker
unit and a government entity/law enforcement fee of $15.00 per vehicle towed. (These fees
shall be deposited, upon recovery, in the police departments account and utilized for any and all
efforts for the enforcement of this section, and general traffic safety for nonconsent tows, each
wrecker will submit payment monthly). (Ordinance 12-02, sec. I, adopted 2/28/12)
(C) Refund of fees. All fees are nonrefundable.
(D) Application for renewal. Annual renewal applications may be submitted between
November 1 and January 31 of each year. A certificate of insurance and fees shall be submitted
with the written renewal application. Regardless of when a renewal application is submitted, the
renewal permit will be from February 1 through January 31.
(E) Late fee. A late fee of $50.00 will be charged if the completed renewal permit application
if not filed or postmarked by midnight, January 31 of each year.
(6) State licenses and certificates. A copy of all licenses and/or certificates issued by the state
allowing the applicant to operate a wrecker, impound yard or vehicle storage facility shall be required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/418
upon payment of annual fees per wrecker company wrecker unit.
(7) Identification on vehicles. Each wrecker shall have the wrecker company's name, address, city
where located, and telephone number of the business operating the wrecker permanently inscribed on
each side of the vehicle in letters no less than two inches high in contrasting colors. No temporary
signs of any kind will be permitted.
(8) Certification sticker. Certification shall be evidenced by a windshield sticker affixed to the
lower left side of the windshield.
(9) Duplicate certificate. A duplicate certificate will be issued upon reinspection and payment of
$25.00 reinspection fee.
(10) Revocation of certificate. A wrecker certification will be revoked for failure to meet and/or
maintain the required standards and regulations of state law and this article.
(11) Application for recertification. If a wrecker certification is revoked, an application for
recertification may be made as soon as the wrecker meets standards.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 4.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.006 Requirements for operating wrecker
Each safety and insurance compliance certificate for a wrecker vehicle shall state that such wrecker has been
inspected and approved under the direction of the department of public safety, and a current inspection sticker
shall be affixed securely to the inside of the windshield of the wrecker vehicle. No person shall operate a
wrecker on the public streets of the city unless a permit to engage in the wrecker business has been issued to the
owner of such wrecker, a safety and insurance compliance certificate has been issued to such wrecker and the
wrecker has a current state inspection sticker. No permit or safety and insurance compliance certificate shall be
transferable, and every permit and safety and insurance compliance certificate shall expire at midnight on
January 31 of the year in which the permit expires. (Ordinance 03-006, sec. 5.00(1), adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.007 Grounds for suspension or revocation of permit
(a) A permit holder may have his permit suspended:
(1) For seven days for any violation of this article.
(2) For 20 days for a second or subsequent violation of this article.
(b) A permit holder may have his permit revoked:
(1) For a third or subsequent violation of this article.
(2) Causes or permits the operation of a city certified wrecker, either owned or contracted for, by
an unlicensed driver on the public roadways.
(3) Causes or permits the operation of a wrecker not certified by the city, either owned or
contracted for, on the public roadway.
(4) Fails to maintain in force the insurance required for the operation of a towing company, vehicle
storage facility or its equipment by the laws of the state.
(5) Operates the wrecker or wrecker company in any way which endangers the life or safety of any
person in any of the following ways:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/418
(A) The grossly negligent operation of a vehicle used by the wrecker company.
(B) Criminal assault committed by the permit holder, his agents, or employees during the
normal course of business.
(6) Submits false information on a permit application.
(7) Is convicted of a violation under this article.
(8) Is convicted of fraud or theft, as defined in the Texas Penal Code, in the conduct or operation of
the permit holder's wrecker company.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 5.00(2), (3), adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.008 Procedure for suspension or revocation of permit
(a) Upon complaint against a wrecker company or any agent or employee thereof filed by any person with the
chief of police, or upon his own motion charging a violation of any of the terms of this article or any ordinances
of the city or laws of the state regulating motor vehicles or crimes of moral turpitude or for good cause shown,
the chief of police shall immediately turn such complaints over to the city manager. The city manager, after
giving five days' notice of such complaint to such wrecker company, may hear evidence with reference to such
complaint and after such hearing may order the chief of police to revoke or suspend the permit issued under this
article for good cause shown.
(b) After the chief of police has heard the complaint for revocation or suspension of the permit of any wrecker
company, he shall make his findings and declare such findings along with the terms, if any, of any suspension of
a temporary or permanent nature. The decision of the city manager shall be reduced to writing. The wrecker
company or the complainant shall have the right to appeal the city manager's decision to the city commission.
All appeals must be filed within ten days from the date of the decision of the city manager or such appeal will be
barred and the decision of the city manager will become final and binding upon all parties. The city commission
shall set the hearing date for all appeals from the city manager under this section. After an evidentiary hearing,
the decision of the city commission shall be reduced to writing, wherein they shall make findings and declare
such findings. No appeal will lie from the decision of the city commission as it is final.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 14.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.009 Wreckers to be summoned by police or fire department
No person shall drive a wrecker to or within 100 feet of the scene or situs of an accident or collision on the
streets of the city unless such person has been called to the scene by the police department or fire department;
provided that, when it is necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident or
collision, the prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable. The owner or operator of a wrecker shall not use or
act upon any information received on the shortwave frequency of the police or fire department of the city for his
own benefit or the benefit of any other person in connection with the operation of a wrecker business unless such
owner or operator was called or summoned by the fire or police department. If any wrecker appears at the scene
of an accident or collision, the owner or operator of which was not specifically called by the fire or police
department, it shall be conclusively presumed that such owner or operator unlawfully intercepted and acted on
the information transmitted by the fire or police department on its radio frequency. (Ordinance 03-006, sec. 6.00,
adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.010 Soliciting business at scene of accident prohibited
No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city, the business of towing any
vehicle which is wrecked or disabled on a public street, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose
of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing such vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/418
Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the wrecker business or the presence of any wrecker or motor
vehicle owned or operated by any person engaged in the wrecker business, either as owner, operator, employee
or agent, on any public street in the city at or near the scene or situs of a wreck, accident or collision, within one
hour after the happening of a wreck, accident or collision, shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in
violation of this section. (Ordinance 03-006, sec. 7.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.011 Intercepting communications from police or fire department radio frequency
No owner of a wrecker company, not licensed by the city, shall intercept any message emanating through the
medium of the fire or police department radio frequency or divulge or publish the existence, contents, substance,
purpose, effect or meaning of such intercepted communication; and no person, not being entitled thereto, shall
receive or assist in receiving any such message and use such message, or any information therein contained, for
his own benefit or for the benefit of another person. (Ordinance 03-006, sec. 8.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.012 Selection of wrecker by vehicle owner
Wrecker selection by vehicle owner shall be limited to the city's wrecker rotation list. (Ordinance 12-02, sec. II,
adopted 2/28/12)
Sec. 4.04.013 Placement on rotation list; use of rotation list
(a) If the owner of a vehicle involved in an accident or collision is physically unable to name the wrecker
company desired or declines to name one, or if the public safety departments of the city are called relating to a
request for wrecker service, the investigating or responding officer or employee shall communicate the fact
immediately to police department headquarters for selection of a wrecker from the wrecker rotation list
maintained by the city police department as provided in this article. Any wrecker company that desires to be
placed on the city wrecker rotation list shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Have been issued a permit and safety and insurance compliance certificate in accordance with
this article.
(2) Have applied to be on such list.
(3) Maintain 24-hour wrecker service located within and not exceeding a seven-mile radius of the
city police department central office and be within a 20-minute response time to anywhere in the city.
(4) Maintain an impound yard located within and not exceeding a seven-mile radius of the city
police department central office.
(5) In addition to the minimum requirements for wreckers required in section 4.04.005, possess at
least one licensed wrecker not less than one and one-half tons in size, equipped with a poweroperated
winch, winch line and boom, with a factory-rated lifting capacity of not less than 10,000
pounds, single line capacity.
(6) In addition to the minimum requirements for wreckers required in section 4.04.005, possess at
least one licensed platform wrecker.
(7) Agree to respond to all requests for wrecker service initiated by the city.
(8) The owner or operator of the wrecker company shall immediately notify the chief of police or
his designated representative of any change in status as it relates to any insurance, certificate, or
permit or any factor that may impede its ability to comply with this article.
(9) The owner or operator of the wrecker company shall produce a monthly report by the third
Monday of each month listing the status of any and all vehicles towed for the city that are considered
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/418
abandoned in their lot, after proper notification has been given in accordance with Transportation
Code subchapter C, Vehicle Abandoned in Storage Facility, section 683.031.
(b) Upon receiving a communication from the city police department, the wrecker company presently on call,
or its duly authorized agent, shall tow the disabled vehicle and remove such vehicle from the public streets of the
city. On each succeeding communication of the inability or refusal of an owner to name a wrecker, the next
company on the list shall be called, and proper rotation on such list shall be on a per-call basis for each wrecker
company on the wrecker rotation list. The chief of police or his designated agent shall establish the procedures
for the rotation of wreckers on the wrecker rotation list.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 10.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.014 Police officers not to recommend wrecker service
No police officer investigating or present at the scene or situs of any wreck, accident or collision on a public
street shall, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, recommend to any person the name
of any particular person engaged in the wrecker service or repair business, nor shall any such police officer
influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a wrecker or
repair service; provided that any police officer, in the exercise of his discretion as a police officer, may direct
that any vehicle, whether towed by a wrecker selected by the owner of the vehicle or from the wrecker rotation
list, shall be taken by the driver of the wrecker towing the vehicle directly to the city pound or other location
designated by such police officer and there held by the city for any lawful purpose. (Ordinance 03-006, sec.
11.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.015 Maximum rates for wreckers on rotation list
(a) Those wreckers who volunteer for rotation agree to follow the rates as set out herein as a condition of
being placed on the rotation list. The maximum rates or fees authorized to be charged for the following
enumerated wrecker services in response to a call from any employee of the city acting in his official capacity
are as follows. Any person requesting his vehicle to be removed to a garage or other area will be responsible for
the additional wrecker fee. (Ordinance 03-006, sec. 12.00, adopted 6/11/03)
(1) Towing a wrecked or disabled vehicle or illegally parked vehicle: $150.00. (Ordinance 12-02,
sec. III, adopted 2/28/12)
(2) Towing away overparked vehicle from parking meter area: $35.00.
(3) Towing of disabled vehicle from high water; up to a maximum fee per hour, per wrecker:
$50.00.
(4) Rolled over or upset vehicles: $50.00.
(5) Rollover with dolly tow: $60.00.
(6) If winch required, additional for each 50 feet of pull: $20.00.
(7) (A) Waiting time over 15 minutes at the scene of an accident (per quarter hour): $7.50.
(B) Additional time required by the wrecker for extraction or rollover of vehicles for actual
working time over 30 minutes (per quarter hour): $12.50.
(8) Disconnecting transmission: $10.00.
(9) Use of dollies or other specialized equipment (no dolly fee will be allowed for flatbeds or
wheel lifts): $50.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/418
(10) Towing of trucks exceeding one ton:
(A) First hour of service (minimum charge): $75.00.
(B) Additional time required to remove such vehicle (per working hour): $75.00.
(11) Towing vehicle from outside the city limits: $15.00. Plus, per mile to and from location of
vehicle: $1.25.
(12) Pickup and delivery of vehicle to city pound:
(A) Daytime delivery: $35.00.
(B) Nighttime delivery: $50.00.
(13) The total fee charged will be made up of the towing fee, specialized service fee (subsections
(8) and (9)), waiting fee (subsection (7)), and storage or impoundment fees, if any.
(b) Where any state law, rule or regulation requires a different rate for services rendered by a wrecker service
and/or storage facility or any other type of business entity regulated under this article as provided for in this
article, then such state-regulated rate shall be followed without the necessity of further amendment of this
section.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 12.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.016 Safety precautions and operation procedures; compliance with traffic laws
Each wrecker company certificate holder shall follow standard safety precautions and operation procedures
generally recognized in the wrecker business to and from and at the scene of an accident or collision and shall
comply with all traffic code ordinances of the city. Each wrecker company at the scene of an accident or
collision shall promptly remove all debris from an accident or collision occurring on the public right-of-way.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 13.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.017 Unauthorized removal of vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person, in the operation of an automobile wrecker on the public streets and ways of
the city and not having been directed to do so by the chief of police, the parking manager of the public works
department or authorized representatives, knowingly to move, tow, haul or otherwise transport in, on or over the
public streets and ways of the city any vehicle which has been abandoned or which has been involved in a
collision and is on a public street, way or other public property. (Ordinance 03-006, sec. 15.00, adopted 6/11/03)
Sec. 4.04.018 Limit on number of companies on rotation list
(a) The number of wrecker companies on the rotation list shall be based on the annual population census, at
one wrecker company per each full 5,000 residents in population. Provided, however, the current list of 13
wrecker companies on the rotation list may be maintained until attrition has reduced the number to the maximum
established in the preceding sentence.
(b) The city planning department is hereby charged with the responsibility of determining the yearly
population of the city. Such report shall be generated within the first six months of each calendar year. Such
population report shall thereafter be approved by the board of commissioners at a regular meeting of such board.
The chief of police or his designated representative shall not increase the number of wrecker companies until
such population report has received the approval of the board of commissioners.
(Ordinance 03-006, sec. 17.00, adopted 6/11/03)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/418
ARTICLE 4.05 TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 4.05.001–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Use and Occupancy of Right-of-Way
Sec. 4.05.031 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to:
(1) Assist in the management of the rights-of-way;
(2) Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers;
(3) Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by
telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 1.0, adopted 2/10/99)
Sec. 4.05.032 Definitions
Whenever used in this division, the following terms, as well as their singulars, plurals and possessives, shall
have the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates
otherwise:
Access line.
(1) Each switched transmission path of the transmission media within the rights-of-way extended
to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the city that allows delivery of
telecommunications service;
(2) Each loop provided as an unbundled network element to a person pursuant to an agreement
under section 252 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996; and
(3) Each termination point of a non-switched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media
connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end user for the delivery of nonswitched
telecommunications service within the city.
Cable service. “Cable service” as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47
U.S.C. section 532 et seq.
Direction of the city. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent
with this division and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
Facilities. Any and all of the duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways,
and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all associated transmission media used for the
provision of telecommunications service.
Line fee. A monthly fee to be applied to each access line for the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the
city as a rights-of-way fee.
Permit holder. Any telecommunications service provider issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/418
Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability
company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity.
Public utility. A public utility as that term is used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Tex. Utilities
Code Ann. section 11.004, including municipally owned and/or operated utilities.
Rights-of-way. All present and future public streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives,
tunnels, easements, bridges, and other such similar passageways, thoroughfares, and public ways within the city.
Rights-of-way fee. The total amount paid to the city on a quarterly basis for the use and occupancy of the rightsof-
way.
Telecommunications service. The transmittal of voice, data, images, graphics and other communications between
or among points by wire, fiber optics, or other similar facilities, as well as the rental, lease, or furnishing of the
facilities to accomplish such transmittal, but does not include transmissions for long distance purposes
(interLATA and intraLATA) or any “wireless service” as defined by law.
Telecommunications service provider. Any person that supplies telecommunications service to others within the
corporate limits of the city in exchange for money or other value.
Telecommunications utility. “Telecommunications utility” as used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995,
Tex. Utilities Code Ann. section 51.002(11).
Transmission media. Any and all of the cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices owned, maintained or
placed by a permit holder to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other
characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes.
Use and occupancy. The permit holder's acquisition, installation, construction, reconstruction, maintenance,
repair, control, or operation of any facilities within the rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 2.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.033 Permit required
Any person that owns, places, or maintains facilities within the rights-of-way shall first obtain a permit pursuant
to the terms of this division. Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city under this division shall issue
permits to telecommunications service providers for the purpose of regulating the use and occupancy of the
public rights-of-way in the city for the provision of access lines. By acceptance of the permit, the permit holder
agrees to abide by the reasonable terms of this division in all its operations within the city, including all
operations and facilities and transmission media used in whole or in part in the provision of access lines in any
newly annexed areas as specified in section 4.05.035(c) of this division. (Ordinance 99-003, sec. 3.0, adopted
3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.034 General terms
(a) No rights agreed to in this division by the city shall be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant
franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the city to any person as the city,
in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest.
(b) A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable operator in the city under this
division, but must first obtain a franchise from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may
be required by law.
(c) The initial term of each permit issued under this division shall be three (3) years from the date of issuance,
unless terminated earlier by mutual written agreement of the city and the permit holder or pursuant to law. At the
expiration of the initial permit period, the permit shall be automatically extended for successive periods of one
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/418
(1) year, unless written notice of intent to terminate the permit is given not less than ninety (90) days prior to the
termination of the then-current period by the city to permit holder. When such notice is given, the permit shall
terminate at the expiration of the then-current period. The permit holder shall provide notice of the impending
automatic renewal at least 120 days prior to the end of the then-current period; provided, however, that the
permit holder's failure to provide notice shall not invalidate the automatic renewal of the ordinance.
(d) The rights granted by this division inure to the benefit of the permit holder licensed hereunder. This rights
granted by permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to another by the permit holder without the express
written consent of the city. For the purposes of this section, assignment, transfer or sale means a change of
operating control of the permit holder, expressly excepting an assignment or transfer to entities that control, are
controlled by or are under common control with the permit holder. Any such consent by the city shall not be
withheld unreasonably.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 4.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.035 Compensation
(a) Rights-of-way fee. The permit holder shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of
month-end by applying the appropriate line fee to each access line owned, placed, or maintained by the permit
holder that is activated for use by an end user or for another telecommunications service provider that uses the
permit holder's services or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service within the city. The line fee
to be applied to each access line on a monthly basis shall be:
Access Line Monthly Fee per Access Line
Residential $0.90
Nonresidential $2.00
(b) Number of access lines. Subject to the city's agreement not to disclose this information, each permit holder
must provide annually, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the
number of each type of access line owned or placed and maintained by the permit holder within the city that are
activated for end-user customers and other telecommunications service providers at month's end for each of the
preceding twelve (12) months. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purpose of verifying
the number of the permit holder's access lines within the city that are activated for end-user customers and
telecommunications service providers. Upon written request, the permit holder shall verify the information in the
report and, upon reasonable advance notice, produce to the city and permit inspection by the city of all noncustomer-
specific records and documents reasonably calculated to verify the information. For purposes of
payment of fees for use of the rights-of-way, lines terminating at customers' premises that are billed as
“Lifeline,” “Tel-Assistance,” or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or
federal law or regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall
not be included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated.
(c) Annexation and disannexation. Within thirty (30) days following the date of the passage of any action
effecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate
boundaries, the city agrees to furnish the permit holder written notice of the action and an accurate map of the
city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of
compensating the city under this division, a permit holder shall start including or excluding access lines within
the affected area in the permit holder's count of access lines on the effective date designated by the comptroller
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/418
of public accounts of the state for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes; but in no case less than thirty
(30) days from the date the permit holder is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation.
(d) Confidential records. If the permit holder notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information,
reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports,
documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the permit
holder's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the permit holder of the
request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall request an attorney general's opinion before
disclosing any confidential information, reports, documents or writings and will furnish the permit holder with
copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the permit holder's confidential information,
reports, documents or writings. Upon request by the city, the permit holder shall provide assistance in preparing
and submitting the request for an attorney general's opinion.
(e) No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection, or
other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business license fees customarily assessed
by the city for the use of the rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of the permit
holder. Further, such rights-of-way fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all of permit holder's
facilities located within the rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do
not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are not used in
the calculation of the rights-of-way fee.
(f) Timing of payment. The permit holder shall remit the line fee on a quarterly basis. The payment shall be
due on the forty-fifth (45th) day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is
calculated.
(g) Uncollectibles. The permit holder has a statutory right to pass through to its customers on a pro rata basis
any compensation paid to the city for access to the rights-of-way. Any other provision of this division
notwithstanding, the permit holder shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines for which revenues
remain uncollectible.
(h) Facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers. To the extent allowed by applicable
state and federal law, any telecommunications service providers that purchase unbundled network elements or
other facilities for the purpose of rebundling those facilities to create telecommunications service for sale to
persons within the city shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the
appropriate line fee, as specified in subsection (a) of this section, to each access line created by rebundling
services or facilities. Such direct payment to the city is necessary because it is only the person creating the
services for resale that will be able to determine the number of access lines being provided, so that the rights-ofway
fee imposed herein can be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all telecommunications service providers
that sell telecommunications service within the city. Other provisions of this division notwithstanding, the permit
holder shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any unbundled network elements or other facilities
provided to other telecommunications service providers for rebundling into telecommunications services, if the
telecommunications service provider that is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a signed statement
to the permit holder that the telecommunications service provider is paying the access line fees applicable to
those rebundled services directly to the city. If permit holder provides a copy of the signed statement to the city,
then the permit holder is absolved of all responsibility for the line fees payable on the telecommunications
service, unbundled network elements, and other facilities rebundled for the creation of telecommunications
service for sale within the city.
(i) Fee application to leased facilities. Pursuant to Tex. Utilities Code section 54.206, a permit holder may
collect the line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this division through a pro rata charge to the customers in the
boundaries of the city, including any other persons who are leasing, reselling or otherwise using the permit
holder's access lines to provide telecommunications service. With respect to any person leasing, reselling, or
otherwise using a permit holder's access lines, if a permit holder believes it does not have sufficient information
to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the person using
the access lines provides to the permit holder sufficient written information to determine the correct line fee. If a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/418
person provides sufficient written information for the application of the line fee, permit holders may bill the
person on the basis of the information provided. The permit holder shall provide to the city any information
regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by another person for the provision of
telecommunications service to end-user customers, so long as the city first obtains written permission of such
other person for the permit holder to provide the information to the city. Any other provision of this division
notwithstanding, however, a permit holder shall not be liable for underpayment of line fees resulting from the
permit holder's reliance upon the written information provided by any person that uses the permit holder's
service or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers.
(j) Public street crossing fee. Any person whose facilities are located within the city but are not used to
provide telecommunications service within the city by means of access lines upon which the line fees are
applicable shall pay the city an annual public street crossing fee of:
(1) $2.50 per linear foot for each diameter inch or less of underground conduit or wire and for each
0.250 diameter inch or less of aerial wire that is in the public rights-of-way per annum; and
(2) $1,000.00 for the first street crossing and $250.00 for every street crossing thereafter.
The public street crossing fee shall be due on July 15 of every year, prorated as applicable. A report as required
by the city manager shall be provided with each annual payment showing the calculation of the payment,
including the length of the network and whether it is overhead or underground, as applicable, and number and
name of each street crossing. The purpose of the public street crossing fee is to compensate the city for the
reasonable rental value of the rights-of-way and to recover the administrative cost in monitoring and enforcing
the provisions of this division. Each municipal permit ordinance requiring payment under this section shall
provide that such fee may be adjusted once every two (2) years to properly reflect the reasonable rental value of
the rights-of-way and administrative cost to the city.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 5.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.036 Audits
(a) On 30 days' notice to a permit holder, the city may audit a permit holder. Without in any manner limiting
the city's right to demand compliance with a permit and/or limiting the time period for which the city may
demand and/or sue for payment of the appropriate fee, an audit pursuant to this section shall be limited to not
more than the current year plus five (5) years preceding the date the audit is commenced; provided, however,
that this provision shall not be considered a waiver of state law pertaining to the applicable statute of limitations
with respect to the enforcement of this division, and provided further that this section may not be used to limit
the scope of any lawsuit or enforcement of this division or discovery related thereto. The permit holder shall
furnish all relevant information to demonstrate its compliance with the permit and/or other provisions of this
division, provided that auditors assure the privacy of customer-specific records and proprietary or marketsensitive
data.
(b) A permit holder shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of business and
operations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for a period of five (5) years. If the
Federal Communications Commission requires, a permit holder shall use the system of accounts and the forms
of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed in 47 CFR part 32 or its successor. The city may require
the keeping of additional records or accounts that are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying,
accounting for, and reporting the number of access lines used to deliver telecommunication services. The city
may examine the permit holder's books and records, expressly excluding any records, documents or other
writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications
Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. section 2701 et seq.
(c) A permit holder shall make available to the city or the city's designated agent for the city or its agent to
examine, audit, review and copy, in the city, upon written request, its books and records, including papers,
books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other records pertaining to a permit. A permit holder shall fully
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/418
cooperate in making records available and otherwise assist the city's agent. The city's agent shall not inspect or
copy or otherwise demand production of customer-specific information or any records, documents or other
writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications
Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. section 2701 et seq.
(d) The city may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to the permit holder's performance of the terms and
conditions of the permit. The permit holder shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis.
(e) The provisions of this section shall be continuing, shall survive the termination of the permit granted under
this division, and shall extend beyond the term of the permit, and the city shall have all the rights described in
this section for so long as the permit holder is providing any telecommunications service within the city.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 6.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.037 Construction and maintenance of facilities
(a) The location and route of all facilities and transmission media placed and constructed in the rights-of-way
shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control and direction of the city.
(b) Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to require or permit the attachment on or placement
in the permit holder's facilities of any electric light or power wires or communications facilities or other systems
not owned by the permit holder. If the city desires to attach or place electric light or power wires,
communications facilities or other similar systems or facilities in or on the permit holder's facilities, then a
further separate, noncontingent agreement with the permit holder shall be required. Nothing contained in this
division shall obligate the permit holder to exercise or restrict the permit holder from exercising its right to enter
voluntarily into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with
any person authorized to operate as a public utility or a telecommunications utility or authorized to offer cable
service within the city.
(c) The surface of the rights-of-way disturbed by the permit holder in the construction or maintenance of its
telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as
good a condition as before the commencement of the work. The permit holder shall endeavor to minimize
disruptions to the efficient use of the rights-of-way by pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and rights-of-way shall
not be blocked for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all construction, maintenance
and/or repair work.
(d) Upon request, the permit holder shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily
to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall
be paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the permit holder may require payment in advance. The
permit holder shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary
rearrangements.
(e) The permit holder, its contractors and agents have the right, permission and license to trim trees upon and
overhanging the rights-of-way to prevent trees from coming in contact with the permit holder's facilities and
transmission media. When directed by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction
of the city or under the supervision of the city's delegated representative.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 7.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.038 Relocation and removal of facilities
(a) In accordance with Tex. Utilities Code Ann. section 54.203(c), upon thirty (30) days' notice by the city, the
permit holder shall begin relocation of its facilities within the rights-of-way at its own expense to permit the
widening or straightening of streets. The notice by the city shall include a specification of the new location for
the permit holder's facilities along the rights-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/418
(b) The city retains the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way to cure or otherwise address a
public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the extent possible with the permit holder in such
instances to assure continuity of service and to afford to the permit holder the opportunity to make such
relocation itself.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 8.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.039 Insurance requirements
(a) A permit holder shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts prescribed by the city with an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state acceptable to the city throughout the term of a permit
issued pursuant to this division. A permit holder shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of
filing the acceptance of a permit. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements during the
effective period of a permit, and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city determines
that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the permit holder require
adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued
by the state providing the same coverage. In the alternative, for types of coverage for which the state does not
issue letters, the city will accept a letter from an authorized company representative that evidences the same
coverage.
(b) The city may, on request and at no cost to the city, receive copies of certificates of insurance evidencing
the coverage required by this section. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular
policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or
regulation binding the city, the permit holder, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or
modification, a permit holder shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change.
(c) An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions:
(1) Name of the city and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as
additional insureds for all applicable coverage;
(2) Provide for 30 days' notice to the city for cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change;
(3) Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city by certified mail; and
(4) Provide that the terms of the permit which impose obligations on the permit holder concerning
liability, duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity section, are included in the policy and
that the risks are insured within the policy terms and conditions.
(d) A permit holder shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city during the term of a permit or an
extension or renewal. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city
approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A permit holder
shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop that may affect an
existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify.
(e) An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the permit
holder and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(f) The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy.
(g) The permit holder shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has
no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a permit
holder must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city
in connection with damage covered by the policy.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 9.0, adopted 3/24/99)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/418
Sec. 4.05.040 Indemnification
The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses, and damages to persons
or property arising directly or indirectly from the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of the permit
holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the permit
holder. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. The city shall give
the permit holder prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The permit holder
shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. This provision is not intended to
create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties, but rather this provision is solely for the
benefit of the permit holder and the city. (Ordinance 99-003, sec. 10.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.041 Administration
(a) The city may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries pertaining to the terms, conditions, rights and
obligations of this division, and the permit holder shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis.
(b) Copies of petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the permit holder to the Federal
Communications Commission or the public utility commission of the state shall be provided to the city upon
specific request.
(c) After reasonable notice to the permit holder, the city may establish, to the extent permitted by law, such
reasonable and nondiscriminatory rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this
division and the construction of the permit holder's facilities in the rights-of-way, so long as those rules and
regulations are competitively neutral.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 11.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.042 Future contingency
In the event this division or any tariff or other provision that authorizes permit holders to recover the fee
provided for in this division becomes unlawful or is declared or determined by a judicial or administrative
authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, or illegal, in whole or in part, then the
city and all permit holders shall negotiate a new compensation arrangement that is in compliance with the
authority's decision. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new compensation arrangement shall provide the city with
a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this division, as long as that compensation is recoverable
by permit holders in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this division. (Ordinance
99-003, sec. 12.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.043 Governing law
This division shall be construed in accordance with the city code in effect on the date of passage of this division
to the extent that such code is not in conflict with or in violation of the constitution and laws of the United States
or the state. (Ordinance 99-003, sec. 13.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.044 Termination of permit
(a) The city shall reserve the right to terminate any permit and any rights or privileges granted under this
division in the event of a material breach of the terms and conditions of the permit or of this division, subject to
a thirty-day written notice and the opportunity to cure the breach during that thirty-day period.
(b) Material breaches of a permit specifically include, but are not limited to, continuing violations of sections
4.05.035 and 4.05.037, and the furnishing of any service requiring municipal authority not authorized by the
permit.
(c) A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the violation occurs without the fault of a permit
holder or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/418
(d) A termination shall be declared only by a written decision of the city commission after an appropriate
public proceeding before the city commission, which shall accord the permit holder due process and full
opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be
met by giving the permit holder at least fifteen (15) days' prior written notice of any public hearing concerning
the proposed termination of its permit. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination alleged by the city.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 14.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.045 Unauthorized use of right-of-way
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly excavate or occupy the rights-of-way that has not been
authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this division and a permit issued hereunder.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to place any facilities on, in or over the rights-of-way, city property,
city structures or utility infrastructure unless expressly allowed under this division or other applicable terms of a
city ordinance.
(c) Such unlawful excavation, occupation or placement as described herein may be challenged by the city in a
court of appropriate jurisdiction, and appropriate compensation, including attorney fees, may be sought.
(Ordinance 99-003, sec. 15, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.046 Nondiscrimination and competitive neutrality
The city hereby recognizes that it has the legal duty to obligate, on a going-forward basis, all permit holders to
abide by the same terms and conditions imposed by this division, including, but not limited to, the payment of
the line fee, and to apply substantively the same requirements governing their use and occupancy of the rightsof-
way. This provision, however, is not intended and should not be construed to extend the obligations and
duties of the city under applicable laws. (Ordinance 99-003, sec. 16.0, adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.047 Existing permit holders
Any permit holder that owns facilities already located within the rights-of-way on the date this division is
enacted is hereby granted a permit hereunder; however, within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this
division all such permit holders shall provide to the city a notice of preexisting facilities. All prospective permit
holders shall file a permit application form at least thirty (30) days before placing any facilities in the rights-ofway.
A permit application form will not be accepted and a permit granted unless the applicant provides on that
form the name and address of the person to whom notices hereunder are to be sent, the date on which the
applicant expects to begin providing service within the city, a 24-hour-per-day contact number for the applicant,
and the certificate number of the applicant's certificate issued by the public utility commission of the state or a
notarized statement from a principal or officer of the applicant that no certification by the public utility
commission is required for the type of service to be offered by the applicant. (Ordinance 99-003, sec. 17.0,
adopted 3/24/99)
Sec. 4.05.048 Issuance and effective date of permit
The city shall deliver a properly certified copy of the ordinance codified in this division to the permit holder,
along with a permit hereunder, within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the notice of preexisting facilities or the
permit application form. The effective date for any permit shall be the date of issuance; however, the assessment
of the line fee shall not begin until the first day of the second month after the date of issuance of the permit.
Permit holders with preexisting facilities may continue the preexisting compensation arrangement until the first
day of the second month following the issuance of the permit. (Ordinance 99-003, sec. 18.0, adopted 3/24/99)
ARTICLE 4.06 OIL AND GAS DRILLING*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/418
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.06.001 Purpose
It being deemed wise to draft a drilling regulation so as to eliminate obsolescence, improve its safety features,
and regulate the drilling and operation of oil and/or gas wells to promote the public welfare and to guard and
protect the persons, lives and properties of the people in the city, and of those passing through the city, from the
dangers and hazards of the escape of gas, fire, explosions, cratering and other dangers incident to fields and
production of oil and gas, this article is, therefore, passed for the purpose of protecting health, life and property,
to preserve and enforce good government, order and security of the city and its inhabitants, and for the purpose
of preventing nuisances in the exploration, drilling for and production of oil and/or gas within the city limits, and
to promote proper and orderly development and conservation of such natural resources. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 3, art. II)
Sec. 4.06.002 Title
This article shall be known as the oil and gas drilling regulation of the city and may be cited as such. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. I, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 4.06.003 Appointment and duties of inspector; appeal of decisions
(a) Appointment; duties. The city manager, or his designee, shall be the oil and gas inspector, and it shall be
his duty to enforce the provisions of this article and appoint others to enforce the provisions of this article.
(b) Appeal of decisions. Any person who may be aggrieved by any ruling, order and/or decision of the oil and
gas inspector, or his designee, shall have the right of appeal to the city commission from such ruling, order, or
decision; provided, however, that any such appeal must be taken, if at all, within 10 business days immediately
following the filing of such rule, order, or decision in the records of the office of the oil and gas inspector.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 4.06.004 City divided into drilling units or districts
The city shall be, and is hereby, spaced and subdivided into oil/or gas drilling units or districts, and such
subdivision of the city into such drilling units or districts is hereby ordained, declared, fixed and definitely
shown on the map or plat hereby adopted, which map or plat is hereby referred to and made a part of this article
for all purposes. A copy of such map shall be on file in the city secretary's office and available for inspection
during regular business hours Monday through Friday. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec.
2.01)
Sec. 4.06.005 Amendment of regulations and drilling block map
This regulation and the drilling block map may be changed, amended or repealed at any time by the city
commission. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.02)
Sec. 4.06.006 Location near street or alley; use of streets and alleys
(a) No oil or gas well, permanent compressor station, water flood station, separator, or tank battery covered by
this article shall be located closer than 100 feet to any street, road, highway, or alley, whether same is existing,
platted, or dedicated, without the written permission of the city commission.
(b) It shall be unlawful to drill any well for oil or gas within any of the streets or alleys of the city. It shall be
unlawful to block, encumber or close up any street or alley in the drilling or production operations, except by
special permit issued by order of the city commission, and then only temporarily.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/418
(c) In order to enable the holder of each permit to remove oil, gas, water or other products from each drilling
unit within the city limits, the holder of each permit issued under this regulation for the drilling and operation of
a well for oil or gas in the city is hereby granted rights-of-way and easements on, over, under, along or across the
city streets, sidewalks, and alleys for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing,
replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or operations may be continued under any permit issued
pursuant to this regulation; provided, however, permittees shall not interfere with or damage existing water,
sewer or gas lines, the facilities of public utilities, or any other improvement or facility located on, under or
across the course of such rights-of-way. All crossings for pipelines under all paved or blacktopped streets shall
be bored or jacked, whenever required by the city, and such pipelines shall be buried beneath the surface of the
streets and alleys to such depth as shall be safe for the pressure carried, and the holder of each permit, at such
holder's own expense, shall at all times restore and repair the streets and alleys of any damage caused by the
permittee in laying pipes and conduits.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.03)
Sec. 4.06.007 Location near residential, commercial or industrial structure
(a) No well shall be drilled, and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled, at any location, or storage
tank to be located, which is nearer than 500 feet to any residence or commercial building without the applicant
having first secured the approval by the city commission to drill such well and unless the applicant has first
secured the written permission of all owners of real property within 500 feet of such location thereof to drill such
well.
(b) No high-pressure gas injection well or compressor in conjunction with a gas injection well shall be located
nearer than 500 feet to any residential, commercial, or industrial structure except upon approval by the city
commission and unless the applicant has first secured the written permission of all owners of real property
within 500 feet of such location thereof to drill such well. In exceptional cases for reasons of safety, the city
commission may require that any such facility shall be located at a greater distance than 500 feet from any such
structure, building, or grounds.
(c) No residential, commercial, or industrial structure other than structures necessary to operate the pipeline
shall be erected or moved to a location nearer than 30 feet to any pipeline transporting gas when the pipeline
operating pressure is greater than 250 psi unless a greater or lesser distance is recommended by the thenapplicable
ANSI code.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.04)
Sec. 4.06.008 Location near school, church or public building
No well for oil or gas shall be drilled, and no permit shall be granted to drill a well for oil or gas, where the hole
is to be drilled within less distance than 500 feet from any school building and 100 feet from the boundary line
of any land used as a school, church or public building site in the city except by permission of the city
commission. No well being drilled within 700 feet of any school or church in the city shall have drill stem
testing tools open during school hours, or from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on any day when school is in session, or at
a time when church services are being held. Nothing in this section shall be constructed as affecting the rights of
the school district or church to its pro rata part of oil or gas produced in the unit in which any of its land is
situated in the same manner as provided in this article for other owners. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art.
II, div. II, sec. 2.05)
Sec. 4.06.009 Standards for proposed facilities
(a) In determining whether to grant or deny any application for a permit required by this article and in
determining the conditions and provisions to be contained in any such permit, the city commission shall include
in its consideration the following factors:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/418
(1) Whether the proposed facility will comply with all provisions of this regulation;
(2) Whether the proposed facility will conflict with the comprehensive plan for orderly growth and
physical development of the city;
(3) Whether the proposed facility would not promote the orderly development and conservation of
oil, gas and minerals;
(4) Whether specific sites have been designated on plats of the property in the area concerned for
such oil and gas facilities as are the subject of the application;
(5) Whether, for any reason, the proposed facility will constitute a hazard to property or persons;
(6) Whether the proposed facility is injurious by reason of such particular location and the
character and value of the permanent improvements already erected or planned for construction on or
approximately adjacent to the particular location in question;
(7) Whether the proposed facility will conflict with the use of the land and surroundings which are
adapted for school, college, university, hospital, park or civic purposes;
(8) Whether the proposed facility may be injurious for health reasons, safety reasons, or any
reasons of like character;
(9) Whether the proposed facility may be a disadvantage to the city or to its inhabitants as a whole,
to a substantial number of its inhabitants, or to visitors as a group.
(b) In acting on any such application, the city commission shall determine whether the application complies
with or is consistent with the above-listed criteria as of the time of the granting or denying of the permit and not
as of the time of the making of the application for such permit.
(c) Once a permit has been granted by the city commission, any subsequent change of conditions not under
the control of the permittee shall not require any action on the part of the permittee to improve or change his
existing facilities [that] complied with the provisions of this article before the change of conditions. However,
the preceding sentence does not apply to facilities which are actually abandoned or relocated for whatever
reason, in which case such relocated facilities must comply with all provisions of this article.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.06)
Sec. 4.06.010 Derricks and rigs
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate, in connection with the drilling or reworking
of any well within the city limits, any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be
equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. No person shall permit any drilling rig or
derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than 30 days after completion or
abandonment of the well. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.07)
Sec. 4.06.011 Watchman
At all times during the drilling and completion stage of each well, either a company employee or contract
representative will be present on the well site location. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec.
2.08)
Sec. 4.06.012 Entering or occupying property of another
Neither this regulation nor any permit issued under this regulation shall be interpreted to grant any right or
license to the permittee to enter upon or occupy, in any respect, in the drilling or production operations, any land
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/418
not under contract or lease to him, except by the written consent of the owner. (1999 Unified General Code, ch.
3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.22)
Secs. 4.06.013–4.06.050 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.06.051 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence to drill a well for oil or gas within the city, or to work upon or
to assist in any way in the drilling operations for any such well, without a permit for such well and for such
development having first been issued by the city in accordance with the terms of this division. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.10)
Sec. 4.06.052 Application
(a) Every application for a permit to drill, complete, or operate a well for oil and/or gas shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant or by some authorized person in his behalf, and should cover no more than one drilling
block. It shall be filed with the city secretary and approved by the city commission and be accompanied by a fee
to the city. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $1,500.00 in cash, cashier's check, or certified
check made payable to the city.
(b) The application shall state the drilling block and the particular lot or location in the block where the
proposed well is to be drilled, and it shall show what part of the unit the applicant holds under lease or contract
with the owners, and that he owns or controls a 51 percent interest in the block as required by this article. The
city secretary is hereby authorized to formulate the form for the drilling permit and application. The city
secretary is hereby required to send notice to any property owner adjoining the lot or block on which the well is
to be drilled and lying within 600 feet of such property line. Such notice shall state the location of the well and
the date at which the city commission shall consider the approval of the permit.
(c) The application for a well-drilling permit shall be accompanied with a map or plat of the block showing
the exact location of the proposed well. In making such location the applicant must take into consideration
improvements which then exist. The application shall also be accompanied by the bond required by section
4.06.054 and a certificate of insurance showing compliance with section 4.06.055.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.11)
Sec. 4.06.053 Fee
(a) The fee for a permit for drilling on any one drilling block in the city shall be $1,500.00. Such fee shall be
deposited, in cash or certified check, with the city secretary at the time the application for the permit is filed, and
shall be held in a special fund until the permit is issued. When the permit is issued, such fee shall accrue to the
city and shall be full and complete compensation for the expense of inspection and other expenses that may be
incurred by the city relating to the drilling permit application and approval. Nothing in this section shall,
however, relieve the permittee from the obligation to properly repair the streets, alleys and public properties, and
to restore the property in clean condition in case they are used in such drilling or production operation. The
payment of the fee and the right of inspection granted in this article shall in no way obligate the city to make any
inspections relating to the drilling or operations of any oil or gas well within the city, and, furthermore, the
payment of the fee or granting of the right of inspection shall not be construed as the approval by the city of the
means and manners of drilling, operation or any other conduct relating to the drilling or production which does
not meet railroad commission rules and regulations or accepted standards of conduct of the oil and gas industry.
(b) If the permit for the well is refused, the fee provided for in this section shall be returned to the applicant,
except that there shall be retained therefrom $100.00 as a filing fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/418
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.12)
Sec. 4.06.054 Bond
(a) No person shall commence the drilling of any oil or gas well until he has filed with the city secretary a
duly executed bond as a drilling bond, executed by the applicant for the drilling permit as principal, and some
good and reliable surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety, payable to the city secretary,
conditioned that, if the permit is granted, the applicant and his assigns will comply with the terms and conditions
of this article in the drilling of the well. The terms and conditions include, but are not limited to:
(1) The applicant will restore the streets and sidewalks and other public places of the city which
may be injured in the operations to their former condition;
(2) The applicant will clear the lots and blocks of all litter, machinery, derricks, buildings, trash
and waste accumulated and all other substances used or allowed in the drilling of such well, when the
well shall be completed as a producing well or plugged and abandoned as a dry hole.
(b) Such bond shall be in the sum of $25,000.00 and, before the permit shall be issued, the bond shall be filed
with the city secretary. Such bond shall become effective upon the granting of the permit and shall remain in full
force and effect for a period of six months subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued, and, in
addition, the bond will be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay all legally imposed fines, penalties,
and other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of his breach of any terms, provisions, and
conditions of this article. The city shall not release the obligation of such bond for any well which is abandoned
as a dry hole or plugged unless and until sufficient proof is furnished to the city secretary from the railroad
commission as having met all of the requirements of such railroad commission. For convenience such bond may
be cumulative and may be conditioned to cover successive wells.
(c) If after completion of a producing well or any facility for which a bond is required by this section and the
permittee has complied with all provisions of this regulation, such as removing the derrick, clearing premises,
erection of fences, and the like, he may apply to the city commission to have the bond reduced during the life of
the well to a sum not less than $10,000.00 on each well or facility for the remainder of the time the well
produces or facility is operated without reworking. During major well workover or in-hole remedial operations
requiring the use of a rotary rig and/or high-pressure injection equipment (deepening, cementing, fracing, reperforating,
and the like), the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. A trunkline pipeline
installation shall not be considered as completed until the lines have been tested and in operation for a period of
30 days.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.13)
Sec. 4.06.055 Insurance
(a) Minimum coverage. In addition to the bond required by section 4.06.054, each person drilling an oil or gas
well shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual
liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, with a company
authorized to do business in the state. Such policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following
minimum coverages:
(1) Bodily injuries, $200,000.00 for one person and $500,000.00 for one accident;
(2) Property damage, $1,000,000.00 for one accident, which shall be in force and effect during the
drilling of such well and until the completion thereof as a producing well or the abandonment and
plugging thereof as a dry hole.
A certificate of insurance shall accompany the application for the drilling permit and shall be subject to the
approval of the city commission. The permittee shall file with the city secretary certificates of insurance as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/418
above stated and shall obtain the written approval thereof by the inspector, who shall act thereon within 10 days
from the date of such filing. The insurance policy or policies shall not be canceled without written notice to the
city secretary at least 10 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event such insurance policy
or policies are canceled, the permit granted shall terminate, and the permittee's right to operate under such permit
shall cease until the permittee files additional insurance as provided herein.
(b) Reduction. If, after completion of a well, the permittee has complied with all provisions of this article,
such as removing the derrick, completion of the pipeline, clearing premises, and the like, the permittee may
apply to the inspector to have such insurance policies reduced as follows:
(1) Bodily injuries, $100,000.00 for one person, $300,000.00 for one accident;
(2) Property damage, $500,000.00 for one accident;
for the remainder of the time such well produces without reworking. During reworking operations the amount of
the insurance policy or policies shall be increased to the original amount.
(c) Exceptions. The city commission may elect to make an exception to the requirements of subsection (a) of
this section when in its opinion the intent and purpose for the requirements of the bond and insurance can be
assured by any of the following means:
(1) Acceptance of a guaranty of indemnity to the city in lieu of bond and a plan of self-insurance in
the case of financially responsible operators.
(2) Acceptance of a blanket bond and a single policy of insurance to cover all operations of the
permittee within the city limits.
(3) Application of bond and insurance requirements acceptable to the city commission.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.14)
Sec. 4.06.056 Contents
(a) After the filing of an application for a permit, the city commission shall determine whether or not the
application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article, and if it does, the city commission shall
then fix the amount of the principal of the bond and insurance provided for herein and shall issue a permit for the
drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities applied for. Each permit shall:
(1) By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this article with the same force and
effect as if this article were copied verbatim in the permit.
(2) Specify the location of the proposed well, injection facility, and all pipelines with particularity
to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, section line, or other available correct
legal description.
(3) Contain and specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of six months from the date
of the permit and until such time as the permittee has permanently abandoned the operation of the
well or facility for which the permit was issued.
(4) Contain and specify such other terms and provisions as may be necessary in a particular case to
accomplish the purposes of this regulation.
(5) Contain and specify that no actual operation shall be commenced until the permittee shall file
and have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as so determined by the
city commission or has complied with this regulation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/418
(b) Such permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the inspector, and, prior to delivery to the permittee,
shall be signed by the permittee (with one original to be retained by the city and one by the permittee) and when
so signed shall constitute the permittee's drilling and installation license, as well as the contractual obligation of
the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit and bond and of this regulation.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.15)
Sec. 4.06.057 Consent to inspections and tests; notice of violation
(a) Those persons in control of the drilling or operation of any oil or gas well in the city shall permit the city
oil and gas inspector, or any subordinate thereof, to come upon the premises and make inspections and tests at
all reasonable hours. The city manager may, from time to time, appoint a city oil and gas inspector.
(b) Each producing well, pumping unit, water flood pump and injection well, together with their associated
equipment (tankage, separators, structures, fencing, landscaping, and the like), regulated by this regulation shall
be inspected annually by the oil and gas inspector for the purpose of conformance to the various regulations. If
any nonconformance is found, the permittee will be notified in writing of the violation immediately, and the
permittee shall begin to institute proceedings to come into full compliance with this article. The annual
inspection fee shall be $100.00 per year for each site upon which there is located a facility covered by this
article, and such fee shall be paid by the permittee.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.16)
Sec. 4.06.058 Input or reception wells for cycling or pressure maintenance purposes
A permit for an input or reception well for cycling or pressure maintenance purposes may be obtained by a
person owning oil and/or gas wells in the city, to be located at some convenient place in the city, under the same
terms and conditions as provided in this article for obtaining a permit to drill a well for oil or gas, excepting that
the one drilling block spacing shall not apply, and, with such exceptions, such well shall be drilled in accordance
with this article, except that there may be maintained upon its site such machinery as is necessary for the
production of pressure and cycling purposes. Such well shall be for cycling or repressuring purposes only, and
not for producing oil or gas. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.17)
Sec. 4.06.059 Issuance
If an application to drill is found by the city secretary to comply in all respects with the terms of this article, the
city secretary shall issue a permit for the drilling of the well applied for. The permit shall specify the particular
location of the well to be drilled, and it shall be unlawful for the permittee to drill elsewhere in the drilling block
without approval of the city secretary in writing. The granting and issuance of a permit for a well on a drilling
unit or block shall automatically operate as a rejection and denial of all other pending applications for wells to be
completed in the same reservoir upon the drilling unit or block involved, or any portion thereof. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.18)
Sec. 4.06.060 Number to be issued in each drilling block
There shall be issued a permit for only one well in each separate producing reservoir or each prospective
producing reservoir, sand, or strata, in each drilling block in the city. This limitation does not apply to input or
reception wells for cycling or secondary recovery purposes and it does not prohibit the use of the surfaces of one
drilling block for the surface location for wells to be drilled directionally and completed under or beneath other
designated drilling blocks. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.19)
Sec. 4.06.061 Applicant must have rights to at least 51 percent of drilling block
No applicant shall be granted a permit to drill a well for oil or gas in the city unless the applicant is the owner of
or has under contract or lease at least 51 percent of the oil and gas rights under the area constituting the drilling
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/418
block on which the well surface location is made and the drilling block under which the bottom of the hole of the
well is located and from which production is sought or obtained. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div.
II, sec. 2.20)
Sec. 4.06.062 Suspension or cancellation; expiration
(a) In the event of failure by the permittee to comply with any provision of this article, the oil and gas
inspector shall issue a written notice to the permittee of the nature of the noncompliance, stating such reasonable
time necessary to gain compliance. After lapse of such reasonable time, the city commission may suspend the
permit for a period of time or cancel the permit unless otherwise provided for herein.
(b) If any person who has been granted a permit under this article does not in good faith commence operations
for the drilling of a well for oil and/or gas in the drilling block for which such permit was issued within six
months from the date of the issuance of such permit, such permit shall be null and void without any action on the
part of the city and no well shall be drilled in that particular drilling block until another permit is granted
therefor on the same terms and conditions as provided in this regulation for the granting of a permit.
(c) After the operations for drilling of the well shall have commenced, the cessation of operations for drilling
prior to the completion of the well for a period of six months shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit and
the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this section and it shall be unlawful thereafter to
continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit.
(d) Provided that, if the well shall be completed as a well capable of production and shall thereafter cease to
be capable of production, the permittee shall have the right to conduct reworking operations on the well within
six months after it becomes incapable of production without having to procure a new permit.
(e) If and when any permit shall terminate and become inoperative as provided in this section, or if and when
the permittee or permittee's assigns shall file with the city written notice of election to surrender the permit and
abandon the premises covered thereby, then, if no claims under the bonds or undertakings shall have been filed
within 90 days thereafter, the city secretary shall return the bonds or undertakings and the securities therefor
furnished by the permittee in connection with such permit, and, if claims are filed within such time, upon the
satisfaction or defeat of such claims such bonds or undertakings and securities shall thereupon be returned to the
permittee or permittee's assigns.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.21)
Secs. 4.06.063–4.06.100 Reserved
Division 3. Operational Requirements
Sec. 4.06.101 General standards
(a) All drilling and operations at any well performed by a permittee under this article shall be conducted in
accordance with the practices of a reasonable and prudent operator. All casing, valves, and blowout preventers,
drilling fluid, tubing, bradenheads, Christmas trees, and wellhead connections shall be of a type and quality
consistent with the practices of a reasonable and prudent operator. Setting and cementing casing and running
drill stem tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the practice of a reasonable and
prudent operator. Each permittee under this regulation shall observe and follow the regulations of the state
railroad commission.
(b) All operations relative to the design, installation, maintenance, and operation of pipelines shall conform to
the requirements of this article and the applicable ANSI codes and the standards of performance of the
reasonable and prudent operators of the trades involved.
(c) All pipelines hereafter constructed shall be of all new pipe and shall comply with ANSI specifications.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/418
(d) Valves shall be installed on all pipelines at such locations and spacing to safely and adequately control the
operation of the line and to minimize the quantity of gas, oil, or water that would be released from the line in
case of line failure or rupture. The types and locations of all valves shall be indicated on a plan layout and
approved by the oil and gas inspector, and must be in compliance with the department of transportation and
railroad commission guidelines.
(e) Pipeline location markers shall be approved as to type and location by the oil and gas inspector, and the
removal of any pipeline marker without the express permission of the oil and gas inspector shall constitute a
violation of the provisions of this article.
(f) The delivery to or the removal of equipment or material from the drill site shall be limited to the hours
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. anytime operations are within 500 feet of a residential neighborhood, except in
cases of emergency. No pipe racking outside the derrick will be permitted during the hours between 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. anytime operations are within 500 feet of a residential neighborhood, except in cases of
emergency. All lighting shall be shielded and directed so as to confine the direct rays to the drill site and
surrounding work areas.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. II, sec. 2.09)
Sec. 4.06.102 Slush pits
Steel slush pits shall be used in connection with all drilling and reworking operations. Such pits and contents
shall be removed from the premises and drilling site within 30 days after completion of the well. No earthen
slush or mud pits shall be dug or used within the corporate limits of the city in the drilling of any oil or gas well.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 4.06.103 Cleanliness and sanitation
The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, satisfactory to the health officer and the city
manager. The permittee shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any mud, wastewater, oil, slush, or other
waste matter from flowing into the alleys, streets, lots, or leases within the corporate limits of the city. No crude
oil or unrefined oil shall be permitted to remain on the premises where an oil and/or gas well is being drilled or
being produced. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.01)
Sec. 4.06.104 Fencing; noise control; storage of equipment and materials
(a) All producing wells, pits and tank batteries shall be protected with a fence appropriate to the general area
in which they are located and shall be secured with a gate and lock. All fencing shall be a minimum of 6 feet in
height and shall surround the perimeter of the work site. All oil and/or gas wells, when completed, shall be
enclosed by a good and substantial smooth net wire fence properly built so as to keep persons and animals out of
the enclosure. The gate to the enclosure shall be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not at the
premises. In a developed residential area, the permittee will be obligated to landscape and maintain the
appearance of the site to conform to the surrounding residential area. In noncongested residential areas, the oil
and gas inspector may designate the type of fencing to be erected. However, if the surrounding area subsequently
develops into a residential neighborhood, the permittee will be obligated to conform to the residential
landscaping, fencing, and appearance.
(b) The compressor unit, water flood pump unit, and/or injection well location shall be enclosed on all sides
by a minimum six-foot chain-link fence with two strands of barbed wire along the top and properly built so as to
keep persons and/or animals out of the enclosure. The fence shall have a minimum of two gates or exitways
located on opposite sides of the enclosure. The gates or exitways shall be kept locked at all times except when
the permittee or his employees are within the enclosure. In a developed residential area, the permittee will be
obligated to landscape, solar-screen, and maintain the appearance of the site to conform to the surrounding area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/418
(c) The compressor unit or water flood pump unit shall, in addition to the fence requirements described above,
be enclosed in such a manner to reduce the noise of operation if in a residential area (and minimize the hazards
to the surrounding area). Hospital-type mufflers will be utilized in residential areas.
(d) Except where the site is located in an industrial or manufacturing zone, the well site, tank site, tank battery
site, pump station site, or compressor site shall not be used for the storage of pipe, equipment or materials except
during the drilling or servicing of the well, pipelines, tanks, pump stations, or compressor stations.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.02)
Sec. 4.06.105 Enclosure permit
(a) Upon completion of a well, the owner or operator shall apply for an enclosure permit. The permit fee shall
be $100.00.
(b) Within six (6) months of the annexation by the city of a property with a producing well, the owner or
operator of said well shall apply for a permit as set forth under subsection (a) of this section.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.03)
Sec. 4.06.106 Nuisances
All oil operations and drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as
far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration, or noxious odors and shall be in accordance with the reasonable and
prudent practices incident to exploration for, drilling for, and production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon
substances. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.04)
Sec. 4.06.107 Fire prevention; flaring or burning gas or oil
(a) Any permittee engaged in the drilling or operation of an oil and/or gas well or the operation of any facility
used in conjunction with the production of oil and/or gas within the corporate limits of the city shall take
reasonable precautions to prevent gas from escaping into the air and shall not flare or burn gas or oil from any
pipe, stack, pit, or any similar means within the corporate limits of the city; provided that gas may be burned for
a limited time when necessary to complete any oil and/or gas wells, so long as the same does not constitute a fire
hazard to the property of others within the vicinity of such oil and/or gas well.
(b) The permittee shall consult with the city manager or his designee regarding the safety applications of
installation.
(c) Emergency firefighting apparatus and supplies, subject to approval by the fire department of the city, shall
be maintained on the drilling site at all times during the drilling operations, and on the site of each compressor
used for gas injection operations.
(d) The permittee shall place a sign at each well location or site to identify the well.
(e) Any rubbish or debris that might constitute a fire hazard shall be removed to a distance of at least 100 feet
from the vicinity of wells, tanks and pump stations. All wastes shall be disposed of in such manner as to avoid
creating a fire hazard or polluting streams and freshwater strata.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.05)
Sec. 4.06.108 Removal of equipment after well is brought into production
After any oil and/or gas well is brought into production, all derricks shall be timely taken down after the
completion of the well and there shall remain on top of the ground during the natural flowing life of the well
only a Christmas tree and a separator and their equipment and the pipes leading thereto or therefrom. Nothing in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/418
this section shall, however, be construed as prohibiting the installation of all necessary equipment for the
necessary reconditioning, reworking, and/or recompletion of a well, and when the time comes when the natural
flow has ceased or become so light as to make necessary the installation of pumps or compression equipment, all
such derricks and equipment may be installed for such purpose and necessary equipment may be maintained.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.06)
Sec. 4.06.109 Casing generally
In the drilling of an oil and/or gas well, new pipe with a mill test pressure of not less than 1,000 pounds per
square inch shall be set for surface casing at a depth below the surface of not less than that required by the
railroad commission, and shall be cemented from the bottom of the pipe to the surface with a proper mixture of
cement. Cementing shall be by the pump and plug method. Cement shall be allowed to stand under pressure a
minimum of 12 hours, and a total of 24 hours shall elapse before drilling plug or initiating tests. Casing shall be
tested by pump pressure in the following manner: Apply pump pressure of at least 1,000 pounds per square inch;
if at the end of 30 minutes the pressure shows a drop of 100 pounds or more, corrective measures shall be
required, and after such corrective operation the casing shall again be tested in the same manner until it shall be
found to comply with the specifications set out in this section. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III,
sec. 3.07)
Sec. 4.06.110 Casing for producing or oil string
In the drilling of an oil and/or gas well, the producing or oil string shall be new casing that has been tested to
3,000 pounds per square inch, and after cementing it shall be tested by pump pressure in the following manner:
Pump pressure of at least 3,000 pounds per square inch shall be applied. If at the end of 30 minutes the pressure
shows a drop of 100 pounds or more, corrective measures shall be required, and after such corrective operation,
the casing shall again be tested in the same manner until the casing conforms to the specifications set out in this
section. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.08)
Sec. 4.06.111 Cementing of producing string
The position of the producing horizon in any oil or gas well shall be determined by coring, logging or testing.
The producing string shall be cemented at the top of such producing horizon or lower. Cementing shall be by the
pump and plug method. A sufficient quantity of cement shall be used so that it will fill the annular space back of
the pipe to a distance of not less than 600 feet above the shallowest sand capable of producing oil or gas in
commercial quantities. Cement shall be allowed to stand a minimum of 24 hours under pressure before drilling
plug or initiating tests. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.09)
Sec. 4.06.112 Blowout preventer and other control equipment
A double-ram type, or its equivalent, blowout preventer, and other connections for keeping any oil or gas well
under control at all times shall be installed as soon as pressure is released from the surface casing. The blowout
preventer shall be of dual control or of such type of construction and operation as to satisfy any test which may
be required by the railroad commission or city building official. The blowout preventer shall be tested in the
manner and frequency commonly employed and established for oilfield operations. All control equipment shall
be in good working order and condition at all times, and shall [have] sufficient working pressure rating and have
been tested to a pressure greater than the possible surface pressure possibly encountered in that hole section.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.10)
Sec. 4.06.113 Drilling fluid
After the setting of surface casing, as in this article provided, and drilling operations are commenced, there shall
be kept at all times a mud-laden fluid for drilling purposes of a minimum weight of 8.3 pounds per gallon, and a
minimum weight of 9.5 pounds per gallon when drilling in excess of 10,000 feet below the ground surface, but
at no time less than such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head equivalent to the formation pressures of the
horizons being drilled, and such mud-laden fluid shall be weighted during drilling operations each eight hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/418
Just before completion or drill stem testing operations are commenced, the mud-laden fluid shall be weighted
while circulating and shall be made to conform to the specifications in this section before proceeding. When
coming out of the hole with the drill pipe, the drilling fluid shall be circulated until equalized and a fill-up line
shall be turned into the casing to ensure a full load of fluid on the bottom of the hole at all times. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.11)
Sec. 4.06.114 Mufflers
All steam exhausts on pumps, boilers and equipment, as well as all combustible engines, used for drilling wells
shall be equipped with mufflers. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.12)
Sec. 4.06.115 Bradenheads
All wells shall be equipped with a bradenhead which has a working pressure of not less than 3,000 pounds per
square inch, and with test pressure rating of 6,000 pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall be welded by a
certified welder, and, as soon as installed, the bradenheads shall be equipped with the proper pipe connections
and valves accessible at the surface. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.13)
Sec. 4.06.116 Casing wear
The operator of any drilling well will exercise reasonable and prudent practice to insure that casing strings are
not worn to the extent that their capacity to withstand burst pressures is reduced to a condition that they cannot
withstand the maximum anticipated pressures. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.14)
Sec. 4.06.117 Inclination or deviation surveys
Inclination or deviation surveys as required by the railroad commission shall be made and notes and a record
kept thereof, which record shall be open to the inspection of any interested party. (1999 Unified General Code,
ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.15)
Sec. 4.06.118 Pressure for Christmas tree fittings
Christmas tree fittings for wells of 8,000-foot depth or less shall have 3,000 pounds per square inch working
pressure and 6,000 pounds per square inch test pressure. Wells below 8,000 feet shall have Christmas trees of
not less than 5,000 pounds per square inch working pressure and not less than 10,000 pounds per square inch test
pressure. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.16)
Sec. 4.06.119 Tubing for natural flowing wells
All natural flowing wells shall be equipped with tubing of not more than three inches nominal (3.5" O.D.) in
diameter. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.17)
Sec. 4.06.120 Chokes or beams
All wells shall be equipped with adequate chokes or beams to properly control their flows. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.18)
Sec. 4.06.121 Operation of boiler or generator near well or oil tank
No boiler or electric lighting generator shall be operated nearer than 150 feet from any producing well or from
an oil tank. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.19)
Sec. 4.06.122 Time for swabbing or bailing operations and drill stem tests
All swabbing and/or bailing operations and drill stem tests on oil or gas wells shall be done and completed in the
daylight hours after sunrise and before sunset, except wells near a church, school, or public building. (1999
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/418
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.20)
Sec. 4.06.123 No smoking signs
Printed signs reading: “DANGEROUS, NO SMOKING ALLOWED,” or similar words, shall be posted in
conspicuous places near each producing well, tank battery, and the like. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art.
II, div. III, sec. 3.21)
Sec. 4.06.124 High grass, weeds and combustible trash
All the permittee's premises shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds and combustible trash within the fenced
enclosure around an oil tank or producing well, or, if there is no fenced enclosure, within a radius of 25 feet
around an oil tank or producing well. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.22)
Sec. 4.06.125 Storage tanks and separators
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, construct, or operate, in connection with any
producing well within the city limits, any crude oil storage tanks, except to the extent of two tanks per well for
oil storage, not exceeding a 20' height for each well, 500 barrels capacity for each well connected thereto, and so
constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight and properly vented. A permittee may use, construct, and
operate a steel conventional separator and such other approved tank and appurtenances as are necessary for
treating oil with each of such facilities, to be so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight. Each oil or gas
separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. All such tanks
shall be placed aboveground, and the tanks shall be placed upon a suitable earth or concrete pad.
(b) The tank or tanks shall be enclosed within a conventional type fire wall constructed of compacted earth;
sufficient water shall be used during the fire wall construction to assure adequate compaction.
(c) The fire wall enclosing the tanks shall have a minimum capacity equal to one times the volume of the
tanks enclosed in compliance with EPA and railroad commission guidelines.
(d) The top or crown of the fire wall shall have a normal height of three feet above normal ground elevation.
The location of the tank site shall be approved by the city oil and gas inspector.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.23)
Sec. 4.06.126 Abandonment and plugging
Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to
comply with the regulations of the railroad commission in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a
well. A copy of the plugging and abandonment form shall be furnished to the oil and gas inspector. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.24)
Sec. 4.06.127 Gas hazards
All oil tanks, where there is a gas hazard, shall be gas tight and provided with proper gas vents. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.25)
Sec. 4.06.128 Open flame
No open flame shall be placed inside the derrick of a well showing oil or gas. (1999 Unified General Code, ch.
3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.26)
Sec. 4.06.129 Separation of working tanks
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/418
No field working tank having a capacity of 10,000 barrels or more shall hereafter be built nearer than 200 feet
(measured from shell to shell) to any other like tank. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec.
3.27)
Sec. 4.06.130 Depth of pipelines laid across public road
All oil and gas pipelines laid upon or across a public road or highway must be buried to a reasonably safe depth.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.28)
Sec. 4.06.131 Setting and cementing of surface pipe and oil strings
Standard operating procedures under the applicable rules and regulations of the railroad commission as well as
those ordinary practices adhered to by prudent operators in this area shall be followed in the setting and
cementing of surface casing and oil strings and the testing of surface pipe and oil strings. (1999 Unified General
Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.29)
Sec. 4.06.132 Wellhead assemblies and Christmas trees
All wells shall be equipped with wellhead assemblies and Christmas trees of working and test pressures as
provided in applicable rules and regulations of the railroad commission and in addition shall conform with
standard practice and procedures used by prudent operators in this area. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art.
II, div. III, sec. 3.30)
Sec. 4.06.133 Generators
No boiler or electric lighting generator shall be placed or remain nearer than 150 feet to any producing well or
oil tank. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.31)
Sec. 4.06.134 Slush tanks
Only portable slush tanks for mud or water shall be permitted in connection with the drilling and reworking
operations. The tanks and their contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within 30 days
after completion of the well. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.32)
Sec. 4.06.135 Motor power for operations
All pumping wells shall be equipped with electric motors gas lift facilities, or properly muffled gas or gasoline
engines. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.33)
Sec. 4.06.136 Saltwater disposal
A permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all saltwater or other impurities which such
permittee may bring to the surface, such disposal to be made in such manner as not to contaminate the
freshwater supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art.
II, div. III, sec. 3.34)
Sec. 4.06.137 Protection of freshwater sands
In order to protect the freshwater sands, the casing program of all wells drilled hereafter in this city not
otherwise excepted from the terms of this article shall include surface casing of new or reconditioned pipe.
Freshwater sands to be protected are herein defined as those above a minimum depth of 850 feet or greater depth
as stipulated by the state commission on environmental quality or railroad commission in the event special field
rules are adopted. To protect freshwater, a permittee shall set surface casing to the depth stipulated by the state
commission on environmental quality or the railroad commission, in the event special field rules are adopted,
but in no instance to a depth less than 1,150 feet, and cement with sufficient cement to fill the annulus from the
casing set depth to the surface and provide return of uncontaminated cement at the surface. Cementing shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/418
by pump and plug method. Cement shall be allowed to stand a minimum of 12 hours under pressure and 24
hours before drilling plug or initiating test. After cementing, the surface casing shall be tested by pump pressure
of at least 750 pounds per square inch. If at the end of 30 minutes the pressure shows a drop of 150 pounds per
square inch or more, the casing shall be condemned. After the corrective operations the casing shall again be
tested in the same manner. It is controllingly provided, however, that in the event a permittee can establish to the
satisfaction of the city commission that the freshwater sands can be adequately protected by use of other means
or measures, any or all of the foregoing requirements may be waived by the city commission. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.35)
Sec. 4.06.138 Waiver of requirements
Any and all the provisions of this division may be waived by the city commission upon a showing by the
permittee to the satisfaction of the city commission that the planned manner of operation by the permittee or the
equipment to be used by the permittee will adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.36)
Sec. 4.06.139 Applicability of federal and state regulations
Any violation of state law or any rules, regulations, or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body
having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, installing, maintaining,
or abandoning any oil and/or gas well, pipelines, or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, or in
reference to fire walls, fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection, or convenience of persons or
property, shall also be a violation of this regulation and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions
hereof. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.37)
Sec. 4.06.140 Inspection of equipment; offensive conditions
All equipment necessarily incident to the production of oil or gas within the city limits shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the appropriate qualified inspectors: oil and gas inspector, building inspectors,
electrical inspector, fire and safety inspector, and the like. All operations will be maintained in such a manner
that will minimize dust, noise, noxious odors, vibrations, and other offensive conditions to the surrounding area.
Any above-ground facility which is located within or immediately adjoining any subdivided area where 10% of
the lots or subdivided tracts within 1/2 mile radius thereof are improved with residential structures, or located
within 1/2 mile of any school or public building, shall be considered within a developed residential area. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.38)
Sec. 4.06.141 Loss of well control
Unless preempted by railroad commission rules and regulations, in the event of loss of control of any well, the
operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control of such well, regardless of any other
provision of this regulation, and shall notify the oil and gas inspector as soon as practicable after receipt of
notice by his employees of the occurrence of such loss of well control endangering persons or property. If and
when the oil and gas inspector certifies in writing to the city secretary that, in his opinion, danger to persons or
property exists because of such loss of well control (briefly describing the same) and the operator is not taking,
or is unable to take, all reasonable necessary steps to regain control of such well, the oil and gas inspector may
employ any well control experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other
expenses for labor or material which the oil and gas inspector deems necessary to regain such well. The city
shall have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners who have voluntarily joined
in the drilling of such well, to secure payment of any expenditure so made by the city pursuant to the above
provisions. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.39)
Sec. 4.06.142 Geophysical work
(a) No geophysical work employing underground explosives will be permitted anywhere at any time within
the city limits. Other geophysical systems employing “thumper,” “vibroseis,” or other techniques not employing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/418
explosives will be permitted upon approval of the city commission and proper application and payment of a
$100.00 application fee.
(b) Such application shall include the following:
(1) The date of the application;
(2) The name of the applicant;
(3) The address of the applicant;
(4) A statement of the proposed commencement and completion dates;
(5) A map or plat outlining the areas proposed to be covered by the survey; and
(6) Compliance with the aforementioned sections concerning indemnification bond and public
liability insurance coverage, in amounts determined by the city commission.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.40)
Sec. 4.06.143 Report upon completion of well
Within 30 days after completion of any well, the permittee shall file in the office of the oil and gas inspector a
final report, including the casing program actually utilized in the well. The final report shall specify any changes
in well location, depth, and any other variation from the terms of the permit. The final report shall specify the
perforated interval and include information pertaining to other perforation, if any. (1999 Unified General Code,
ch. 3, art. II, div. III, sec. 3.41)
Sec. 4.06.144 Supplemental permit for deeper drilling
(a) Once a well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be unlawful and
an offense for any person to drill such well to a deeper geological formation than that reached in the prior
drilling operations without the permittee as to such well obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a
supplemental application with the city secretary specifying:
(1) The condition of the well and the casing therein.
(2) The depth to which it is proposed such well be deepened.
(3) The proposed casing program to be used in the connection with proposed deepening operations.
(b) In the event the inspector is satisfied that such well may be deepened with the same degree of safety as
existing in the original well, a supplemental permit may be issued without an additional filing fee to the
permittee authorizing the deepening and operation of the well for such specified depth as applied for, provided
that the derrick and drilling equipment have not been removed from the drill site. In any deeper drilling or any
deeper completion of any deeper production operations, the permittee shall comply with all provisions contained
in this article and applicable to the drilling, completion, and operation of a well or wells.
(c) If the operator has removed the derrick and drilling equipment from the location, the supplemental permit
shall comply with the requirements specified for a permit herein.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. IV, sec. 4.06)
Secs. 4.06.145–4.06.180 Reserved
Division 4. Pipeline Specifications
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/418
Sec. 4.06.181 Compliance
Each and every pipe used for the purpose of transporting natural gas and crude oil, or the products thereof,
within the city shall comply with the provisions of this division. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div.
IV, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 4.06.182 Resistance to internal pressure
Every pipe used to transport oil or gas within the city shall have a calculated resistance to internal pressure value
based on the nominal wall thickness and minimum yield strength of the steel at least two times the value of the
highest working pressure that is ever imposed on such line. This is a safety factor of two and may be derived by
dividing the yield strength as determined in this section by the working pressure. The result of such division
must be two or greater. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. IV, sec. 4.01)
Sec. 4.06.183 Water test
Any pipe employed for the purpose of transporting oil or gas through the city shall be hydrostatically tested with
water to a pressure at least 1-1/2 times as high as the maximum working pressure that will be employed. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. IV, sec. 4.02)
Sec. 4.06.184 Protection from external corrosion
All pipe shall be protected from external corrosion. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. IV, sec. 4.03)
Sec. 4.06.185 Pipe to be buried
All pipe shall be buried beneath the surface of the ground in accordance with specifications provided by the city
engineer. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. IV, sec. 4.04)
Sec. 4.06.186 Expansion loops
Expansion loops shall be provided when the pipe is to be subjected to gases and liquids at a higher than normal
temperature. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. IV, sec. 4.05)
Sec. 4.06.187 Installation standards; excavations
(a) Excavations. No permittee shall make any excavation for any purpose or construct any lines for
conveyance of fuel, water, or minerals on, under, or through the streets and alleys of the city without express
permission of the city in writing, and then only in strict compliance with regulations of the city; provided,
however, that emergency repairs may be made without such permission when in the good faith opinion of the
permittee the delay required to obtain written permission would involve a hazard to person or property.
(b) Gathering and flow lines maximum operating gauge pressure. The gathering lines and flow lines hereafter
installed in the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of transporting oil, gas, or water in conjunction with
the operation of any well, tank or tank battery, or injection or gathering system are hereby limited to a maximum
operating gauge pressure of 250 psi (pounds per square inch) unless otherwise specifically approved by the oil
and gas inspector. The location of any such gathering lines and flow lines, if not specified in the permit, must be
specifically approved by the oil and gas inspector.
(c) Testing. The pipeline shall be tested prior to being placed in service.
(d) As-built plot plans required. The companies responsible for any and all pipelines now existent or hereafter
installed within the corporate limits are hereby required to furnish the city an “as-built” plot plan showing the
location of all their facilities for permanent record with the city.
(e) Cover.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/418
(1) All pipelines within the corporate limits, other than the utility lines of the city and the
franchised distribution system of Southern Gas Company, designed or utilized to transport oil, gas, or
water in connection with the production and transportation of oil and/or gas or for repressurizing
operations shall hereafter be installed with the minimum of cover or backfill specified by the thenapplicable
ANSI code for such pipelines.
(2) The oil and gas inspector is authorized to approve a lesser cover or specify a greater cover or
backfill in special cases when in the opinion of the oil and gas inspector such variation is advisable
and/or will not increase the degree of hazard.
(f) Construction in right-of-way. The requirements for construction in public right-of-way must conform to
such regulations of the city regulating such construction.
(g) Effect on existing streets. The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking up, or
damaging of any street as defined by this article, or leaving upon any street any earth or other material or
obstruction, shall not be permitted unless such persons shall first have obtained written permission from the city
engineer; provided, however, that emergency repairs may be made without such permission when in the good
faith opinion of the permittee the delay required to obtain the written permission would involve a hazard to
person or property.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. II, div. IV, sec. 4.07)
ARTICLE 4.07 SECURITY CAMERAS REGULATIONS*
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
The definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction meaning, and application
of the following words and phrases used in this article.
Check cashing business. A business entity, whether operating as a proprietorship, partnership, association,
limited-liability company, corporation or otherwise that engages in the cashing of checks for a fee.
Consumer products. All food, except for foods that are prepared on site by a business for immediate
consumption by a patron.
Convenience or grocery store. Any business which sells twenty (20) or more consumer products and which
routinely remains open for business sixteen (16) to twenty-four (24) hours a day or between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) a.m. and five o'clock (5:00) a.m.
Media. Material on which audio, video, and electronic data can be recorded for the purposes of making a
permanent record that can be enlarged through projection or other means.
Pawnbroker. A business entity, whether operating as a proprietorship, partnership, association, limited-liability
company, corporation or otherwise that:
(1) Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than chooses in action, securities, or written evidences of indebtedness;
(2) Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it
back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price; or
(3) Lends money upon goods, wares or merchandise pledged, stored or deposited as collateral
security.
Regulated business. Any check cashing business, convenience or grocery store, pawnbroker, used merchandise
dealer or bank operating in the city that is open for a continuous 24-hour period within any given week.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/418
Video surveillance system. A continuous digital surveillance system including cameras, cabling, monitors, and
digital video recorders (DVR).
Sec. 4.07.002 Required
(a) Every regulated business is hereby required to install a video surveillance system. Video surveillance
systems shall be maintained in a proper working order at all times and shall be in operation 24 hours a day, 7
days a week.
(b) The minimum external coverage of such video surveillance system shall include cameras that are
dedicated to viewing all entrances and exits of the business, any loading dock areas and any areas designated for
customer and/or employee parking use. The minimum internal coverage of such video surveillance system shall
include cameras that are dedicated to viewing all persons entering the establishment or all persons approaching
within ten (10) feet of the cash register, or both, or elsewhere if so directed by the chief of police.
(c) All installations of video surveillance systems shall be approved in advance by the police department for
conformance with the requirements of this article prior to installation. An internal approval notice will also
inform customers and employees of the existence of the video surveillance system. A separate external notice of
the video surveillance system, in a form acceptable to the chief of police shall be placed in an approved exterior
area.
Sec. 4.07.003 Standards and areas of coverage
The chief of police shall develop departmental rules and regulations setting forth the minimum specifications for
surveillance cameras. However, at a minimum the surveillance system must be capable of producing and
replaying retrievable images and video recordings on approved media that can be enlarged through projection or
other means. The system must produce and replay color images and video that is identifiable and that adequately
distinguishes the activity and physical features of persons or areas within the premises to the satisfaction of the
chief of police. If the video surveillance system is web-enabled or has wireless capability, the police department
shall be provided the ability to access the live system upon initiation by the regulated business during incidents
requiring a police response or intervention.
Sec. 4.07.004 Notice and access
If a crime is known to have occurred or is believed to have occurred within area covered by the required security
cameras, the regulated business shall contact the city's police department immediately informing the department
of the same. The business shall also, after appropriate legal authorization has been obtained or as otherwise
permitted, provide access to the media containing the recorded event to the department. The regulated business
shall retain the continuous digital images recorded by this system for no less than sixty (60) days.
Sec. 4.07.005 Exceptions
A business which is required to install a video surveillance system, including businesses that have a previously
existing video surveillance system, may request an exemption from all or part of the provisions of this article
from the city's chief of police. The chief of police may exempt a business if he or she finds the business has or
will undertake alternate security procedures that are substantially equal to or more effective in preventing
criminal activity and in assisting in the apprehension of the perpetrators of crime or for the protection of
employees. The chief of police may also authorize temporary extensions of time for installation when a business
demonstrates it is temporarily unable to comply for good cause.
Sec. 4.07.006 Penalty
(a) Any person, organization, corporation or entity that violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
the following penalties:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/418
(1) First violation. A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00.
(2) Second violation. A fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00.
(3) Third and each subsequent violation. A fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00.
(b) For purposes of this article, each day a violation continues is a separate violation.
(Ordinance 10-13 adopted 8/24/10)
ARTICLE 4.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec. 4.08.001 Permit requirements
(a) No person, corporation or association shall sell alcoholic beverages within the city without first having
applied for and been granted a valid permit issued by the city to sell alcoholic beverages. Upon the exhibition of
a license or permit duly issued by the state to the applicant, the building inspection department shall, in the name
of the city, issue and deliver to the applicant a permit to engage in the business in the city of the character
described in and authorized by the license or permit from the state held by the applicant. The license or permit so
issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in a
license or permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as the license or permit from the state
remains in forces.
(b) Inspection of premises. It is hereby required that there be performed an inspection and approval, by the
city inspector under the Unsafe Buildings Code, and the fire marshal under the Life Safety Code or Fire
Prevention Code, of the place for which the permit is being sought, prior to the issuance of a license or within a
one-month period after the license is issued.
(c) Secretary to attest on state license application. Prior to the issuance of a wine and beer license, the city
secretary must attest, in the application for wine and beer permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage
commission that the location for which the license being requested is within a proper zoning area or has received
proper zoning permits.
(Ordinance 09-07, sec. 1, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 4.08.002 Licenses and fees
(a) Relation to state fees. In accordance with the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, section
1.01 et seq., the city shall, from and after the effective date hereof, charge to all holders of permits under the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code who do business within the city limits a fee of an amount equal to one-half (1/2)
the fee charged by the state for such permits.
(b) Fees enumerated. The following are the most common fees to be charged for permits within the city but
this is not an exclusive or complete list of the fees to be charged:
(1) BQ – Wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit: $60.00 for 2 years.
(2) BG – Wine and beer retailer's permit: $175.00 for 2 years.
(3) BF – Beer retailer's off-premises license: $60.00 for 2 years.
(4) MB – Mixed beverage permit: $750.00 after 3rd year for 2 years.
(5) LB – Mixed beverage late hours: $150.00 for 2 years.
(6) PE – Beverage cartage permit: $20.00 for 2 years.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/418
(7) BL – Retail dealer's on-premises late hours license: $250.00 for 2 years.
(8) BF-Q – Beer retailer's off-premises license wine only package store: $150.00 for 2 years.
(9) BF-P – Beer retailer's off-premises license package store permit: $500.00 for 2 years.
(10) PS – Package store testing permit: $25.00 for 2 years.
(11) FB – Food and beverage certificate: $100.00 for 2 years.
(c) Payment of fees. Such fees shall be payable on an biannual basis to the city at city hall, thirty (30) days
prior to expiration of the license.
(d) Any violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
violation. The penalty to be provided for in this subsection shall not be construed as exclusive, and the city
hereby provides that any other remedy available to it in the enforcement of this section, in law or in equity, is not
intended to be, is not to be, and is not foreclosed by the provision of such penalty.
(Ordinance 16-10 adopted 4/26/16)
Sec. 4.08.003 Location near schools, churches and hospitals
(a) The provisions of section 109.33 of Vernon's Annotated Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code are hereby
adopted and, from and after the effective date hereof, it shall be prohibited for any dealer whose place of
business is within three hundred feet (300') of a church, public school, city-owned building or park of the city or
public hospital, to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption from such place of business, except a
permit will be allowed if less than fifty percent (50%) of the gross receipts is from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages of a business that is within the three hundred feet (300') of city-owned buildings, property or
parks.
(b) The sale of beer is prohibited at any location in the city that is within a residential zoning district or an
identified portion of a planned development district restricted to residential uses, except as may otherwise be
allowed by the comprehensive zoning ordinance. The sale of alcoholic beverage shall not be permitted on the
premises of a restaurant with drive-through or curb service. The sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of
any church, public or private school or public hospital is prohibited.
(c) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the
church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door,
and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be in a direct line from the property line of the
public school to property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections.
(d) If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the state alcoholic beverage
commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirements regarding distance from schools, churches,
and other types of premises set forth in this article, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy the distance
requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit. On the sale or transfer of the premises or the
business or the premises in which a new original license or permit is required for the premises, the premises
shall be deemed to satisfy any distance requirements as if the issuance of the new original permit or license were
a renewal of a previously held permit or license. This subsection does not apply to the satisfaction of the
distance requirement prescribed by this section for a public school, except that on the death of a permit or
license holder or a person having an interest in a permit or license this subsection does apply to the holder's
surviving spouse or child of the holder or person if the spouse or child qualifies as a successor in interest to the
permit or license.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/418
(e) The city commission may, upon application, approve and grant a variance from the requirements of
subsection (b) of this section if the commission determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular
instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources,
creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not
effective or necessary, or for any other reason the commission, after consideration of the health, safety, and
welfare of the public and equities of situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.
(f) A violation of this section is an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00, and each violation
shall be a distinct and separate offense and punishable as such.
(Ordinance 09-07, sec. 3, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 4.08.004 Telephone requirements
(a) Required for on-premises business. It shall be unlawful for any person owning a business establishment
engaged in selling beer, wine or any type of alcoholic beverage for on-premises consumption within the city
limits to fail to have a telephone, in working order, located on the premises of such business establishment.
(b) Violation. Any person or corporation engaging in the sale of beer, wine or any type of alcoholic beverage
for on-premises consumption within the city limits without having a telephone in working order on the premises
of such business establishment shall be guilty of a violation under this section.
(c) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall have their on-premises
alcoholic beverage retailer's license suspended until such time as the provisions of this section are complied with
and shall be subject to penalty of this code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 09-07, sec. 4, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 4.08.005 Sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages during extended hours
(a) It shall be lawful for the holder of a mixed beverage permit within the corporate limits of the city to
acquire a mixed beverage late hours permit, and under such mixed beverage late hours permit, sell or offer for
sale any alcoholic beverages during the extended hours allowed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code on the
premises of the mixed beverage permit holder.
(b) Any violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
violation. The penalty to be provided for in this subsection shall not be construed as exclusive, and the city
hereby provides that any other remedy available to it in the enforcement of this section, in law or in equity, is not
intended to be, is not to be, and is not foreclosed by the provision of such penalty.
(Ordinance 09-07, sec. 4, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 4.08.006 Sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages during extended hours for
restaurants
(a) It shall be lawful for a business that holds a permit as a restaurant and that processes, prepares, and serves
food on the premises and is a holder of a beer or wine retailer's permit within the city to sell or offer to sell and
deliver beer or wine during extended hours as provided in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code section 105.04 for
consumption on the premises of the permitted.
(b) Any violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
violation. The penalty to be provided for in this subsection shall not be construed as exclusive, and the city
hereby provides that any other remedy available to it in the enforcement of this section, in law or in equity, is not
intended to be, is not to be, and is not foreclosed by the provision of such penalty.
(Ordinance 09-07, sec. 5, adopted 6/9/09)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/418
ARTICLE 4.09 OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALE OF MERCHANDISE
Sec. 4.09.001 Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to display and sell any new or used goods or materials, including farm
products or agricultural products in their natural state, outdoors on any open unimproved lot or parcel or on any
open area of a lot or parcel with a structure unless excepted or permitted by this chapter.
Sec. 4.09.002 Exceptions
The outdoor display and sale of merchandise on an open or unimproved lot or open area of a lot or parcel with a
structure is only allowed in the following situations:
(1) On the premises or a lot or parcel in which a retail business is operated. The outdoor display
and sale of merchandise shall not result in an elimination, temporarily or permanently, of the number
of off-street parking spaces required for such location under the city's off-street parking ordinance.
Such structure must comply with all building requirements and other requirements mandated by this
code.
(2) The display or sale of agricultural products on the site from which those products were actually
harvested or at a farmer's market location.
(3) The display and sale of merchandise related to a garage sale provided that the display is limited
to the address location and duration of the garage sale permit otherwise issued under the provisions
of this code.
(4) The display and sale of merchandise at a flea market location for which a conditional use
permit has been obtained and maintained under this code.
(5) The petitioner proves to the planning director that the purpose of the display, storage or sale is
to raise funds for an educational charitable philanthropic, religious or patriotic organization. These
permits to be limited to properties owned by the city or a school facility. A permit shall be obtained
from the planning department at a minimum three (3) days before the event.
(6) Political fundraisers shall be allowed on commercial properties that have adequate parking and
restroom facilities on site. A permit shall be obtained from the planning department at a minimum
three (3) days before the event.
(7) The sale of newspapers on a public street between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. provided
that:
(A) The vendor wears a reflective vest when selling newspapers in the public right-of-way.
(B) The vendor does not stack or store newspapers in the median of the street.
(C) The vendor does not stand or enter into the traveled portion of any street except to
complete the sales transaction.
(D) The vendor has a newspaper sales permit on file with the city for the street location.
(E) The vendor does not sell in a street under construction, reconstruction or maintenance.
(F) The vendor shows proof of liability insurance and shall maintain such insurance for the
application period to be no more than one (1) year. Such limits of liability shall be a minimum
of $100,000.00 dollars per occurrence and $250,000.00 in the aggregate.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/418
(G) The vendor executes an indemnity and hold harmless agreement for the benefit of the
city.
Sec. 4.09.003 Planning director to issue permit
The planning director or his/her designee, shall issue to any applicant applying thereof, who has complied with
all the requirements of this article, a permit authorizing the open-air display and sale of goods within the city.
Such permit is not transferable and shall only be applicable to the person or entity applying and receiving such
permit.
Sec. 4.09.004 Additional license required
The granting of a permit as provided for in this division shall not excuse any person from applying for and
receiving any other license or permit required by the city, the county or the state or any other regulatory
authority having jurisdiction thereof.
Sec. 4.09.005 Penalty
An offense under this article shall be punishable by a fine up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) per offense.
(Ordinance 13-07 adopted 4/23/13)
ARTICLE 4.10 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.10.001 Purpose and intent
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the
purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the context of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the constitution, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(b) It is the intent of the city commission that the location regulations of section 4.10.013 of this article are
promulgated pursuant to chapter 243 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Sec. 4.10.002 Definitions
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment that as one of its principal businesses purposes
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion-pictures,
video reproductions or other visual representation which depict or describe “specified sexual
activities” or “specified sexual areas”; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified
sexual activities.”
Adult cabaret. A night club, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/418
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or
by “specified sexual activities”; or
(3) Films, motion-pictures, video reproductions, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion-pictures, video reproductions or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises that availability of this type of photographic reproductions;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sublet the room for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours.
Adult motion-picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motionpictures,
video reproductions or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized
by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Chief of police. The chief of police of the City of San Juan, Texas or his/her designated agent.
Child-care facility. A building used as a day nursery, children's boarding home, child placement agency,
religious or charitable encampment for children or any other place for the care or custody of children under
sixteen (16) years of age.
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes connected
with faith or for propagating a particular form of belief.
Dwelling unit. A building or structure, manufactured home or mobile home used and occupied for human
habitation.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort agency. A person who, or business association that, furnishes, offers or advertises to furnish escorts as
one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment. Includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of any existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/418
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Footcandle. A unit of illuminance or illumination, equivalent to the illumination produced by a source of one
candle at a distance of one foot and equal to one lumen incident per square foot.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical
areas” is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any other form of consideration.
Nudity or a state of nudity.
(1) The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast;
or
(2) A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals, or areola of the female breast.
Operates or causes to be operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to
be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part
owner, or licensee of the business.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that offers for any form of consideration.
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion-picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude modeling studio or a sexual encounter center.
Specified anatomical areas. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
Specified sexual activities. Includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
(1) through (3) above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/418
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. The increase in floor area occupied by business by
more than twenty percent (20%), as the floor area exists on the date of passage of this article.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
Sec. 4.10.003 Classification of sexually oriented businesses
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabaret;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion-picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
Sec. 4.10.004 License requirements
(a) A person commits an offense if he/she operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued
by the city for the particular type of business.
(b) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application form
shall be sworn to and shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale and drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6"). The police chief has the option to reject
the application if the sketch or diagram is not legible in his/her opinion.
(c) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be found
to be in compliance with the law by the city's chief building official and fire marshal.
(d) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the
application for a license as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other
than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign
the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 4.10.005 and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is, granted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/418
Sec. 4.10.005 Issuance of a license
(a) The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the city secretary to an applicant within thirty
(30) days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city for any taxes, fines
or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented
business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license
or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this
article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two
(2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect.
(5) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a
sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the city's
chief building official and fire marshal as being in compliance with applicable building and fire
codes.
(7) The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
(8) An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within
the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated that he/she is unable to operate or manage a
sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action
by law enforcement officers.
(9) An applicant for the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any
section of this article.
(10) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving any of the
following offenses as described in chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code:
(A) Prostitution.
(B) Promotion of prostitution.
(C) Aggravated promotion of prostitution.
(D) Compelling prostitution.
(E) Obscenity.
(F) Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor.
(G) Sexual performance by a child.
(H) Possession or promotion of child pornography.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/418
(11) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving any of the
following offenses as described in chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code:
(A) Public lewdness.
(B) Indecent exposure.
(C) Indecency with a child.
(12) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving any of the
offenses as described in chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code.
(13) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving incest,
solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in chapter 25 of the Texas Penal
Code.
(14) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving criminal
attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the following offenses for which:
(A) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of
a misdemeanor offense;
(B) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
(C) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period.
(b) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or
applicant's spouse.
(c) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
Sec. 4.10.006 License fee
To process an initial application for a proposed sexually oriented business within the city limits the fee shall be
five hundred ($500.00) dollars. If approved the annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be
$1,000.00.
Sec. 4.10.007 Inspection
(a) An applicant or licensee shall allow representatives of the police department, fire department and the city's
chief building official to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(b) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he
refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police and fire departments or the
chief building official at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to areas of an adult motel that are currently being rented by a
customer as a permanent or temporary habitation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/418
Sec. 4.10.008 Expiration of license
(a) Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making
application as provided in section 4.10.005. Application for renewal should be made no more than thirty (30)
days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the
expiration date of the license shall not be affected.
(b) When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one
year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of renewal
of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date denial became final.
Sec. 4.10.009 Suspension
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a
licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article;
(2) Engaged in excessive consumption of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented
business premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
article;
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
(5) Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and
law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
Sec. 4.10.010 Revocation
(a) The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 4.10.009 occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(b) The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police
during the application process;
(2) A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee, an agent or an employee knowingly operated a sexually oriented business during a
period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 4.10.005(a)(10)–(13) for which the
time period required in section 4.10.005(a)(14) has not lapsed;
(6) On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons
committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, of a crime listed in section
4.10.005(a)(10)–(13), for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were
employees of the sexually oriented business at the time of the offenses were committed;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/418
(7) A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The
term “sexual contact” shall have the same meaning as it is defined in section 21.01 of the Texas Penal
Code; or
(8) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes,
sales taxes or other taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(d) Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as grounds for revoking the license unless the licensee,
agent or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or
sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
(e) When the chief of police revokes a license the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee
shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the revocation became
effective. If subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date
the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under section (b)(5), an applicant may not be granted
another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 4.10.005(a)(14) has elapsed since
the termination of any sentence, parole or probation.
Sec. 4.10.011 Appeal
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, he shall send to the
applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his/her action and the right to
an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, the applicant or licensee whose
application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to
appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within thirty (30) days after
the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. The applicant or licensee shall bear the burden of
proof in court.
Sec. 4.10.012 Transfer of license
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another person, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented
business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
Sec. 4.10.013 Location of sexually oriented business
(a) A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
within two thousand (2,000) feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private elementary school or secondary school;
(3) A boundary of any residential district that has an existing dwelling unit, as defined in the city's
zoning ordinance;
(4) A public park adjacent to any residential district, as defined in the city's zoning ordinance;
(5) The property line of a lot of record devoted to residential use;
(6) A child-care facility; or
(7) Any building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/418
(b) A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial
enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within two thousand (2,000) feet
of another sexually oriented business.
(c) A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of
more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of
floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
(d) For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where, a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church, child-care facility, public or private elementary or secondary school, or building or structure in which
alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district
with an existing dwelling, or a residential lot of record.
(e) For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to any intervening structures or objects, from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(f) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article, that is in violation of
subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed twelve 12 months unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more
sexually oriented businesses are within two thousand (2,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible
location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is/are nonconforming.
(g) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use
by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public
or private elementary or secondary school, child-care facility, public park, residential zoning district with an
existing dwelling unit, or residential lot of record, or any building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are
offered for sale, within two thousand (2,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only
to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license
has expired or has been revoked.
Sec. 4.10.014 Exemption from location restrictions
(a) If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually
oriented business establishment is in violation of any provision of this article, then the applicant may, not later
than ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for
an exemption from the locational restrictions of this article.
(b) If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the city commission shall
consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the
written request is received and notices of the hearing must be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the
applicant's property.
(c) A hearing by the city commission may proceed if a quorum of the city commission is present. The city
commission shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do
not apply.
(d) The city commission may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restriction of this
article if it makes the following findings:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/418
(1) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect
on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or general welfare;
(2) That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article;
(3) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not, in the city commission's
opinion, downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the
development of urban blight;
(4) That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to
any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or
restoration; and
(5) That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed.
(e) The city commission shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote
shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the
evidence. The decision of the city commission is final.
(f) If the city commission grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the
city commission's action. Upon expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the
locational restrictions of this article until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(g) If the city commission denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least
twelve (12) months' have elapsed since the date of the city commission's action.
(h) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article other
than the locational restrictions of section 4.10.013.
Sec. 4.10.015 Additional regulations for escort agencies
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person commits an offense if he/she acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years.
Sec. 4.10.016 Additional regulations for nude model studios
(a) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the
person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(c) A person commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or knowingly allows
another to appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be
viewed from the public right-of-way.
(d) A nude studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a
sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
Sec. 4.10.017 Additional regulations for adult theaters and motion-picture theaters
(a) A person commits an offense if he/she knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion-picture
theater.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/418
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he/she knowingly appears in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion-picture theater.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under eighteen (18)
years was in a restroom not open to the public view or persons of the opposite sex.
Sec. 4.10.018 Additional regulations for adult motels
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article.
(b) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he/she rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or subrents
the same sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
Sec. 4.10.019 Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space,
a film, video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply
with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied
by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more
manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, which lights are controlled by which
switches and designating a portion of the premises in which patrons are not permitted. Only agents or
employees shall have access to light switches. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to
some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale and with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6"). The chief of police may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration for the premises has not been altered since it was first submitted.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the
prior approval of the chief of police.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is
on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times where any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from the manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/418
to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any, agents and
employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this
section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all
times that any patron is present on the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted
in the application filed.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
(1) footcandle as measured at the floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it also shall be the duty of any agents and
employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times when any patron is present on the premises.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(7) above commits an offense if he/she
knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
Sec. 4.10.020 Display of sexually explicit material to minors
(a) A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen
(17) years, he/she displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or video reproduction in a manner
calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for
commercial gain, including any of the following:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a portion of the
female breast;
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly larger or fuller than normal state because of swelling,
whether covered or uncovered.
(b) In this section “display” means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from
an agent or employee of the business establishment:
(1) It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
(2) The cover, outside packaging on the item or contents of the item is visible to members of the
general public.
Sec. 4.10.021 Enforcement
(a) Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 4.10.013 of this article,
upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed three thousand ($3,000.00) dollars for each offense and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs.
(b) If the sexually oriented business is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of
section 4.10.004(a) or section 4.10.013 of this article is punishable as a class A misdemeanor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/418
(c) Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section above, any person violating a provision of this article
other than section 4.10.013, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed three thousand ($3,000.00)
dollars for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under sections 4.10.004(a), 4.10.013, 4.10.016(d) of this article that a person
appearing in a state of nudity of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the state, a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely by or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; or
(B) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
(C) Where no more than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any time.
(D) It is a defense to prosecution under section 4.10.004(a) or section 4.10.013 of this article
that each item of descriptive, printed film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a
whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
Sec. 4.10.022 Injunctive relief
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in
violation of section 4.10.013 of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal
violations.
(Ordinance 15-04 adopted 4/14/15)
ARTICLE 4.11 GREASE TRAPS
Sec. 4.11.001 Applicability and prohibitions
(a) This article shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as
defined in this article.
(b) Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
(c) Facilities generating fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or
food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in section
4.11.003 of this article. These facilities include but are not limited to restaurants, food manufacturers, food
processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or
otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption.
(d) No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the
POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause
pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/418
Sec. 4.11.002 Definitions
All terms used in this article shall be given their meaning as provided by the Texas Food Establishment Rules found in 25
Tex. Admin. Code, ch. 229, secs. 161–171 and 173–175, including any future amendments of such rules, unless otherwise
defined in the following definitions.
Act. Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et.
seq.
BOD. The value of the 5-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of “Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.”
COD. The value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of “Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.”
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain
multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical
test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time-to-time. All are sometimes referred to
herein as “grease” or “greases.”
Generator. Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces
a grease trap waste.
Grease trap or interceptor. A device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light
density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection
system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities,
prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and
interceptors are also referred to herein as “grease traps/interceptors.”
Grease trap waste. Material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a
commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting
from de-watering processes.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source.
Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources
inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is
a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit.
pH. The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10)
of the hydrogen ion concentration.
POTW or publicly owned treatment works. A treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as
defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the
storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also
includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term
also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the terms “sanitary
sewer system” and “POTW” may be used interchangeably.
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies.
Transporter. A person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEO to transport sewage sludge, water
treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical, toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/418
with 30 Texas Administrative Code sec. 312.142.
TSS. The value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of “Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater.”
User. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes or
permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such
wastewater from mobile sources.
Sec. 4.11.003 Installation requirements and maintenance requirements
(a) Installations.
(1) New facilities. Food processing or food service establishments which are newly proposed or
constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service
facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, operate and maintain
a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable
ordinances. Minimum size of the trap for new facilities shall be 1,000 gallons unless a justifiable
design can be provided at the time of plan review, or special exceptions are granted from the building
official or director of utilities. Grease traps/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Existing facilities. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be operated and maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with these model standards,
unless specified in writing and approved by the POTW.
(b) Cleaning and maintenance.
(1) Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at
all times.
(2) Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the
tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional
transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with
30 Texas Administrative Code sec. 312.143.
(3) All grease trap/interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with
federal, state, or local regulation.
(c) Self-cleaning.
(1) Grease trap self-cleaning operators must receive approval from the POTW annually prior to
removing grease from their own grease trap(s) located inside a building, provided:
(A) The grease trap is no more than fifty (50) gallons in liquid/operating capacity;
(B) Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g. absorb liquids into solid
form and dispose into trash after being double bagged);
(C) The local solid waste authority allows such practices;
(D) Grease trap waste is placed in a leak proof, sealable container(s) located on the premises
and in an area for the transporter to pump-out; and
(E) Detailed records on these activities are maintained.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/418
(2) Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed self-cleaning request to the
POTW for approval. The written request shall include the following information:
(A) Business name and street address;
(B) Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title, and phone number;
(C) Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size
(in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and
(D) Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce
them for compliance inspections.
(3) Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements; procedures and detailed recordkeeping
outlined in their approved application, to ensure compliance with this article. A maintenance log shall
be kept by self-cleaning operators that indicates, at a minimum, the following information:
(A) Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced;
(B) Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/interceptor;
(C) Waste disposal method used;
(D) Gallons of grease removed and disposed of;
(E) Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and
(F) Signature of the operator after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed,
disposed of properly, grease trap/interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were
replaced and in operable condition.
(4) Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject to enforcement action including
fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program.
(d) Cleaning schedules.
(1) Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that
sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease
trap/interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no
visible grease is observed in discharge.
(2) Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a
minimum of every ninety (90) days for traps greater than 50 gallons and every thirty (30) days for
traps up to 50 gallons, or more frequently when:
(A) Twenty-five (25) percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease
interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains
floating materials, sediment, oils or greases;
(B) The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established
by the POTW; or
(C) If there is a history of noncompliance.
(3) Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the POTW a request
in writing for an exception to the ninety (90) day pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/418
The POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
(A) The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap/interceptor
will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with
established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined
by the POTW; or
(B) Less than twenty-five (25) percent of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease
interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains
floating materials, sediment, oils or greases.
(4) In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and
inspected at least once every 180 days.
(e) Manifest requirements.
(1) Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used
for recordkeeping purposes.
(2) Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each
individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall
include:
(A) Name, addresses, telephone, and commission registration number of transporter;
(B) Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who generated the waste and
the date collected;
(C) Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported;
(D) Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing
the waste;
(E) Date and place where the waste was deposited;
(F) Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility
where the waste was deposited;
(G) Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste
and the amount of waste received;
(H) The volume of the grease waste received; and
(I) A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and
regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported.
(3) Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows.
(A) One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed
and given to the generator at the time of waste pickup.
(B) The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely
filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest.
(C) One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/418
(D) One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the
collection and disposition of waste.
(E) One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated
the wastes within 15 days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility.
(F) One part of the manifest shall go to the POTW within 15 days after the waste is received
at the disposal or processing facility.
(4) Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five years and be
readily available for review by the POTW.
(f) Alternative treatment.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the
introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents, and
emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and
include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection (f)(1) that the use of surfactants or
soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations.
(3) Bioremediation media may be used with the POTW's approval if the person has proved to the
satisfaction of the POTW that laboratory testing which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be
used has verified that:
(A) The media is a pure, live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of
domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water
temperatures of 160/F (71/C).
(B) The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap
and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer.
(C) The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer.
(D) The BOD, COD, and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does
not exceed the BOD, COD, and TSS which would be discharged if the product were not being
used and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between 5 and 11.
(4) All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection (f)(3) shall be scientifically
sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other
pollutant levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and which are defined in
title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 136 or title 30, Texas Administrative Code sec. 319.11.
Testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval.
Sec. 4.11.004 Schedule of penalties
(a) If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line the
generator shall owe a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and
$2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in
penalty by $500.00 and may also result in termination of services.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a written warning for the first
violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/418
a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two- year period. Consistent violations will result in a
$500.00 increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service.
Sec. 4.11.005 Enforcement
(a) The director of utilities or his/her designee shall have the administrative authority to enforce this article.
Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation, or
requirements contained in the ordinance, the city will implement the enforcement response plan. Enforcement
response necessary to initiate corrective action may include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Notice of violation. The city may serve upon any user a written notice stating the nature of
violation. Within 24 hours of the time and date of the notice or first regular work day, a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted for approval by the director of utilities.
(2) The city may suspend water service when such suspension necessary, in the opinion of the
director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which:
(A) Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons or the environment; and/or
(B) Causes stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the
sanitary sewer system.
(b) Any person notified of a suspension of water service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In
the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps
as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of water utility services, to prevent or minimize damage
to the sanitary sewer collection system or endangerment of any individuals.
(c) The city shall reinstate utility services when such conditions causing the suspension have been corrected or
eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the cause(s) of the violation and the
measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city, director of utilities, within
fifteen days of the date of the occurrence.
Sec. 4.11.006 Injunctive relief
A person who causes a violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal
violations.
(Ordinance 2017-30 adopted 12/5/17)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE CODE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/418
Sec. 5.02.001 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Fire Code. The adoption of this
code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to maintenance of
buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
International Fire Code - 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 04-008, sec. 1, adopted 6/8/04; Ordinance 15-22 adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 5.02.002 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ordinance 04-008, sec. 2, adopted
6/8/04)
Sec. 5.02.003 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 04-008, sec.
3, adopted 6/8/04)
ARTICLE 5.03 LIFE SAFETY CODE
Sec. 5.03.001 Adopted
(a) It is the desire of the city to adopt the 2003 edition of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. The adoption of this
code is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to maintenance of
buildings within the city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare.
(b) The following code is hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein fully:
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code - 2003 edition.
(Ordinance 05-005, sec. 1, adopted 2/22/05)
Sec. 5.03.002 Conflicting regulations
Any matter in said code which is contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ordinance 05-005, sec. 2, adopted
2/22/05)
Sec. 5.03.003 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (Ordinance 05-005, sec.
3, adopted 2/22/05)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 5.04.001 Classified positions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/418
(a) As per the authority specified in section 143.012, Texas Local Gov't Code, as amended, the following
classifications are hereby created and recognized in the city's fire department below the position of department
head:
Deputy chief - Fire marshal
Lieutenant
Driver - Engineer
Firefighter.
(b) The number of budgeted positions within each classification recognized above shall be determined as a
component of the city's budgetary process.
(Ordinance 09-17, secs. 1, 3, adopted 10/27/09)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 SMOKING
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.02.001–6.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Smoking in Public Places†
Sec. 6.02.031 Definitions
The following words, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Smoke or smoking. The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted
smoking equipment or device, and the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of
any kind. (Ordinance 2000-023, sec. 1.00, adopted 1/24/01)
Sec. 6.02.032 Administration and enforcement
The administrative official for the purposes of this division shall be the city manager and his or her assistants,
deputies, and department heads insofar as they may be charged by the city manager and the provisions of this
division with duties and responsibilities with reference thereto. Without limitation, the directors or heads of
departments responsible for planning, public works, water and wastewater, finance and building inspections
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/418
shall ordinarily administer and enforce the provisions of this division. (Ordinance 2000-023, sec. 3.00, adopted
1/24/01)
Sec. 6.02.033 Penalty
(a) The penalty for violation of any section or other part of this division is established so that the minimum
fine shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the maximum fine shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each
day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) In the event a defendant has once previously been fined for a violation hereof, the defendant shall be fined
an amount no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation [and no] less than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for a third violation and for each violation thereafter. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2000-023, sec. 4.00, adopted 1/24/01)
Sec. 6.02.034 Prior offenses; more restrictive provisions
(a) Offenses and liabilities preserved. All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective
date of this division shall be treated as though all prior applicable regulations and amendments were in full force
and effect for the purposes of sustaining any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and
liabilities.
(b) More restrictive provisions. Wherever higher or more restrictive standards are established by the
provisions of any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation than are established by the provisions of this
division, the provisions of such other statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
(Ordinance 2000-023, sec. 5.00, adopted 1/24/01)
Sec. 6.02.035 Smoking prohibited in certain places; designation of smoking areas; defenses
(a) It is an offense for a person to smoke in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas, except those areas
designated as smoking areas:
(1) Any conference room, meeting room, or area open to the public of any facility owned, operated
or managed by the city, except those conference rooms or meeting rooms that are not generally open
to the public and are specifically designated by the mayor for the city as a smoking area.
(2) An elevator used or that may be used by the public.
(3) A hospital or nursing home corridor providing direct access to any patient's room.
(4) An area marked with a “no smoking” sign in accordance with subsection (b) by the owner or
person in control of a hospital, nursing home, or retail or service establishment serving the general
public.
(5) Any facility of a public primary or secondary [school] or an enclosed theater, motion picture
theater, library, museum or public transportation vehicle, such as buses, taxicabs and city owned or
operated vehicles, except on charter buses for private hire or in taxicabs clearly designated by the
operator to permit smoking.
(6) All rooms in which hearings or meetings are open to the public.
(b) The owner or person in control of an establishment or area designated in subsection (a) of this section shall
post a sign, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at or near each public entrance to the establishment. The sign
shall contain substantially the words “NO SMOKING EXCEPT IN DESIGNATED AREAS.” The sign may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/418
include the universal sign for no smoking or other language that clearly prohibits smoking. If such premises do
not have a designated smoking area, then the sign may merely say “NO SMOKING AS PER CITY OF SAN
JUAN ORDINANCE 2000-023."
(c) The owner or person in control of an establishment or area described in subsection (a)(4) or (a)(5) may
designate an area, but is not required to so designate any area, including but not limited to lobbies, waiting
rooms or lounges, as a smoking area, provided that the designated area may not:
(1) Include the entire establishment;
(2) Include the cashier areas or over-the-counter service areas or service lines;
(3) Include the viewing area of any theater or motion picture theater;
(4) Be larger than is reasonably necessary in order to accommodate the smoking public, but shall
have ashtrays or suitable containers for extinguishing smoking materials.
(d) In any establishment or area having a smoking area, the nonsmoking remaining area must:
(1) Be clearly marked and separated from the smoking area;
(2) Be clearly designated by appropriate signs visible to patrons within the area indicating that the
area is designated nonsmoking.
(e) It is a defense to prosecution under this division if the person was smoking:
(1) In a designated smoking area that is posted as a designated smoking area with appropriate
signs;
(2) In a location that is an administrative area or office area of an establishment [described in]
subsection (a)(5) and (a)(6) set forth above;
(3) In a location that is a retail or service establishment serving the general public with less than
750 square feet of public showroom or service space or having only one employee on duty;
(4) In a location that is a retail or service establishment which is primarily engaged in the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products or smoking implements;
(5) While as a participant in a theatrical performance;
(6) In a situation in which the person is present at an event in which an entire room or hall is used
for a social function by a private entity or individual and seating arrangements are under the control
of the sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor or person in charge of the place. However, the
sponsor of the social function may designate a nonsmoking area.
(Ordinance 2000-023, sec. 2.00, adopted 1/24/01)
ARTICLE 6.03 STAGNANT WATER, WEEDS, RUBBISH, AND OTHER UNSANITARY
CONDITIONS*
Sec. 6.03.001 Places where water may accumulate
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot(s) in the city to permit or allow depressions
or containers or places on said lots where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or permit same to remain.
Sec. 6.03.002 Stagnant water
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/418
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot(s) in the city to permit or allow the
accumulation of stagnant water, or to permit same to remain.
Sec. 6.03.003 Carrion, filth, or other unwholesome matter
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or yard in
the city to permit or allow any carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain
within the respective boundary of the lot or parcel and to extend beyond such boundaries to the centerlines of
adjacent or abutting streets or alleys.
Sec. 6.03.004 Weeds, brush, or rubbish
(a) Within the respective boundary of the lot or parcel and to extend beyond such boundaries to the centerlines
of adjacent or abutting streets or alleys wherever a lot or parcel contains weeds and/or brush over twelve (12)
inches tall within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the curbline of adjacent streets, and, where no curb exists, to the
edge of the street or road surface, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any building or within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of any public or private grammar, middle or high school property line, such condition is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is a public necessity.
(b) All lots and parcels of land within the city shall be kept completely free and clear of garbage, trash, debris,
rubbish, waste, wood and metal scrap, inoperative or abandoned appliances and furniture or other unsightly,
objectionable or unsanitary material. Weed and grass cuttings, however, need not be removed unless they will be
of such quantity as to be a hazard to pedestrians, constituting a public nuisance, and notice is given by the code
enforcement officer to the property owner, tenant, or occupant.
(c) Wherever garbage, trash, waste, wood and metal scrap, items of furniture, inoperative appliances or
rubbish shall exist, covering or partially covering any lot or parcel, such condition is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is a public necessity.
(d) If a tract of land is smaller than three (3) acres, the entire tract shall be kept free of weeds and brush over
twelve (12) inches tall.
(e) It is the duty and responsibility of the owner of a lot or parcel of land within the city to keep and maintain
said lot or parcel of land in compliance with the above standards.
(f) The owner of the lot or parcel shall abate any violations of this section to comply with city code standards
within the time period of seven (7) days of the notice's receipt or seven (7) days of the date of the notice's final
publication as provided by this article.
Sec. 6.03.005 Notice of violation
(a) Whenever the code enforcement officer discovers or receives information of the existence of any lot or
parcel not meeting the standards set out in this article, the code enforcement officer, shall notify the owner of the
lot or parcel of the violation.
(b) Unless specified otherwise, notice under this article shall be given:
(1) Personally in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner's post office address sent by certified U.S. mail, return receipt
requested; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown:
(A) By publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice within ten (10)
consecutive days; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/418
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the lot or parcel to
which the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the lot or
parcel to which the violation relates, if the lot or parcel contains no buildings.
(c) When the known owner is a corporation, notice shall be served or addressed delivery to the president, vicepresident,
or registered agent of the corporation. When the corporation shall fail to appoint or maintain a
registered agent, or whenever its officers or registered agent cannot with reasonable diligence be found at the
registered office, duplicate copies by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(d) Unless specified otherwise, notice under this article shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the lot or parcel;
(2) A description of the code violations that occurred on the lot or parcel;
(3) The time period, as provided in this article, in which the owner must abate the nuisance;
(4) A statement that, upon failure of the owner to abate the situation within such time period, the
city may cause the correction and abatement work to be done on its own and charge the owner for the
expense involved as set out in this article and, upon failure of the owner to pay the city for such
expense, fix a lien on the lot or parcel for the expense involved.
(e) The city may also inform the owner that, if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature
that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of notice, the city
without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the lot or
parcel. Notice of this subsection's provisions may be included in any notice of violation allowed under this
article. Notice of this subsection's provisions shall be satisfied if it is given:
(1) Be certified mail, return receipt requested; or
(2) By personal delivery with receipt signed by the owner.
If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not
been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action
permitted by this article to abate the violation and may assess expenses against the owner of the lot or parcel.
(Ordinance 15-14, sec. 1, adopted 9/21/15)
Sec. 6.03.006 Penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any land within the city to knowingly, recklessly, or with
criminal negligence fail to have any weeds, brush or rubbish mowed, cut, or removed or otherwise bring
property into compliance with the standards set forth in section 6.03.004.
(b) Upon conviction for violation hereof, the owner shall be fined an amount no less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, however, in the event a defendant has
once previously been convicted under this article, the defendant shall be fined an amount no less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) and shall be fined no less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a third conviction
and for each conviction therefore [thereafter]. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ordinance 99-011, sec. 6.00, adopted 10/13/99)
Sec. 6.03.007 Abatement by city; payment of city's costs; removal of trees for access
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/418
(a) If abatement to city code standards does not occur within the time period provided in this article, the city
may cause the work necessary to abate the violation to be done at the owner's expense. This remedy shall be in
addition to the remedy provided in section 6.03.006.
(b) Whenever the city shall abate a violation provided by this article, the code compliance director shall select
a private contractor to cut the vegetation and/or clean the land to bring the lot or parcel into compliance.
(c) A statement of the costs incurred by the city to bring the lot or parcel into compliance shall be mailed to
the owner of such premises, if the owner and mailing address are known, and, if not known, may be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement shall demand payment within thirty (30) days from
the date of receipt or publication. If the statement has not been paid within such period, the mayor, the city's
health authority, or other official designated by the mayor may file a statement of expenses incurred with the
county clerk stating the owner's name, if known, and the legal description of the lot or parcel. The statement of
expenses, or a certified copy of the statement, shall be prima facie proof of the expenses incurred. Such
statement shall be and the city shall have a privileged lien for expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate
of ten (10) percent on the amount due from the date incurred by the city. Such liens shall be inferior only to tax
liens and liens for street improvements. The city may foreclose such lines in a proceeding brought in accordance
with applicable law. The remedy allowed in this subsection shall not be the city's sole remedy.
(d) Although large trees are not covered hereby, it may be necessary at times to remove trees or parts thereof
in order for the city crews or city contractors to effect entry of mowing or cleaning equipment of lots or parcels
or portions of lots or parcels not meeting standards established in this article. In such cases trees or parts thereof
may be removed only if there is not other reasonable way to effect such entry and only to the extent absolutely
necessary to effect such entry; provided that no tree of six-inch diameter or greater at fifty-four (54) inches
above the ground shall be removed without coordination or prior consent of the city's arborist. The cost of this
work shall be included in the cost charged to the owner.
(e) The city may assess to the owner of such lot or parcel a charge for all work done or improvements made as
is needed to bring and [the] lot or parcel into compliance with this city code, including an administrative expense
of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00), and cause the expense thereof to be assessed on the real estate, lot,
or lots upon which such expense is incurred.
(Ordinance 99-011, sec. 7.00, adopted 10/13/99)
Sec. 6.03.008 Summary abatement
(a) All violations of section 6.03.004 occurring within one thousand (1,000) feet of public or private grammar
school, middle school, or high school property lines are hereby declared to be public health and safety
emergencies, and the city shall summarily abate these violations at the owner's expense as provided in this
article.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions within this article, weeds within the location parameters enumerated
in section 6.03.004 that have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches and are an immediate danger to the
health, life, or safety of any person may be abated by the city at the owner's expense as provided in this article
without prior notice to the owner of the lot or parcel.
(c) No later than the tenth (10th) day after the abatement, the owner of the lot or parcel shall be notified in
accordance with this article. The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the lot or parcel;
(2) A description of the code violations that occurred on the lot or parcel;
(3) A statement that the city has abated the violation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/418
(4) The date the city completed the abatement;
(5) A statement that the owner will be charged for the expense involved as set out in this article,
and, upon failure of the owner to pay the city for such expense, a lien may be fixed on the lot or
parcel for the expense involved; and
(6) An explanation of the lot or parcel owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the
abatement of the violation, and a statement of the necessary procedures and time deadlines to request
such hearing.
(Ordinance 99-011, sec. 8.00, adopted 10/13/99)
Sec. 6.03.009 Award of bids for work
The city may award any quantity of work under sections 6.03.007 and 6.03.008 of the city code to any person
whose bid shall be accepted by the city commission as being the best for doing such work during a stipulated
time, not exceeding one (1) year. (Ordinance 99-011, sec. 9.00, adopted 10/13/99)
Sec. 6.03.010 Bees and wasps
(a) It shall be unlawful to have bees or wasps or to foster the existence of bees or wasps in private property
within the corporate limits unless located in an approved honeybee colony.
(b) Whenever the code enforcement officer discovers or receives information of the existence of bees or
wasps in any lot or parcel that causes injury or damage to persons or property the code enforcement officer shall
notify the lot or parcel owner in writing of the violation and give the owner ten days to remedy the situation.
(c) To protect the general welfare of the community the city reserves the right to use city personnel or to hire a
private contractor to remedy the situation that may cause injury or damage to persons or property if determined
by the city's police or fire chief that action must be taken immediately to protect the health and general welfare
of the surrounding residents without notice in writing to the lot or parcel owner.
(d) Any expenses the city undertakes to remedy the above-referenced situation(s) the city shall have a right to
invoice the lot or parcel owner for such expenses. Failure to pay the invoice within 30 days shall result on the
filing of a lien to the real estate for those expenses plus administrative expenses and interest at ten (10) percent
per year.
(Ordinance 15-14, sec. 1, adopted 9/21/15)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/418
Sec. 7.02.001 Technology fund and building security fund
(a) Technology fund established.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, to be hereinafter
known as the technology fund, pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The city municipal court clerk shall deposit the court costs collected under this subsection into
such fund. Such fund shall only be used to pay for those items otherwise authorized under the city
budget process and as set out under article 102.0172(d), Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) Building security fund established.
(1) There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund.
(2) The city municipal court clerk shall deposit the court costs collected under this subsection into
such fund. Such fund shall only be used to pay for those items otherwise authorized under the city
budget process and as set out under art. 102.017(d), Code of Criminal Procedure.
(c) Amount of technology fee. The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(d) Amount of building security fee. The fee shall be in the amount of $3.00.
(e) Final conviction defined; assessment and collection of fee.
(1) The fee imposed by subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be assessed and collected from
the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A
defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(B) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication
community supervision; or
(C) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(2) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed after the effective date of this
section.
(3) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city's finance director.
(Ordinance 99-018, secs. 1.00–6.00, adopted 12/1/99)
(f) Designated use of funds; administration.
(1) The municipal court technology fund shall be used exclusively to finance expenditures
authorized by the Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.0172. (Ordinance 99-018, secs. 1.00–6.00,
adopted 12/1/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) The municipal court building security fund shall be used exclusively to finance expenditures
authorized by the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(3) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city commission.
(Ordinance 99-018, secs. 1.00–6.00, adopted 12/1/99)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/418
State law references–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017; authority of
municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
ARTICLE 7.03 MUNICIPAL COURT MARSHAL
Sec. 7.03.001 Establishment
There shall be the position of municipal court marshal(s). The position may consist of a court administrator,
municipal court marshal, deputy municipal court marshal(s), part-time deputy municipal court marshal(s), and
reserve deputy municipal court marshal(s). The municipal court marshal(s) shall meet and maintain all
qualifications necessary and be certified as a peace officer by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officers Standards and Education, or any successor agency of the state.
Sec. 7.03.002 Duties
The municipal court marshal(s) shall report directly to the municipal court administrator, who is authorized to
hire, terminate, and otherwise supervise the municipal court marshal(s); provided however, that, at the direction
of the municipal court administrator, the municipal court marshal(s) shall perform the following duties:
(1) Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal process issuing out of the city's
municipal court;
(2) Perform duties as bailiff when municipal court is in session; and
(3) Perform other duties as assigned, such duties not to be in conflict with provisions of this
section and section 7.03.003.
Sec. 7.03.003 Same authority; noncivil service: other provisions applicable
(a) The municipal court marshal(s) shall serve as peace officers and have full police authority in the exercise
of their assigned duties; however, they shall not be assigned the duties which are presently assigned to the police
department of the city.
(b) The municipal court marshal(s) are not members of the city's police department, and shall not be covered
under the municipal civil service provisions of chapter 143 of the Local Government Code; however, they are
eligible for membership in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as amended and any other benefits as
approved by the city manager.
Sec. 7.03.004 Oath of office
Each municipal court marshal(s) shall be required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of
his or her duties. The oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the
office of the municipal court administrator.
(Ordinance 13-10 adopted 5/14/13)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/418
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 8.02 FIREWORKS AND FIREARMS*
Sec. 8.02.001 Declaration of nuisance
The city commission hereby finds and declares it a nuisance for any person to possess with the intent to
distribute, by sale or otherwise, any squib, firecracker, grenade, gun, cartridge, firearm, or other combustible
materials without a permit, or to cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol,
shotgun, rifle, firearm, cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind within the corporate boundaries of
the city, or in that area of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction within 5,000 feet from any point of the city's
corporate boundaries. (Ordinance 99-005 adopted 5/26/99)
Sec. 8.02.002 Prohibited acts
It will be a violation for a person, firm, corporation or association to:
(1) Cast, throw or fire a squib, firecracker, grenade, gun, cartridge, firearm, or other combustible
materials without a permit, or to cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, grenade, gun, revolver,
pistol, shotgun, rifle, firearm, cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind within the
corporate boundaries of the city, or in that area of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction within 5000
feet from any point of the city's corporate boundaries; or
(2) Exhibit or have in its possession, with intent to give away or sell or offer for sale within the
city, any squib, rocket, firecracker, grenade, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any
kind, within the corporate boundaries of city or in the area of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction
within 5000 feet from any point of the city's corporate boundaries.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. I, sec. 2.00; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.02.003 Enforcement; notice of violation
The police department is assigned the responsibility of enforcing this regulation. Enforcement shall require a
written warning given to any person who is the owner, is employed by, or is an agent of the owner of the
firecrackers or fireworks who is offering these for sale. Notice to the employee or agent shall constitute notice to
the owner. Unless the distribution or selling by the owner or the agent(s) or employee(s) of the owner has ceased
within no more than four hours from the time of the warning, a citation shall be issued to the person or persons
for violation of the regulation. Thereafter, each additional hour that the sales or distributions continue shall
constitute a separate violation. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. I, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 8.02.004 Responsibility for violations by employees
(a) It shall be a rebuttable presumption that an employer/principal has knowledge and approves of or ratifies
his employee's or agent's conduct.
(b) A violation by an employee or agent and [of] another shall constitute a violation by the employer/principal
as well.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 4, art. I, sec. 4.00)
ARTICLE 8.03 ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/418
Secs. 8.03.001–8.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Abandoned Vehicles
Sec. 8.03.031 Authority to take possession
(a) The police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private
property.
(b) The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or contract for other
personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, and store an abandoned motor vehicle it takes into
custody.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I. div. I, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 8.03.032 Notification of owner and lienholder
(a) The police department shall notify, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle
and all lienholders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, chapter 501 Texas Transportation Code, or
chapter 31, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code, that the vehicle has been taken into custody.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a), the notice shall be mailed not later than the 10th day after taking the
motor vehicle into custody or the 10th day after receiving a report of possession.
(c) The notice shall:
(1) Describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the motor vehicle;
(2) Set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held;
(3) Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not later than
the 20th day after the date of the notice on payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, or garagekeeper's charges; and
(4) State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within
the time provided constitutes:
(A) A waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle; and
(B) Their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction.
(c) Alternate notice by publication.
(1) If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, the registration contains no
address for the owner, or it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
addresses of all lienholders, then notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in
the area where the motor vehicle was abandoned is sufficient notice under this regulation.
(2) The notice by publication may contain a multiple listing of abandoned vehicles, and shall be
published within the time requirements prescribed for notice by certified mail, and contain the same
contents required for a notice by certified mail.
(d) The consequences of a failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle are as set forth in a valid notice.
(e) The police department or an agent of a police department that takes custody of an abandoned motor
vehicle is entitled to reasonable storage fees for:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/418
(1) A period of not more than 10 days beginning on the day the department takes custody and
continuing through the day the department mails notice as provided by this section; and
(2) A period beginning on the day after the day the police department mails notice and continuing
through the day any accrued charges are paid and the vehicle is removed.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. I, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 8.03.033 Police department use of certain vehicles
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by section 8.03.032 of this article, the
police department may use the vehicle for police department purposes.
(b) The police department may use the abandoned motor vehicle for police department purposes as long as the
department considers it cost-effective. If the police department discontinues use of the abandoned motor vehicle,
the department shall auction the vehicle.
(c) This section does not apply to an abandoned motor vehicle with a garagekeeper's lien.
(d) This section will not apply to any motor vehicle that is taken into custody by the police department when
the county reaches a population of 2.4 million or more according to the most recent federal decennial census and
when that motor vehicle is removed to a privately owned storage facility.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. I, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 8.03.034 Sale at auction; disposition of proceeds of sale
(a) Notice of the public auction shall be given by publication as required by law, and, in the case of a
garagekeeper's lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified by certified mail of the time and place of the auction.
(b) The police department shall receive a sales receipt and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and
receive a certificate of title if it purchases the vehicle.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. I, sec. 4.00)
(c) From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall reimburse itself
for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle, and all notice and
publication costs incurred under section 8.03.032 of this article. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall
be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in a special
fund that shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing, preserving, storage, and all notice and
publication costs that result from placing abandoned vehicles in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another
abandoned motor vehicle are insufficient to meet these expenses and costs. The city may transfer any funds in
excess of $1,000.00 from the special fund to the city's general revenue account to be used by the police
department. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.03.035 Vehicles abandoned at storage facility
(a) A motor vehicle shall be considered abandoned in the following circumstances:
(1) Has been left at a commercial facility for more than 10 days after a notice to retrieve a vehicle
was sent to the owner and lienholder of record (under the Certificate of Title Act, chapter 501 Texas
Transportation Code) by registered or certified mail return receipt requested;
(2) Is left for more than 10 days beyond the storage agreement; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/418
(3) Is left for more than ten (10) days in a storage facility by someone other than the registered
owner or a person authorized to have possession of the motor vehicle under a contract of use, service,
storage, or repair, beyond the agreement.
(b) A garagekeeper shall report the abandoned vehicle to the police department.
(c) Notice by publication once in one newspaper of general circulation in the city shall constitute sufficient
notice if certified notice is returned unclaimed.
(d) If a garagekeeper or storage facility acquires possession of a motor vehicle for a purpose other than repair,
the garagekeeper or storage facility is entitled to towing, preservation, and notification charges and to reasonable
storage fees, in addition to storage fees earned pursuant to a contract, for a maximum of 5 days until notification
is mailed to the last known registered owner and all lienholders of record. After such notice is mailed, storage
fees may continue until the vehicle is removed and all accrued charges are paid. A garagekeeper who fails to
report the possession of an abandoned vehicle to the police department within 48 hours after it becomes
abandoned may no longer claim reimbursement for storage of the vehicle.
(e) The police department, upon receipt of a report from a garagekeeper of the possession of a vehicle
considered abandoned under the provisions of this section, shall follow the notification procedures, except that
custody of the vehicle shall remain with the garagekeeper until after compliance with the notification
requirements. A fee of $5.00 shall accompany the report of the garagekeeper to the police department. The $5.00
fee shall be deposited in the city treasury and used to defray the cost of notification or other costs incurred in the
disposition of the abandoned motor vehicle.
(f) An abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility and not reclaimed after notice shall be taken into custody by
the police department and used for police department purposes after the garagekeeper's charges have been paid.
The remaining proceeds shall be used to offset the expense of the auction. Surplus proceeds remaining from an
auction shall be distributed in accordance with section 8.03.034(c) of this article.
(g) Except for the termination or limitation of a claim for storage for failure to report an abandoned motor
vehicle, nothing in this section may be construed to impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this
state.
(h) A person charging fees under subsection (d) of this section commits an offense if the person charges a
storage fee for a period of time not authorized by that subsection. An offense under this subsection is punishable
by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. I, sec. 5.00)
Sec. 8.03.036 Disposal to demolisher
(a) A person, firm, corporation, or unit of government on whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or a person who is the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost,
or destroyed, may apply to the state department of transportation for authority to sell, give away, or dispose of
the vehicle to a demolisher.
(b) The department is urged to assist residents with the application procedures. The application, except where
submitted by a unit of government, will be accompanied by a fee of $2.00.
(c) The application shall set out:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The year, make, model, and vehicle identification number of the motor vehicle, if ascertainable,
together with any other identifying features;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/418
(3) Either:
(A) A concise statement of the facts surrounding the abandonment;
(B) A statement that the title of the motor vehicle is lost or destroyed; or
(C) A statement of the reasons for the defect of title in the owner.
(d) The applicant shall execute an affidavit stating that the facts alleged in the application are true and that no
material facts have been withheld.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. I, sec. 6.00)
Sec. 8.03.037 Adoption of state Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act
In addition to the provisions of this division, the city hereby adopts and makes applicable to the city the Texas
Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, chapter 683 Texas Transportation Code, and hereby grants and gives to its duly
authorized agents the authority, right, and privilege to do and perform all the necessary acts under such
Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act to fully carry out and implement the purpose and intentions of such act. (1999
Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. I, sec. 7.00)
Sec. 8.03.038 Duties of demolishers
(a) A demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires a motor vehicle to wreck, dismantle, or demolish shall
obtain a valid certificate of title, sales receipt, or transfer document, or a certificate of authority, from the person
delivering the vehicle for demolition.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a), the demolisher is not required to obtain a certificate of title for the
motor vehicle in the demolisher's name.
(c) A demolisher commits an offense if the demolisher fails to keep an accurate and complete record of a
motor vehicle purchased or received in the course of business in the manner provided by this subsection. These
records must:
(1) Contain the name and address of the person from whom each motor vehicle was purchased or
received and the date of the purchase or receipt;
(2) Be open for inspection by the state department of transportation or any police department at
any time during normal business hours; and
(3) Be kept by the demolisher for at least one year after the transaction to which it applies.
(d) A demolisher who commits an offense under this section is, on conviction, subject to a fine of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, to confinement in the county jail for not less than 10 days nor more than six
months, or to both.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. I, sec. 8.00)
Secs. 8.03.039–8.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Junked Vehicles
Sec. 8.03.071 Declaration of nuisance; penalty
(a) A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is located in a place where it is visible from a
public place or public right-of-way is a public nuisance if it:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/418
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates fire hazards;
(5) Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; and
(6) Is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city.
(b) A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this section.
(c) A person who commits an offense under this section is, on conviction, subject to a fine not to exceed
$200.00. On conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. II, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 8.03.072 Vehicles not to be made operable after removal
Any vehicle found to be a nuisance under this division may not be reconstructed or made operable after removal
by the city. (1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. II, sec. 2.00)
Sec. 8.03.073 Administration and enforcement; nuisance abatement board
(a) Procedures for abatement and removal of a public nuisance pursuant to this division shall be administered
by the code enforcement officer of the city and the city police department, who must be regularly salaried, fulltime
employees of the city, but any authorized person may remove the nuisance.
(b) Any person authorized to administer the procedures may enter private property to examine a public
nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance.
(c) The municipal court may issue necessary orders to enforce the procedures.
(d) The code enforcement officer shall conduct hearings.
(e) A nuisance abatement board shall be created to conduct hearings.
(1) The nuisance abatement board shall consist of 5 regular members and 2 alternates, who shall be
appointed by the commission for a term of 2 years, and removable for cause by the commission.
(2) The alternate members shall serve in the absence of 1 or more regular members when requested
to do so by the mayor, the city manager, or an authorized official.
(3) A quorum shall consist of 3 members of the nuisance abatement board.
(4) The chairperson, or, in his or her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. II, sec. 3.00)
Sec. 8.03.074 Notice procedure
(a) The city shall provide not less than 10 days' notice of the nature of the nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/418
(b) Notice must be sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to:
(1) The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
(2) Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
(3) The owner or occupant of:
(A) The property on which the nuisance is located; or
(B) If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-ofway.
(c) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be
placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered.
(d) If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than
the 11th day after the date of the return.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. II, sec. 4.00)
Sec. 8.03.075 Contents of notice
The notice must state:
(1) The nuisance must be removed and abated not later than the 10th day after the date on which
the notice was mailed; and
(2) A request for hearing must be made before expiration of the 10-day period.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. II, sec. 5.00)
Sec. 8.03.076 Hearing
(a) The nuisance abatement board or the enforcement officer shall conduct public hearings under procedures
adopted under this division.
(b) If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required, the hearing shall be held not earlier than
the 11th day after the date of the service of notice.
(c) At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed [to be inoperable], unless demonstrated otherwise by
the owner.
(d) If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the
nuisance must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of
the vehicle.
(e) Notice shall be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of
removal. The notice must identify the vehicle or vehicle part pursuant to section 683.074 of the Texas
Transportation Code.
(f) The procedures shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in
a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, a vehicle or vehicle
part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a
collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/418
that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence,
rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div. II, sec. 6.00)
Sec. 8.03.077 Appeals
(a) Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the nuisance abatement board or the enforcement officer.
(b) All appeals shall be to the city municipal court.
(c) An appeal of a decision must be filed within fifteen (15) days after the original decision rendered by the
board or the enforcement officer is issued. No appeal may be had after the expiration of 15 days.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div II, sec. 7.00)
Sec. 8.03.078 Disposal
(a) A junked vehicle or vehicle part shall be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle
demolisher, or any suitable site operated by a municipality or county.
(b) The city may operate a disposal site upon the determination by the city commission that the commercial
channels of disposition are not available or are inadequate, and the city may make final disposition of the
vehicles or vehicle parts, or the city may transfer the vehicles or vehicle parts to another disposal site if the
disposal is only as scrap or salvage.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 3, art. I, div II, sec. 8.00)
ARTICLE 8.04 CURFEW FOR MINORS*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Direct route. The shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or
stop along the way.
Emergency. Means but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or obtaining immediate
medical care for another person.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian. Any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order.
Minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. The term “parent” shall also include a courtappointed
guardian or other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court, or by the courtappointed
guardian to have the care and custody of a person.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/418
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to streets, highways, alley, park, sidewalk, and the common areas of schools, medical facilities,
apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets, including but not limited to the
congregating of groups, or of interacting minors, in which any minors involved would not be using the streets
for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home. Within this meaning, this article does not
prohibit mere presence but is intended as a curfew prohibiting remaining on the public streets and ways.
Street. A way or place of whatever nature opened to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of
vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term includes the legal right-ofway,
including but not limited to the traffic lanes, curbs, sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass
plots or other ground found within the legal right-of-way of the street. Such term applies irrespective of what the
street may be called or informally named, whether alley, avenue, road, roadway, highway or otherwise.
Time of night. The prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time,
generally observed at that hour by the public in the city; it shall be prima facie the time then observed in the city
administrative offices and police station.
(Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08A, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 8.04.002 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the
minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08B, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 8.04.003 Hours
It shall be unlawful for any minor to purposefully remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any
public place in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sundays through Thursdays, and 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. (Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08C, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 8.04.004 Defenses
(a) The minor was accompanied by his parent;
(b) The minor was accompanied by another adult approved by the parents;
(c) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent and was using a direct route; or an emergency errand;
(d) The minor was attending a school or religious activity or is going to or coming from a school, religious, or
government sponsored activity; or returning home by a direct route from an official school or religious activity;
(e) The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or is going directly to or coming directly from
lawful employment; including but not limited to newspaper delivery and was using a direct route;
(f) The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/418
(g) The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation or transportation for
which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route;
(h) The minor was exercising his or her First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution
including, but not limited to, the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; and
(i) The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
V.T.C.A., Family Code chapter 31.
(Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08D, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 8.04.005 Parental responsibility
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to
allow such minor to be or remain upon any city street under circumstances not constituting an exception to or
otherwise outside the scope of the curfew. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that a parent should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It shall be
no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. It
shall be a defense to the accusation of unlawful conduct pursuant to this section for the accused parent to
demonstrate that the parent has reported an inability to control the minor to a law enforcement agency with
jurisdiction over the parent's place of residence or to demonstrate that the parent has enrolled in parenting classes
at a public or private educational institution. (Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08E, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 8.04.006 Enforcement procedure
Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 8.04.002 or 8.04.003, shall transfer the minor to
the proper authority facilities.
(1) Ascertain the name and address of the minor.
(2) Issue to the minor a citation for violation of 8.04.002(a).
(3) When a minor is taken into custody under this subsection, the police department shall
immediately notify a parent or legal guardian to pick up the minor at the holding location. After a
parent arrives at a holding location and provides the information required by the chief of police to file
an incident report, the minor shall be released into the custody of the parent. If a parent cannot be
located or fails to take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities.
(4) If a minor was found in violation of section 8.04.002(a), the parent shall receive a first time
written warning citation for the violation of section 8.04.002(b) that any subsequent violation may
result in the enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties.
(5) If the minor was found in violation of section 8.04.002(c) at an establishment, the police
department shall notify the owner, operator, or employee of the establishment of the violation and
include a warning that any subsequent violation may result in prosecution of the owner, operator, and
employee under this section.
(Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08F, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 8.04.007 Penalties
(a) Any minor violating section 8.04.002(a), shall be guilty of a class “C” misdemeanor as defined in the state
penal code and be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of title 3, V.T.C.A., Family Code.
(b) A parent of a minor violating section 8.04.002(b), shall be guilty of a class “C” misdemeanor, which shall
be punishable by a fine of $100.00 for the first offense, $250.00 for the second offense and $500.00 each for the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/418
third and subsequent offenses.
(c) Any owner, operator, or employee of an establishment that receives a first time warning for violation of
section 8.04.002(c), may be punishable by a fine for the second violation, and that any subsequent violation may
result in prosecution of the owner, operator, and employee under this section of a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(d) In assessing punishment for either a parent or a child, the municipal court judges are encouraged to
consider the community service program.
(Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08G, adopted 6/9/09)
Sec. 8.04.008 Referral of minor repeat offenders
Any minor who violated section 8.04.002(a) more than two times shall be referred by the juvenile officer to the
county juvenile probation department for processing as a child having engaged in conduct indicating a need for
supervision. In making any such referral, the juvenile officer shall follow the appropriate police department
juvenile procedures. (Ordinance 09-08, sec. 09-08H, adopted 6/9/09)
ARTICLE 8.05 NOISE*
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning:
Daytime hours. The hours of 7:00 a.m. on one day and 10:00 p.m. the same day for residential properties or
areas and 6:00 a.m. on one day and midnight on the same day for nonresidential properties or areas.
dB(A). The intensity of a sound expressed in decibels.
Device. Includes any mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus or instrument to intensify or to amplify
or to reproduce the human voice or any other sound.
Emergency. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property
damage or loss that demands immediate action.
Nighttime hours. The hours between 10:01 p.m. on one day and 6:59 a.m. the following day for residential
properties or areas and 12:01 a.m. and 5:59 a.m. the same day for nonresidential properties or areas.
Nonresidential property/areas. Any real property that is not included in the definition of residential property as
defined in this section. Without limitation, the term includes any properties that are devoted to public purposes,
such as public parks.
Plainly audible. Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. For
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or
reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the name of the song, specific words or the
artist performing it. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to constitute a
plainly audible sound.
Property line. With respect to single occupancy properties, the line along the ground surface and its vertical
extension that separates the real property owned, leased, or occupied by one person from that owned, leased, or
occupied by another person. With respect to shared occupancy properties the term shall mean the imaginary line
that represents the legal limits of occupancy of any person who owns, leases, or otherwise occupies an
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, office, or any other type of occupancy from that of other
occupants.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/418
Residence. The place where a person resides or has a home.
Residential properties/areas. Any real property where a residence is located.
Streets. Shall be defined as being in the same category as the surrounding property. In the case of residential
properties/areas which are across the street from nonresidential properties/areas, the street shall be considered to
be in a residential area.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 1, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.002 General prohibitions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud noise that
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others. In determining whether a
noise is loud, the following factors shall be considered: time of day; proximity to residential properties/areas as
defined above; whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; the volume and intensity; whether the
noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of electronic or mechanical means; and whether the
noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of electronic or mechanical means; and whether the
noise is subject to being controlled without unreasonable effort or expense to the creator thereof.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue cause to be made or
continued, or permit the continuance of any sound that either exceeds the maximum permitted sound levels
specified in section 8.05.005 of this article or, for purposes of sections 8.05.003, 8.05.004 and 8.05.005 of this
article, otherwise unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of
others.
(c) The acts enumerated in the following sections of this article, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.
(d) This article shall not apply to any agricultural machinery, public utility or public works.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 2, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.003 Noisy vehicles
(a) The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair or so extra loaded, that it creates any loud and unreasonable,
(that is, not standard equipment for the type of vehicle, or which violates state regulations for equipment
emissions), grating, grinding, rattling, or any other loud and unreasonable sound is hereby prohibited and
declared to be unlawful.
(b) No person shall operate or allow an engine of any sort of motor vehicle except emergency equipment or
vehicles located at a permitted public event or parade, to idle for more than one hour.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 3, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.004 Amplified sound
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or
continued, or permit the continuance of any sound using any sound amplifier that is part of or connected to any
speaker system, radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, microphone, or any other sound
source, when operated:
(1) In such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants; or
(2) At any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in
the vehicle or within the property or premises in which such sound amplifier is operated and who are
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/418
voluntary listeners thereto.
The operation of any such sound amplifier in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet or more from a vehicle shall be presumed to be in violation of this section. The operation of
any such sound amplifier in such a manner that bass sounds are plainly audible at a distance of 50
feet or more from the property line of a property or premises in which the amplification is located
shall be presumed to be in violation of this section.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause the operation of a stationary or portable radio,
stereo, boom box, or any other object that produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to offend a person
of ordinary sensibilities.
(c) It shall be prima facie evidence that subsection (a) of this section has been violated when a stationary or
portable radio, stereo, boom box, or any other object that produces or reproduces sound can be heard by a person
of ordinary sensibilities when such person is 50 feet or more away from the stationary or portable radio, stereo,
boom box, or other object that produces or reproduces sound.
(d) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the sound source is a motor vehicle and
that:
(1) The motor vehicle is a mobile sound stage or studio that is being used on a stationary basis at a
location not situated upon any street for the purpose of providing sound, during daytime hours, for an
event or function; and
(2) The use is in compliance with all other provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 4, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.005 Maximum permissible sound levels
(a) In addition to the violations established by the preceding sections of this article, no person shall conduct,
permit, or allow any activity or sound source to produce a sound discernible beyond the property on which the
sound is being generated that when measured as provided in section 8.05.006 of this article exceeds 85 decibels
during daytime hours and 70 decibels during the nighttime hours for the respective areas described above.
(b) Any sound that exceeds the decibel levels set forth in this section under the conditions and measurement
criteria set forth in this section is a violation of this article. Evidence that an activity or sound source produces a
sound that exceeds the decibel levels specified in this section shall be prima facie evidence of a sound nuisance
that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in
violation of this article.
(c) Regardless of the measurable decibel level established above and measured as provided in section
8.05.006 below, the generator of any sound of such a nature as to cause persons occupying or using any property
other than the property upon which the sound is being generated to experience physically detectable sound,
vibrations or resonance at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the sound (measured as set out below) caused
by the sound shall also be prima facie evidence of a sound that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in violation of this article.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 5, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.006 Method of measurement
Whenever portions of this article prohibit sound over a certain decibel limit, measurement shall be made with a
type 1 or type 2 calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-weighting scale and the slow meter response as
specified by the American Standards Association. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a
proper representation of the sound being measured. The microphone of the meter shall be positioned so as not to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/418
create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. A windscreen for the microphone shall
be used. Traffic, aircraft, and other transportation noise shall not be considered in taking measurements except
where such background noise interferes with the noise being measured and cannot reasonably be distinguished
from the primary noise. Measurements of sound generated shall be taken from the curbline of the nearest public
street to the property where the sound is generated and taken toward the source of the sound. In the event that
there is not at least 50 feet of distance from the building in which sound is being generated and from which
sound is being measured, then measurements shall be taken from the street curbline opposite the said building of
the nearest public street to the property where the sound is generated. (Ordinance 10-03, sec. 7, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.007 Permit required for use of outdoor sound amplification equipment
(a) No person shall use or cause to be used any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier, or any
other machine or device that produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound outside of buildings or other enclosed
structures in a manner that exceeds the levels specified in section 8.05.005, without first obtaining a permit to do
so. No permit is required for any use not exceeding the said permissible levels. The permit shall be granted only
for the amplification of music or human, or both. The permit:
(1) May be obtained by making application to the city secretary.
(2) Requires payment of a $10.00 fee for the administrative costs of issuing a permit or a sworn
statement of inability to pay the fee.
(3) Is valid for any requested period between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in residential
areas or between 7:00 a.m. and midnight in nonresidential areas.
(4) Shall not be issued to the same or any other person for the same location more than twice
during any 30-day period. In the case of a sound truck, location shall relate to the area traversed by
the truck in one day.
(5) Shall specify the maximum sound level permitted. All devices shall be so equipped with some
character of control whereby the sound may be increased or decreased, and this sound control shall
be so located that the control may be kept locked. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with
the lock on the sound control or tamper with the sound control or increase the sound coming from the
device.
(b) The permit application required to be filed pursuant to this section shall contain the following information:
(1) The date of the application and the date and hours for which the permit is requested.
(2) The name and address of the applicant.
(3) The name and address of the person who will have charge of the sound amplifying equipment.
(4) The address and a description of the location where the sound equipment will be used.
(5) A description of the type of sound amplifying equipment to be used.
(6) Any permit issued under this section shall not be transferable to another location nor shall any
device be moved to another location or replaced without first securing another permit.
(c) The permit hereby required is not required for the purpose of regulating speech which is protected speech
or to conflict with any law of any superior governmental authority. Any regulation hereof that is in conflict with
any such right or authority is hereby declared to be inoperative and severable from the other regulations herein.
(d) After the permit has been secured under this section, the person responsible for the operation of the device
shall place the device in the location where it is to be used, together with all amplifiers and other equipment, but
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/418
shall not begin the use of the device until such device has been approved by the chief of police.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 8, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.008 Defenses
The following defenses shall apply to any offense established in this article, and the same must be specifically
pleaded by anyone charged with a violation:
(1) The emission of any sound was for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an
emergency, danger, or attempted crime, or was produced pursuant to any safety rule or regulation of
any governmental entity or agency.
(2) The sound was produced by an authorized emergency vehicle.
(3) The sound was produced by emergency work.
(4) The sound was generated:
(A) At a lawfully scheduled stadium event;
(B) By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a lawful parade;
(C) By spectators and participants at lawfully scheduled amphitheater event;
(D) By patrons and participants using cannons and gunfire during historical battle
reenactments for which a pyrotechnic permit was obtained and the explosives were inspected
by the person who performs the duties of fire marshal;
(E) By a pyrotechnic display that was inspected and approved by the person who performs
the duties of fire marshal; or
(F) By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival, fiesta, or
concert that was sponsored or cosponsored by the city and in full compliance with a permit
issued by the city.
(5) The sound was produced by the erection, excavation, construction, or demolition of any
building structure, including the use of any necessary tools or equipment, which activity did not
produce a sound exceeding 85 decibels when measured from the property line of the residential
property where the sound is being received.
(6) The sound was produced by aircraft, in flight or in operation at an airport, or railroad
equipment in operation on railroad rights-of-way.
(7) The sound was produced by operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered
saw, drill, sander, router, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawnmower, or any other similar device used
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when the sound is being produced for the maintenance
or upkeep of the property on which it was operated.
(8) The sound was generated as authorized under the terms of a permit issued under section
8.05.007 of this article.
(9) The sound was produced by church bells or chimes when used as part of a religious observance
or service during daytime hours for the zone in which the church is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/418
(10) The sound was produced during daytime hours by activities conducted on public parks, public
playgrounds, and public or private school grounds, including, but not limited to, school athletic, band
and school entertainment practice or events.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 9, adopted 5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.009 Variances
The city commission may authorize a variance to any restriction set forth in this article. Before granting a
variance, the city commission must determine that a literal enforcement of this article would create an
unnecessary hardship or a practical difficulty on the applicant, that the situation causing the unnecessary
hardship or practical difficulty is unique to the affected property and is not self-imposed, that the variance will
not injure and will be wholly compatible with the use and permitted development of adjacent properties, and that
the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this article. A person may request a
variance from this article by filing the request with the city secretary. (Ordinance 10-03, sec. 10, adopted
5/20/10)
Sec. 8.05.010 Penalty and culpable mental state
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than $1.00 or more than $500.00, and each and every violation of the various provisions of
this article shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each day that the violation continues.
(b) Enforcement hereunder shall not require the pleading or proving of any culpable mental state.
(Ordinance 10-03, sec. 11, adopted 5/20/10)
ARTICLE 8.06 LOITERING
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
Loiter, loitering.
(1) To be dilatory; to be slow in movement; to stand around or move slowly about; to stand idly
around; to saunter; to delay; to linger; to lag behind; or to prowl.
(2) Does not include similar circumstances where such conduct is due to physical defects or
conditions.
Parking lot. Any area in, at or adjacent to a restaurant, drive-in restaurant, store retail or whole-sale business
establishment, office building, professional building recreational building multifamily residential area referred to
in this section as a premises or any public building or space used, designed or intended for the parking of any
type of vehicle, including motor vehicles, by members of the general public, and maintained for the convenience
of customers, clients, patients, members or patrons of one or more business establishments, public offices or
organizations.
Sec. 8.06.002 Prohibition; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, whether alone or in any grouping or assemblage of persons, to loiter, as
defined in this article, in, on, or about any place, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city, when
not otherwise engaged in a lawful pursuit relating to the use
of the premises and without the owner's consent, or to leave a motor vehicle unattended on a parking lot, except
for the purpose of entering into a premises, or returning therefrom, except with the consent and approval of the
owner or operator or manager of such parking lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/418
(b) For the purposes of this section, the fact that a premises is closed shall constitute prima facie proof that a
person is not engaged in a lawful pursuit relating to the use or the premises. Furthermore, if any parking lot is
clearly marked by any sign or device declaring time limits or other restrictions relating to parking, then a
violation by any person of such restrictions shall be prima facie proof of such owner's nonconsent to any person
parking or congregating on such parking lot. Failure to post a notice or sign prohibiting conduct shall not affect
the enforcement of this article.
(c) This section shall not apply to police officers acting in the line of duty, or to persons participating in a
municipal, community, school, or church event, or a fundraising gathering, election or parade.
Sec. 8.06.003 Enforcement; punishment; penalties
(a) Should any person or business violate the prohibitions contained herein, or allow the commission of an act
or condition that proximately resulted in a violation of this section the city attorney may take any action to
enforce this or any ordinance to prevent and summarily abate the action and remove or seize any objects used to
violate this section. These actions may also include but not be limited to allowing for municipal resources and
personnel to: abate any premises or property, closure, condemn, remove any person or thing, court action,
suspend, cancel, or void any license or permit issued by the city or a state or federal agency, and any and all
other relief as may be necessary.
(b) An violation of this section shall be subject to both civil and criminal penalties. A criminal conviction shall
be a class C misdemeanor. A violator shall also be subject to the maximum penalties allowed by law for failing
to appear in court when charged with an offense as described herein. If conduct constituting an offense under
this section also constitutes an offense under another law, the person may be prosecuted under all applicable
laws.
(c) A liable party shall be subject to a civil penalty up to $350.00 per violation, or the maximum allowed by
law.
(Ordinance 15-06 adopted 7/28/15)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Personnel policies
The personnel policies of the city, adopted by Ordinance 08-01, as amended, are on file and available for public
review at the city offices. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Charter reference–Personnel rules, sec. 4.02(C).
ARTICLE 9.02 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM†
Sec. 9.02.001 Ordinance on file
The specific ordinances providing for participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted by the
city, are not included in this article, but they are hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/418
on file in the office of the city administrator. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 9.03 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 9.03.001 Classified positions
(a) As per the authority specified in section 143.012, Texas Local Gov't Code, as amended, the following
classifications are hereby created and recognized in the city's police department below the position of
department head:
Captain
Lieutenant
Sergeant
Corporal
Patrol officer.
(b) The number of budgeted positions within each classification recognized above shall be determined as a
component of the city's budgetary process.
(Ordinance 09-17, secs. 2, 3, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 9.03.002 Categories of pay
The following additional categories of pay shall be allowed pursuant to the criteria set forth herein.
(1) Certification pay.
(A) The city commission authorizes the payment of certification pay to each member of the
fire department in the following amounts, as specified below:
TCFP Certification Yearly Rate
Intermediate $600.00
Advanced $900.00
Master $1,200.00
(B) Fire personnel must provide acceptable proof of TCFP certification to the department in
order to qualify to receive certification pay.
(C) Disputes over qualification for certification pay shall be handled administratively by the
fire chief, whose decision shall be final.
(2) Education pay.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/418
(A) The city commission hereby authorizes the payment of education pay to those
firefighters, other than the chief, who have successfully completed courses at an accredited
college or university as follow:
Education Hours/Degree Yearly Rate
30 hours or more $300.00
Associates Degree $600.00
Bachelors Degree $900.00
*Associate Degree education pay shall also be paid to firefighters who have not yet
attained a Bachelors degree.
(B) Firefighters must provide acceptable proof of education hours or degree in the form of a
certified transcript or diploma to the department in order to qualify to receive education pay.
(C) Disputes over qualification of education hours or degree shall be handled
administratively by the fire chief, whose decision shall be final.
(3) Other criteria. The following criteria apply to the payment of education pay and certification
pay:
(A) Education pay and certification pay are not cumulative and eligible firefighters shall
receive only the highest level for which the firefighter qualifies.
(B) A firefighter who for any reason loses the certification or education level entitling that
firefighter to additional pay shall immediately cease to be eligible for the pay. If applicable, the
firefighter shall revert to the next highest level of pay for which the firefighter is eligible. A
firefighter who loses eligibility for education or certification pay shall be paid through the last
date of eligibility.
(C) Education and certification pay shall be paid on regular payroll dates at the effective
hourly rate associated with appropriate level of pay.
(4) Assignment pays.
(A) The city commission hereby authorizes the following assignment pays within the fire
department, subject to the administrative discretion of the fire chief, in accordance with the
following terms and conditions.
Assignment Authorized Slots Annual Amount (prorated)
EMT 4 $600.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/418
Fire inspectors 2 $600.00
Instructor 4 $600.00
Fitness specialist 1 $600.00
Training coordinator 1 $600.00
(B) Assignment pay shall be earned only by those firefighters who are specifically assigned
to the assignment pay categories identified above by the fire chief.
(C) The fire chief shall determine which firefighters hold special assignments and each
officer holds such assignment at the pleasure of the fire chief.
(D) Nothing in this section requires the fire chief to make any particular assignment or to fill
authorized categories or slots. Firefighters shall not have any property interest in assignment
pays.
(E) Assignment pay shall be paid on regular payroll dates at the effective hourly rate
associated with the actual assignment period.
(F) In the event of multiple assignments, a firefighter shall not earn more than the highest
two assignment pays held by that firefighter.
(5) Longevity pay.
(A) Longevity pay shall be paid on regular payroll dates at the effective hourly rate
associated with the actual assignment period.
(B) The following criteria apply to the payment of longevity pay:
Longevity Annual Per Pay Period
1 year or more $100.00 $3.846
2 years or more $200.00 $7.692
3 years or more $1,000.00 $38.461
4 years or more $1,200.00 $46.153
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/418
6 years or more $2,000.00 $76.923
8 years or more $3,000.00 $115.384
10 years or more $3,500.00 $134.615
12 years or more $4,000.00 $153.846
14 years or more $4,500.00 $173.076
16 years or more $5,000.00 $192.307
(Ordinance 13-28 adopted 11/26/13)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
Sec. 10.02.001 Adopted
The Unified Development Code, adopted by Ordinance 98-027, adopted February 10, 1999, is included at the
end of this code as appendix A. Due to the nature of the Unified Development Code and the technicalities
involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed as enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting
and style changes. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 10.03 WATER AND WASTEWATER FACILITIES FOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.03.001 Authority; scope
These rules are adopted by the city under the authority of the Local Government Code, chapter 212, and Water
Code, section 16.350. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, these rules apply only to a subdivision
which creates two or more lots of five acres or less intended for residential purposes. Lots of five acres or less
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/418
are presumed to be for residential purposes unless the land is restricted to nonresidential uses on the final plat
and in all deeds and contracts for deeds. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 1, sec. 1.1, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.002 Purpose
It is the purpose of these rules to promote the public health of the city's residents, to ensure that adequate water
and wastewater facilities are provided in subdivisions within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city, and to establish the minimum standards for water and wastewater facilities. (Ordinance 2000-07, div.
1, sec. 1.2, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.003 Effective date
These rules became effective on the 25th day of April, 2000. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 4, sec. 1.3, adopted
4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.004 Plat required
(a) The owner of a tract of land located within the corporate limits of a municipality that divides the tract in
any manner that creates two or more lots of five acres or less intended for residential purposes must have a plat
of the subdivision prepared. Lots of five acres or less are presumed to be for residential purposes unless the land
is restricted to nonresidential uses on the final plat and all deeds and contracts for deeds.
(b) No subdivided land shall be sold or conveyed until the subdivider:
(1) Has received approval of a final plat of the tract; and
(2) Has filed and recorded with the county clerk of the county in which the tract is located a legally
approved plat.
(c) A division of a tract is defined as including a metes and bounds description, or any description of less than
a whole parcel, in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, using a contract of sale or other executory
contract, or lease/purchase agreement, or using any other method to convey property.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 1, sec. 1.5, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.005 Definitions
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
City. The City of San Juan, Hidalgo County, Texas. Any reference to an act of the city shall be deemed to
include acts of the city commission, board of aldermen, or other such elected governing body of the city.
County. Hidalgo County, Texas.
Drinking water. All water distributed by any agency or individual, public or private, for the purpose of human
consumption, use in the preparation of foods or beverages, cleaning any utensil or article used in the course of
preparation or consumption of food or beverages for human beings, human bathing, or clothes washing.
Engineer. A person licensed and authorized to practice engineering in the state under the Texas Engineering
Practice Act.
Final plat. A map or drawing and any accompanying material of a proposed subdivision prepared in a manner
suitable for recording in the county records and prepared as described in these regulations.
Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/418
Non-public water system. Any water system supplying water for domestic purposes which is not a public water
system.
OSSF. On-site sewage facilities as that term is defined in rules and/or regulations adopted by TCEQ, including,
but not limited to, 30 TAC chapter 285.
Platted. Recorded with the county in an official plat record.
Public water system. A system for the provision to the public of water for human consumption through pipes or
other constructed conveyances, which includes all uses described under the definition for drinking water. Such a
system must have at least 15 service connections or serve at least 25 individuals at least 60 days out of the year.
This term includes any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facilities under the control of the operator
of such system and used primarily in connection with such system; and any collection or pretreatment storage
facilities not under such control which are used primarily in connection with such system. Two or more systems
with each having a potential to serve less than 15 connections or less than 25 individuals but owned by the same
person, firm, or corporation and located on adjacent land will be considered a public water system when the total
potential service connections in the combined systems are 15 or greater or if the total number of individuals
served by the combined systems total 25 or more at least 60 days out of the year. Without excluding other
meanings of the terms “individual” or “served,” an individual shall be deemed to be served by a water system if
he lives in, uses as his place of employment, or works in a place to which drinking water is supplied from the
system.
Purchaser. Shall include purchasers under executory contracts for conveyance of real property.
Retail public utility. Any entity meeting the definition of a retail public utility as defined in Water Code, section
13.002.
Sanitarian. A person registered as a professional sanitarian by the department of state health services under the
authority of Texas Occupations Code, section 1953.104.
Sewerage facilities. The devices and systems which transport domestic wastewater from residential property,
treat the wastewater, and dispose of the treated water in accordance with the minimum state standards contained
or referenced in these rules.
Subdivider. Any owner of land or authorized agent thereof proposing to subdivide or dividing land so as to
constitute a subdivision.
Subdivision. Any tract of land divided into two or more parts that results in the creation of two or more lots of
five acres or less intended for residential purposes. A subdivision includes resubdivision (replat) of land which
was previously divided.
TAC. Texas Administrative Code, as compiled by the secretary of state.
TCEQ. State commission on environmental quality.
Water facilities. Any devices and systems which are used in the supply, collection, development, protection,
storage, transmission, treatment, and/or retail distribution of water for safe human use and consumption.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 1, sec. 1.1, adopted 4/25/00)
Secs. 10.03.006–10.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Minimum Standards
Sec. 10.03.041 Scope of standards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/418
The establishment of a residential development with two or more lots of five acres or less where the water
supply and sewer services do not meet the minimum standards of this division is prohibited. A subdivision with
lots of five acres or less is presumed to be a residential development unless the land is restricted to
nonresidential use on the final plat and all deeds and contracts for deeds. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 2, sec. 2.1,
adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.042 Water facilities development
(a) Public water systems.
(1) Subdividers who propose to supply drinking water by connecting to an existing public water
system must provide a written agreement with the retail public utility in substantially the form
attached to Ordinance 2000-07 as appendix 1A. The agreement must provide that the retail public
utility has or will have the ability to supply the total flow anticipated from the ultimate development
and occupancy of the proposed subdivision for a minimum of 30 years. The agreement must reflect
that the subdivider has paid the cost of water meters and other necessary connection equipment,
membership fees, water rights acquisition costs, or other fees associated with connection to the public
water system so that service is immediately available to each lot.
(2) Where there is no existing retail public utility to construct and maintain the proposed water
facilities, the subdivider shall establish a retail public utility and obtain a certificate of convenience
and necessity (CCN) from the TCEQ. The public water system, the water quality and system design,
construction and operation shall meet the minimum criteria set forth in 30 TAC, sections 290.38–
290.51 and sections 290.101–290.120. If groundwater is to be the source of the water supply, the
subdivider shall have prepared and provide a copy of a groundwater availability study which shall
include an analysis of the long-term (30 years) quantity and quality of the available groundwater
supplies relative to the ultimate needs of the subdivision. If surface water is the source of supply, the
subdivider shall provide evidence that sufficient water rights have been obtained and dedicated, either
through acquisition or wholesale water supply agreement, that will provide a sufficient supply to
serve the needs of the subdivision for a term of not less than 30 years.
(b) Non-public water systems. Where individual wells or other non-public water systems are proposed for the
supply of drinking water to residential establishments, a test well or wells located so as to be representative of
the quantity and quality of water generally available from the supplying aquifer shall be drilled by the subdivider
and the produced waters sampled and submitted to a private laboratory for a complete chemical and
bacteriological analysis of the parameters on which there are drinking water standards. The subdivider shall have
prepared and provide a copy of a groundwater availability study which shall include an analysis of the long-term
(30 years) quantity of the available groundwater supplies relative to the ultimate needs of the subdivision. The
water quality of the water produced from the test well must meet the standards of water quality required for
community water systems as set forth in 30 TAC, sections 290.103, 290.105, 290.106 and 290.110, either:
(1) Without any treatment to the water; or
(2) With treatment by an identified and commercially available water treatment system.
(c) Transportation of potable water. The conveyance of potable water by transport truck or other mobile
device to supply the domestic needs of the subdivision is not an acceptable method, except on an emergency
basis. Absence of a water system meeting the standards of these rules due to the negligence of the subdivider
does not constitute an emergency.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 2, sec. 2.2, adopted 4/25/00)
State law reference–Sanitary standards of drinking water and protection of public water supplies and bodies of water, V.T.C.A., Health
and Safety Code, sec. 341.031 et seq.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/418
Sec. 10.03.043 Wastewater disposal
(a) Organized sewerage facilities.
(1) Subdividers who propose the development of an organized wastewater collection and treatment
system must obtain a permit to dispose of wastes from the TCEQ in accordance with 30 TAC chapter
305 and obtain approval of engineering planning materials for such systems under 30 TAC chapter
317 from the TCEQ.
(2) Subdividers who propose to dispose of wastewater by connecting to an existing permitted
facility must provide a written agreement in substantially the form attached to Ordinance 2000-07 as
appendix 1B with the retail public utility. The agreement must provide that the retail public utility has
or will have the ability to treat the total flow anticipated from the ultimate development and
occupancy of the proposed subdivision for a minimum of 30 years. The agreement must reflect that
the subdivider has paid the cost of all fees associated with connection to the wastewater collection
and treatment system [and that such fees] have been paid so that service is immediately available to
each lot. Engineering plans for the proposed wastewater collection lines must comply with 30 TAC
chapter 317. Figure: 31 TAC, section 364.33(a)(2).
(b) On-site sewerage facilities.
(1) On-site facilities which serve single-family or multifamily residential dwellings with
anticipated wastewater generations of no greater than 5,000 gallons per day must be designed by a
registered professional engineer or registered professional sanitarian, permitted by the authorized
agent of the TCEQ, and in all respects comply with 30 TAC chapter 285.
(2) Proposals for on-site sewerage facilities for the on-site disposal of sewage in the amount of
5,000 gallons per day or greater must comply with 30 TAC chapter 317.
(3) The TCEQ or its authorized agent shall review proposals for on-site sewage disposal systems
and make inspections of such systems as necessary to assure that the system is in compliance with the
Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 366, and rules in 30 TAC chapter 285, and in particular
sections 285.4, 285.5 and 285.30–285.39. In addition to the unsatisfactory on-site disposal systems
listed in 30 TAC, section 285.3(b), pit privies and portable toilets are not acceptable waste disposal
systems for lots platted under these rules.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 2, sec. 2.3, adopted 4/25/00)
State law reference–On-site sewage disposal systems, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 366.
Sec. 10.03.044 Greywater systems for reuse of treated wastewater
(a) Organized or municipal sewerage systems. Any proposal for sewage collection, treatment and disposal
which includes greywater reuse shall meet minimum criteria of 30 TAC chapter 210 and chapter 285, subchapter
H, promulgated and administered by the TCEQ.
(b) On-site sewerage facilities. Any proposal for on-site sewage disposal which includes provisions for
greywater use shall meet the minimum criteria of 30 TAC chapter 285 contained within the Construction
Standards for On-Site Sewerage Facilities promulgated by the TCEQ.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 2, sec. 2.4, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.045 Sludge disposal
The disposal of sludge from water treatment and sewerage facilities shall meet the criteria of 30 TAC chapter
312 and chapter 317. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 2, sec. 2.5, adopted 4/25/00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/418
Sec. 10.03.046 Setbacks
In areas that lack a nationally recognized fire code as listed in Local Government Code, section 233.062(c), and
lack water lines sized for fire protection, setbacks from roads and rights-of-way shall be a minimum of 10 feet,
and setbacks from adjacent property lines shall be a minimum of five feet, and shall not conflict with separation
or setback distances required by rules governing public utilities, on-site sewerage facilities, or drinking water
supplies. Setback lines required elsewhere in the orders or rules of the city shall control to the extent greater
setbacks are therein required. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 2, sec. 2.6, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.047 Number of dwellings per lot
No more than one single-family detached dwelling shall be located on each subdivision lot. A notation of this
restriction shall be placed on the face of the final plat. This restriction shall be placed in all deeds and contracts
for deeds for real estate sold within the subdivision. Where otherwise authorized, proposals which include
multifamily residential structures shall include adequate, detailed planning materials required by the city for
determination of proper water and wastewater utility type and design. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 2, sec. 2.7,
adopted 4/25/00)
Secs. 10.03.048–10.03.080 Reserved
Division 3. Plat Approval
Sec. 10.03.081 Application for plat approval
(a) Owner representation. An application for approval of a plat shall be filed by the record owner of the
property to be subdivided or the duly authorized agent of the record owner.
(b) Standards. Every plat creating two or more lots of five acres or less for residential use shall comply with
the standards of division 2 and the requirements of division 3 of this article.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 3, sec. 3.1, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.082 Final engineering report
The final plat shall be accompanied by an engineering report bearing the signed and dated seal of a professional
engineer registered in the state. The engineering report shall discuss the availability and methodology of
providing water facilities and wastewater treatment service to individual lots within the subdivision. A detailed
cost estimate per lot acceptable to the city shall be provided for those unconstructed water supply and
distribution facilities and for wastewater collection and treatment facilities which are necessary to serve each lot
of the subdivision. The plan shall include a construction schedule for each significant element needed to provide
adequate water or wastewater facilities. If financial guarantees are to be provided under section 10.03.084 of this
article, the schedule shall include the start dates and completion dates.
(1) Public water systems.
(A) Where water supplies are to be provided by an existing public water system, the
subdivider shall furnish an executed contractual agreement in substantially the form attached to
Ordinance 2000-07 as appendix 1A between the subdivider and the retail public utility to the
effect that the retail public utility has or will have the ability to supply the total flow anticipated
from the ultimate development and occupancy of the proposed subdivision for a minimum of 30
years and that the subdivider has provided for the payment of costs or fees for the connection of
each individual lot to the public water system, including water meters, water acquisition fees, or
other necessary expenses required by the retail public utility. Before final plat approval, plans
and specifications for the proposed water facilities shall have been approved by all entities
having jurisdiction over the proposed project, which may include the TCEQ and the county
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/418
health department in addition to the responsible departments of the city. If groundwater is to be
the source of the water supply, the final engineering report shall include a groundwater
availability study which shall include comments regarding the long-term (30 years) quantity
and quality of the available groundwater supplies relative to the ultimate needs of the
subdivision.
(B) Where there is no existing retail public utility to construct and maintain the proposed
water facilities, the subdivider shall establish a retail public utility and obtain a certificate of
convenience and necessity (CCN) from the TCEQ and include evidence of the CCN issuance
with the plat. Before final plat approval, plans and specifications for the proposed water
facilities shall have been approved by all entities having jurisdiction over the proposed project.
If groundwater is to be the source of the water supply, the final engineering report shall include
a groundwater availability study which shall include an analysis of the long-term (30 years)
quantity and quality of the available groundwater supplies relative to the ultimate needs of the
subdivision. If surface water is the source of supply then the final engineering report shall
include evidence that sufficient water rights have been obtained and dedicated, either through
acquisition or wholesale water supply agreement, that will provide a sufficient supply to serve
the needs of the subdivision for a term of not less than 30 years.
(2) Non-public water systems. Where individual wells are proposed for the supply of drinking
water to residences, the final engineering report shall include the quantitative and qualitative results
of sampling the test wells in accordance with section 10.03.042(b) of this article. The results of such
analyses shall be made available to the prospective property owners. If the water quality of the test
well required pursuant to section 10.03.042(b) of this article does not meet the water quality
standards as set forth in that section without treatment by an identified and commercially available
water treatment system, then the final report must state the type of treatment system that will treat the
water produced from the well to the specified water quality standards, the location of at least one
commercial establishment within the county at which the system is available for purchase, and the
cost of such system, the cost of installation of the system, and the estimated monthly maintenance
cost of the treatment system. The engineer shall issue a statement concerning the availability of
groundwater supplies to serve the fully developed subdivision over the next 30 years. Such statement
may be based on information available from the state water development board's office of planning.
The description of the required sanitary control easement shall be included.
(3) Organized sewerage facilities.
(A) Where wastewater treatment is to be provided by an existing retail public utility, the
subdivider shall furnish evidence of a contractual agreement in substantially the form attached
to Ordinance 2000-07 as appendix 1B between the subdivider and [the retail public utility. The
agreement] must provide that the retail public utility has or will have the ability to treat the total
flow anticipated from the ultimate development and that the subdivider has paid the cost of all
fees associated with connection to the wastewater collection and treatment system [and that
such fees] have been paid so that service is immediately available to each lot. Before final plat
approval, an appropriate permit to dispose of wastes shall have been obtained from the TCEQ
and plans and specifications for the proposed wastewater collection and treatment facilities
shall have been approved by all entities having jurisdiction over the proposed project.
(B) Where there is no existing retail public utility to construct and maintain the proposed
sewerage facilities, the subdivider shall establish a retail public utility and obtain a CCN from
the TCEQ. Before final plat approval, a wastewater treatment permit authorizing the treatment
of the wastewater for the ultimate build-out population of the subdivision shall have been
obtained from the TCEQ and plans and specifications for the proposed sewerage facilities shall
have been approved by all entities having jurisdiction over the proposed project.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/418
(4) On-site sewerage facilities. Where private on-site sewerage facilities are proposed, the final
engineering report shall include planning materials required by 30 TAC, section 285.4(c), including
the site evaluation described by 30 TAC, section 285.30 and all other information required by
applicable OSSF regulations.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 3, sec. 3.2, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.083 Additional information
The city may, at its option, require additional information necessary to determine the adequacy of proposed
water and wastewater improvements as part of the plat approval process. Such information may include, but not
be limited to:
(1) Layout of proposed street and drainage work;
(2) Legal description of the property;
(3) Existing area features;
(4) Topography;
(5) Floodplains;
(6) Description of existing easements;
(7) Layout of other utilities;
(8) Notation of deed restrictions;
(9) Public use areas; or
(10) Proposed area features.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 3, sec. 3.3, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.084 Financial guarantees for improvements
(a) Applicability. If an adequate public or non-public water system or sewerage facility is not available from a
retail public utility, or is not constructed by the subdivider, to serve lots intended for residential purposes of five
acres or less at the time final plat approval is sought, then the city shall require the owner of the subdivided tract
to execute an agreement with the city in substantially the form attached to Ordinance 2000-07 as appendix 2A,
secured by a bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other alternative financial guarantee such as a cash deposit
which meet the requirements set forth below.
(b) Bonds. A bond that is submitted in compliance with subsection (a) of this section shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) The bond or financial guarantee shall be payable to the mayor of the city, in his official
capacity, or the mayor's successor in office.
(2) The bond or financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the city to be adequate to
ensure proper construction or installation of the public or non-public water facilities and wastewater
facilities to service the subdivision, including reasonable contingencies, but in no event shall the
amount of the bond be less than the total amount needed to serve the subdivision as established by
the engineer who certifies the plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/418
(3) The bond shall be executed with sureties as may be approved by the city. The city shall
establish criteria for acceptability of the surety companies issuing bonds that include but are not
limited to:
(A) Registration with the secretary of state and be authorized to do business in the state;
(B) Authorization to issue bonds in the amount required by the city; and
(C) Rating of at least B from Best's Key Rating Guide; or, if the surety company does not
have any such rating due to the length of time it has been a surety company, the surety company
must demonstrate eligibility to participate in the surety bond guarantee program of the Small
Business Administration and must be an approved surety company listed in the current United
States Department of Treasury Circular 570. Such bonds shall meet the criteria contained in the
rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Treasury.
(4) The bond shall be conditioned upon construction or installation of water and wastewater
facilities meeting the criteria established by division 2 of this article and upon construction of
facilities within the time stated on the plat, or on the document attached to the plat for the
subdivision, or within any extension of time granted by the city.
(c) Letter of credit. A letter of credit that is submitted in compliance with subsection (a) of this section shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) Any letter of credit submitted as a financial guarantee for combined amounts greater than
$10,000.00 and less than $250,000.00 must be from financial institutions which meet the following
qualifications:
(A) Bank qualifications:
(i) Must be federally insured;
(ii) Sheshunoff rating must be 10 or better and primary capital must be at least 6.0% of
total assets; and
(iii) Total assets must be at least $25 million.
(B) Savings and loan association qualifications:
(i) Must be federally insured;
(ii) Tangible capital must be at least 1.5% of total assets and total assets must be greater
than $25 million or tangible capital must be at least 3.0% of total assets if total assets are
less than $25 million; and
(iii) Sheshunoff rating must be 30 or better.
(C) Other financial institutions qualifications:
(i) The letter of credit must be 110% collateralized by an investment instrument that
would meet the qualifications for a city investment; and
(ii) The investment instrument must be registered in the city's name and the city must
receive safekeeping receipts for all collateral before the letter of credit is accepted.
(2) Any letter of credit submitted as a financial guarantee for combined amounts greater than
$250,000.00 must be from financial institutions which meet the following qualifications:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/418
(A) Bank qualifications:
(i) Must be federally insured;
(ii) Sheshunoff rating must be thirty or better and primary capital must be at least 7.0%
of total assets; and
(iii) Total assets must be at least $75 million.
(B) Savings and loan association qualifications:
(i) Must be federally insured;
(ii) Tangible capital must be at least 3.0% of total assets and total assets must be greater
than $75 million, or tangible capital must be at least 5.0% of total assets if total assets are
less than $75 million; and
(iii) Sheshunoff rating must be 30 or better.
(C) Other financial institutions qualifications:
(i) The letter of credit must be 110% collateralized by an investment instrument that
would meet the qualifications for a city investment; and
(ii) The investment instrument must be registered in the city's name and the city must
receive safekeeping receipts for all collateral before the letter of credit is accepted.
(3) The letter of credit shall list as sole beneficiary the mayor of the city, in his official capacity, or
the mayor's successor in office, and must be approved by the city. The form of the letter of credit
shall be modeled after the form attached to Ordinance 2000-07 as appendix 2B.
(4) The letter of credit shall be conditioned upon installation or construction of water and
wastewater facilities meeting the criteria established under division 2 of this article and upon
construction of facilities within the time stated on the plat, or on the document attached to the plat for
the subdivision, or within any extension of time granted by the city.
(d) Financial guarantee. The city will determine the amount of the bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit
required to ensure proper construction of adequate water and wastewater facilities in the subdivision.
(e) Alternative to city accepting a financial guarantee. The city may approve a final plat under this section
without receiving a financial guarantee in the name of the city if:
(1) The property being subdivided lies wholly within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of a
municipality; and
(2) The city has executed an interlocal agreement with the county that imposes the obligation on
the county to:
(A) Accept the bonds, letters of credit, or other financial guarantees that meet the
requirements of this section;
(B) Execute the construction agreement with the subdivider; and
(C) Assume the obligations to enforce the terms of the financial guarantee under the
conditions set forth therein and complete construction of the facilities identified in the
construction agreement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/418
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 3, sec. 3.4, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.085 Review and approval of final plats
(a) Scope of review. The city will review a final plat to determine whether it meets the standards of division 2
and the requirements of division 3 of this article.
(b) Disapproval authority. The city shall refuse to approve a plat if it does not meet the requirements
prescribed by or under these rules.
(c) Prerequisites to approval. Final plat approval shall not be granted unless the subdivider has accomplished
the following:
(1) Dedicated the sites for the adequate water and sewerage facilities identified in the final plat to
the appropriate retail public utility responsible for operation and maintenance of the facilities; and
(2) Provided evidence that the water facilities and sewerage facilities have been constructed and
installed in accordance with the criteria established within these rules and the approvals from TCEQ
of the plans and specifications for such construction, including any change orders filed with these
agencies; or
(3) Obtained all necessary permits for the proposed water facilities and sewerage facilities (other
than for OSSF permits on individual lots within the proposed subdivision) and has entered into a
financial agreement with the city secured by a bond or other alternative financial guarantee such as a
cash deposit or letter of credit for the provision of water and sewerage facilities with the bond or
financial guarantee meeting the criteria established in division 3 of this ordinance.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 3, sec. 3.5, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.086 Time extensions for providing facilities
(a) Reasonableness. The city may extend, beyond the date specified on the plat or on the document attached to
the plat, the date by which the required water and sewer service facilities must be fully operable if:
(1) Any financial guarantees provided with the final plat as originally submitted are effective for
the time of the requested extension or new financial guarantees that comply with section 10.03.084
are submitted which will be effective for the period of the extension; and
(2) The city finds the extension is reasonable and not contrary to the public interest.
(b) Timeliness. if the facilities are fully operable before the expiration of the extension period, the facilities
are considered to have been made fully operable in a timely manner.
(c) Unreasonableness. An extension is not reasonable if it would allow a residence in the subdivision to be
inhabited without water or sewer services that meet the standards of division 2 of this article.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 3, sec. 3.6, adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.087 Criteria for subdivisions that occurred prior to September 1, 1989
(a) Authority and scope. This section shall apply only to tracts of land that were divided into two or more
parts to lay out a subdivision before September 1, 1989, and have not been platted or recorded.
(b) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health of the city's residents, to ensure that
adequate water and sewerage facilities are provided in subdivisions within the city and its extraterritorial
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/418
jurisdiction, and to establish the minimum standards for pre-1989 subdivisions for which no plat has been filed
or recorded in the records of the county.
(c) Required plat. In the event that the owner of a tract of land located within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction who subdivided the tract into two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract prior to
September 1, 1989, including an addition, or to lay out suburban lots or building lots, and to lay out streets,
alleys, squares, parks or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers
or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts, was legally
obligated to, but has failed to, have a plat of the subdivision prepared, approved by the city, and filed with the
county, the owner of a residential lot which was created by the subdivision may have a plat of the individual lot
prepared and approved by the commissioners court as provided in this section in lieu of the filing of a plat of the
subdivision.
(d) Special criteria. The city may approve the plat of a residential lot which does not comply with the
provisions of section 10.03.004(b) of this article (sale restrictions), section 10.03.046 of this article (setbacks),
section 10.03.047 of this article (number of dwellings per lot), section 10.03.082 of this article (final engineering
report), and section 10.03.084 of this article (financial guarantees for improvements) as applied to an individual
subdivided lot if such approval is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article so that the public
health, safety, and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.
(1) Owners of individual lots in a single unplatted subdivision may file a joint request for approval
of their respective individual residential lots.
(2) An application for approval of the plat of an individual lot shall be made in writing. The
application shall state specifically the division, section, or subsection with which the plat does not
comply and from which a waiver is being requested. The application shall contain available
information and documentation which supports the requested approval. The applicant shall also
provide such additional documentation as the city may request to support the application, including:
(A) A copy of a dated plat, sales contract, utility records, or other acceptable documentation
that the subdivision occurred prior to September 1, 1989;
(B) The name and address of the original subdivider or the subdivider's authorized agent, if
known;
(C) A survey and plat of the lot for which approval is requested, showing existing residences,
roads, and utilities; and
(D) A deed, an affidavit of ownership or other evidence of ownership of the lot for which
approval is requested.
(3) Approval of plats of individual lots shall be granted subject to the limitations of state law, and
based on written findings by the city that:
(A) The lot for which approval is requested is within a tract that was subdivided prior to
September 1, 1989, and is not owned by the original subdivider;
(B) A plat was required for the subdivision, but has not been filed with the county by the
subdivider legally obligated to file it;
(C) An existing, currently occupied residential dwelling is located on the lot;
(D) Existing water and sewer services which comply with the minimum standards set forth in
this article are available to the lot; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/418
(E) The request is reasonable, compliance with specified sections of these rules is
impractical, and a waiver is not contrary to the public health and safety.
(e) Final determination. The city shall make the final decision on an application for a waiver. The applicant
may withdraw a request for a waiver at any point in the process. If the requested waiver application is approved,
the city shall issue a certificate stating that a plat of the residential lot has been reviewed and approved.
(Ordinance 2000-07, div. 3, sec. 3.7, adopted 4/25/00)
Secs. 10.03.088–10.03.120 Reserved
Division 4. Enforcement
Sec. 10.03.121 Oversight
The owner, by submitting a plat, acknowledges the authority of the city and state agencies to lawfully enter and
inspect property for purposes of execution of their statutory duties. Such inspection will not release the owner
from any obligation to comply with the requirements of these rules. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 4, sec. 4.1,
adopted 4/25/00)
Sec. 10.03.122 General enforcement authority
The provisions of this article are enforceable pursuant to the specific provisions hereof related to enforcement
and state law including Water Code, chapter 7, and sections 16.352, 16.353, 16.3535, 16.354, and 16.3545, and
Local Government Code, section 212.0175 and section 212.018. (Ordinance 2000-07, div. 4, sec. 4.2, adopted
4/25/00)
Secs. 10.03.123–10.03.140 Reserved
Division 5. Standard Design Guide for Public Infrastructure Improvements
Sec. 10.03.141 Adoption of infrastructure standards
The standard design guide for public infrastructure improvements, attached to Ordinance 16-24 as exhibit A is
hereby adopted as the official infrastructure standards of the city and all new subdivision plats filed for
processing after September 27, 2016 must abide by the standards.
Sec. 10.03.142 Copy available at city secretary's office
A copy of the standards shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary and shall be posted in the official
city website under the planning department.
Sec. 10.03.143 Failure to comply with standards
The failure to comply with the standards shall result in the subdivision plat not being approved for recording
with the county clerk.
(Ordinance 16-24 adopted 9/27/16)
CHAPTER 11
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/418
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAX†
Sec. 11.02.001 Discount for early payment
(a) The city commission adopts the discounts provided by section 31.05 subsection (b) of the Texas Property
Tax Code, in the manner required by law for official action by the commission.
(b) The city adopts the following discounts to apply regardless of the date on which city mails its tax bills:
(1) Three percent if the tax is paid in October or earlier;
(2) Two percent if the tax is paid in November; and
(3) One percent if the tax is paid in December.
(Ordinance 2000-021, sec. 1.00, adopted 12/20/00)
Charter reference–When taxes due and payable, sec. 6.06.
State law reference–Tax discount for early payment, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 31.05.
Sec. 11.02.002 Homestead exemption for disabled or elderly persons
(a) The city adopts a tax limitation of ad valorem property taxes for qualified homesteads of property owners
who are either 65 years of age or older or a disabled person.
(b) The city will not be able to increase homestead ad valorem property taxes to citizens who are disabled, or
age 65 or older unless significant improvements are made to the home other than normal repairs or maintenance.
(c) The city will provide for the extension of such tax limitations to surviving spouses of elderly persons if
such spouse is 55 years of age or older at the time of death of the elderly person.
(Ordinance 09-04 adopted 7/21/09)
State law reference–Homestead exemption for disabled persons and persons over 65 authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13(d)
and (e).
Sec. 11.02.003 Exemption for charitable organizations
(a) Definitions. In this section:
Local charitable organization. An organization that:
(1) Is a chapter, subsidiary, or branch of a statewide charitable organization; and
(2) With respect to its activities in this state, is engaged primarily in performing the following
functions:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/418
(A) Providing medical care without regard to the beneficiaries' ability to pay, which in the
case of a nonprofit hospital or hospital system means providing charity care and community
benefits in accordance with section 11.1801 of the Texas Tax Code;
(B) Providing support or relief to orphans, delinquent, dependent, or handicapped children in
need of residential care, abused or battered spouses or children in need of temporary shelter, the
impoverished, or victims of natural disaster without regard to the beneficiaries' ability to pay;
(C) Providing support to elderly persons, including the provision of recreational or social
activities and facilities designed to address the special needs of elderly persons, or to the
handicapped, without regard to the beneficiaries' ability to pay;
(D) Preserving a historical landmark or site;
(E) Promoting or operating a museum, zoo, library, theater of the dramatic or performing
arts, or symphony orchestra or choir;
(F) Promoting or providing humane treatment of animals;
(G) Acquiring, storing, transporting, selling, or distributing water for public use;
(H) Answering fire alarms and extinguishing fires with no compensation or only nominal
compensation to the members of the organization;
(I) Promoting the athletic development of boys or girls under the age of 18 years;
(J) Preserving or conserving wildlife;
(K) Promoting educational development through loans or scholarships to students;
(L) Providing halfway house services pursuant to a certification as a halfway house by the
pardons and paroles division of the state department of criminal justice;
(M) Providing permanent housing and related social, health care, and educational facilities
for persons who are 62 years of age or older without regard to the residents' ability to pay;
(N) Promoting or operating an art gallery, museum, or collection, in a permanent location or
on tour, that is open to the public;
(O) Providing for the organized solicitation and collection for distributions through gifts,
grants, and agreements to nonprofit charitable, education, religious, and youth organizations
that provide direct human, health, and welfare services;
(P) Performing biomedical or scientific research or biomedical or scientific education for the
benefit of the public;
(Q) Operating a television station that produces or broadcasts educational, cultural, or other
public interest programming and that receives grants from the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting under 47 U.S.C. section 396, as amended;
(R) Providing housing for low-income and moderate-income families, for unmarried
individuals 62 years of age or older, for handicapped individuals, and for families displaced by
urban renewal, through the use of trust assets that are irrevocably and, pursuant to a contract
entered into before December 31, 1972, contractually dedicated on the sale or disposition of the
housing to a charitable organization that performs charitable functions described by subsection
(I);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/418
(S) Providing housing and related services to persons who are 62 years of age or older in a
retirement community, if the retirement community provides independent living services,
assisted living services, and nursing services to its residents on a single campus:
(i) Without regard to the residents' ability to pay; or
(ii) In which at least four percent of the retirement community's combined net resident
revenue is provided in charitable care to its residents; or
(T) Providing housing on a cooperative basis to students of an institution of higher education
if:
(i) The organization is exempt from federal income taxation under section 501(a),
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, by being listed as an exempt entity under
section 501(c)(3)of that code;
(ii) Membership in the organization is open to all students enrolled in the institution and
is not limited to those chosen by current members of the organization;
(iii) The organization is governed by its members; and
(iv) The members of the organization share the responsibility for managing the housing.
Qualified charitable organization. A statewide charitable organization or a local charitable organization.
Statewide charitable organization. A statewide organization that, with respect to its activities in this state, is
engaged primarily in performing functions listed in section 11.18(d) of the Texas Tax Code.
(b) Exemption granted.
(1) A qualified charitable organization shall hereby be entitled to an exemption from taxation of:
(A) The buildings and other real property and the tangible personal property that:
(i) Are owned by the organization; and
(ii) Except as permitted by subsection (b)(2) of this section, are used exclusively by the
organization and other organizations eligible for an exemption from taxation under this
section or section 11.18 of the Texas Tax Code; and
(B) The real property owned by the organization consisting of:
(i) An incomplete improvement that:
a. Is under active construction or other physical preparation; and
b. Is designed and intended to be used exclusively by the organization and other
organizations eligible for an exemption from taxation under this section or under
section 11.18 of the Texas Tax Code; and
(ii) The land on which the incomplete improvement is located that will be reasonably
necessary for the use of the improvement by the organization and other organizations
eligible for an exemption from taxation under this section or under or section 11.18 of the
Texas Tax Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/418
(2) Use of exempt property by persons who are not charitable organizations eligible for an
exemption from taxation under this section or section 11.18 of the Texas Tax Code does not result in
the loss of an exemption authorized by this section if the use is incidental to use by those charitable
organizations and limited to activities that benefit the charitable organization that owns or uses the
property.
(3) Before an organization may submit an application for an exemption to the chief appraiser under
this section, the organization must apply to the comptroller for a determination of whether the
organization is engaged primarily in performing functions listed in subsection (2) of the definition of
“local charitable organization” in subsection (a) of this section and is eligible for an exemption under
this section.
(4) A property may not be exempted under subsection (b)(1)(B) of this section for more than three
years.
(5) For purposes of subsection (b)(1)(B) of this section, an incomplete improvement is under
physical preparation if the charitable organization has:
(A) Engaged in architectural or engineering work, soil testing, land clearing activities, or site
improvement work necessary for the construction of the improvement; or
(B) Conducted an environmental or land use study relating to the construction of the
improvement.
(6) An exemption under this section expires at the end of the fifth tax year after the year in which
the exemption is granted. To continue to receive an exemption under this section after that year, the
organization must obtain a new determination letter and reapply for the exemption.
(Ordinance 03-003, secs. 1.00, 2.00, adopted 7/16/03)
State law reference–Exemption for charitable organizations, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.18.
ARTICLE 11.03 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Definitions
As herein employed, the following words, terms, and phrases are defined as follows:
Consideration. The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall
not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to
the cleaning and making ready of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or
other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes.
Monthly period. The regular calendar month of the year.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms
or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or
agreement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/418
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or
sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or
preceding year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel.
(Ordinance 2001-031, sec. 1, adopted 10/24/01)
Sec. 11.03.002 Levy; rate; exceptions
(a) There is hereby levied, for the purposes provided in section 351.101 Texas Tax Code, a tax upon the cost
of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two
dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to five percent (5%) of the consideration paid by the
occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other
occupancy taxes imposed by [sic] other governmental agencies.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(c) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively
for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
shareholder or individual.
(Ordinance 2001-031, sec. 2, adopted 10/24/01)
Sec. 11.03.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section
11.03.002 hereof for the city. (Ordinance 2001-031, sec. 3, adopted 10/24/01)
Sec. 11.03.004 Reports
(a) On or before the last day of the month following each monthly period, every person required in section
11.03.003 hereof to collect tax imposed herein shall file a report with the director of finance showing the
consideration paid for all room or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of tax
collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the director of finance may reasonably require,
which report shall be in writing. Such persons shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing of
such report. (Ordinance 2001-031, sec. 4, adopted 10/24/01)
(b) At the end of each reporting period, the person required to pay the tax shall provide to the city a copy of
the report filed with the state comptroller. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.03.005 Administrative procedures; access to records
The director of finance shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to
effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon request of any person owning, operating, managing or
controlling any hotel furnish a copy of such procedures, rules and regulations for the guidance of such person
and to facilitate the collection of such tax as such collection is required herein. Such procedures, rules and
regulations shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be placed on file with the city secretary. The director of
finance shall be permitted to have access to books and records during reasonable business hours as shall be
necessary to enable the director of finance to determine the correctness of the amount due under the provisions
of this article, or to determine whether or not a report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of
taxes due. (Ordinance 2001-031, sec. 5, adopted 10/24/01)
Sec. 11.03.006 Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/418
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports as
required herein, and pay to the city the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such report, or pay
such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report, of if any such person shall violate any of the provisions of
this article, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and shall pay to the city the tax due, together
with a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the tax due for each thirty (30) days or portion thereof, that the same is
not timely filed. (Ordinance 2001-031, sec. 6, adopted 10/24/01)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Duties of planning director
(a) Duties of planning director. It shall be the duty of the planning director, or his designee, to:
(1) Conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city
officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions;
(2) Place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required;
(3) Supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices;
(4) Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary;
(5) Establish safety zones, including school zones, of such kind and character and at such places as
he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians;
(6) Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable consistent
with this chapter and other traffic regulations or regulations;
(7) Administer and supervise the issuance of parking violation citations by non-police officer
personnel and administer the collection of fines;
(8) Designate any street as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which the vehicle
shall stop before entering such intersections;
(9) Establish no-parking or limited-parking zones in areas not reserved for city commission
consideration and where an established need exists based on vehicular and pedestrian safety
considerations;
(10) Inspect taxicabs and transit vehicles.
(b) Conformance with state manual. The aforementioned powers and duties shall be exercised in conformance
with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/418
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 2, art. I, sec. 1.00)
Sec. 12.01.002 Ratification of existing traffic-control devices
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected and in use for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic are ratified and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such trafficcontrol
devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. (1999 Unified General Code,
ch. 2, art. I, sec. 2.00)
ARTICLE 12.02 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 12.02.001–12.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Stop Signs†
Sec. 12.02.051 Locations
(a) Except as otherwise indicated, stop signs shall be placed at the following intersections:
7th Street and S. Standard Avenue.
7th Street and San Antonio.
7th Street and Coil Drive.
Coconut Palm and FM 495.
Pullin and FM 495.
San Antonio Avenue and Ridge Road.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 2, art. I, sec. 5.00)
(b) The city is hereby authorized to erect stop signs at the intersections of Cesar Chavez Road and Sam
Houston Avenue, Sgt. Leonel Trevino Road, Sioux Road, and Earling Road by placing signs on the northwest
and southeast corners of the intersections so that vehicles approaching the intersection from the north or south
shall come to a complete stop.
(c) All vehicles entering said intersections from a point whereby it shall face said stop signs shall be required
to come to a complete stop before entering said intersections.
(Ordinance 05-011 adopted 4/26/05)
Secs. 12.02.052–12.02.090 Reserved
Division 3. Speed Limits*
Sec. 12.02.091 Generally
Except as otherwise indicated, the maximum speed limit on all streets shall be 30 miles per hour. (1999 Unified
General Code, ch. 2, art. I, sec. 3.00; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/418
State law reference–Prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.352.
Sec. 12.02.092 Speed limits on specific streets
Business 83. The speed limit on Business 83 shall be as follows:
(1) Between I Road and eighty (80) feet east of Kansas Avenue the maximum speed shall be thirtyfive
(35) miles per hour.
(2) Between eighty (80) feet east of Kansas Avenue and 460 feet east of FM 2557 (Stewart Road)
the maximum speed shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(3) Between 460 feet east of FM 2557 and Cesar Chavez Road the maximum speed shall be fifty
(50) miles per hour.
(Ordinance 04-021 adopted 2/8/05)
Cesar Chavez Road. The speed limit on Cesar Chavez Road shall be as follows:
(1) Beginning at the intersection with Owassa Road, south to a point 5,308 feet south of the
centerline of Owassa Road, the maximum speed shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(2) Beginning at the intersection with Earling Road (Nolana Loop), south to a point 7,946 feet
south of the centerline of Earling Road, the maximum speed shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(3) Beginning at the intersection with FM 495, south to a point 4,281 feet south of the centerline of
FM 495, the maximum speed shall be forty (40) miles per hour.
(Ordinance 2001-010 adopted 4/10/01)
FM 1426 (Raul Longoria Road). The speed limit on FM 1426 (Raul Longoria Road) shall be as follows:
(1) Between the north right-of-way line of Owassa Road and 475 feet north of Nolana Loop the
maximum speed shall be fifty (50) miles per hour.
(2) Between 475 feet north of Nolana Loop and 121 feet north of Jaime Street the maximum speed
shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(3) Between 121 feet north of Jaime Street and FM 495 the maximum speed shall be forty (40)
miles per hour.
(4) Between FM 495 and Business 83 the maximum speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(Ordinance 05-008 adopted 3/22/05)
FM 3461 (Nolana Loop). The speed limit on FM 3461 (Nolana Loop) shall be as follows: Between the east
right-of-way line of I Road and FM 1426 the maximum speed shall be fifty (50) miles per hour. (Ordinance 05-
009 adopted 3/22/05)
Retama Street. The speed limit on Retama Street shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection with FM 495,
south to a point 2,696 feet south of the centerline of FM 495, the maximum speed shall be forty (40) miles per
hour. (Ordinance 2001-009 adopted 4/10/01)
U.S. 83 frontage roads. The speed limit on U.S. 83 frontage roads, eastbound and westbound, shall be as
follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/418
(1) Between I Road and FM 1426 (Raul Longoria Road) the maximum speed shall be fifty (50)
miles per hour.
(2) Between FM 1426 (Raul Longoria Road) and FM 2557 (Stewart Road) the maximum speed
shall be fifty-five (55) miles per hour.
(3) Between FM 2557 (Stewart Road) and Cesar Chavez Road the maximum speed shall be fiftyfive
(55) miles per hour.
(Ordinance 04-015 adopted 2/8/05)
W. Ridge Road. The speed limit on W. Ridge Road shall be as follows:
(1) Beginning at the intersection with South I Road, east to a point 2,543 feet east of the centerline
of South I Road, the maximum speed shall be forty (40) miles per hour. From said point east to a
point 1,539 feet east of the centerline of South San Antonio Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall
be forty (40) miles per hour.
(2) The maximum school speed limit on W. Ridge Road shall be described as follows: Beginning
at the intersection with South I Road, east to a point 1,200 feet east of the centerline of South I Road,
and again from 839 feet east of the centerline of South San Antonio Avenue to the centerline of South
Nebraska Avenue, the maximum speed limit shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour during the times
posted or when the flashing school speed zone signs are in operation and, 40 miles per hour at all
other times.
(Ordinance 2001-008 adopted 4/10/01)
Sec. 12.02.093 School zones
(a) Except as otherwise indicated, the maximum speed limit in all school zones shall be 20 miles per hour
when the flashing school speed zone signs are operating.
(b) When the flashing school speed zone signs are not operating and at all other times, the maximum speed
limit shall be 30 miles per hour.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 2, art. I, sec. 4.00)
ARTICLE 12.03 PARKING GENERALLY*
Sec. 12.03.001 Roadway parking areas
Except as otherwise indicated, the following streets or street segments shall be designated as roadway parking:
(1) On Kansas Avenue between the intersection of Business 83 and the intersection of Kansas
Avenue;
(2) On E. 6th Street between the intersection of Kansas Avenue and the intersection of Iowa
Avenue; and
(3) On Iowa Avenue between the intersection of E. 6th Street and the intersection of Business 83.
(1999 Unified General Code, ch. 2, art. I, sec. 6.00)
Sec. 12.03.002 No parking zones
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/418
(a) Findings. The city commission hereby finds that motor vehicle parking on South San Antonio Avenue
between the intersection of 14th Street and Ridge Road will cause traffic congestion which poses health and
safety hazards in the immediate area.
(b) Designation. It is ordered that the above-described street within the above-described section shall be a “no
parking” zone and shall be clearly marked as such by the use of distinguishing markings and signs as “no
parking.”
(c) Signs. The placement of all parking/traffic signs shall conform to the procedures and criteria prescribed in
the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(Ordinance 2002-005 adopted 6/12/02)
ARTICLE 12.04 TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES*
Sec. 12.04.001 Enforcement; penalty
(a) The chief of police, or his designee, shall be the principal agent for the enforcement of these regulations.
(b) However, the city manager in his discretion may appoint additional persons to enforce these regulations.
(c) If a vehicle is found to be in violation of this article, the enforcement officer may issue a citation to the
driver, owner, or operator of the oversized commercial vehicle.
(Ordinance 2002-012, sec. 8.00, adopted 8/27/02)
Sec. 12.04.002 Truck routes designated
The city designates the following streets as a truck route:
Alameda Street.
Cesar Chavez Road.
FM 495.
FM 1426.
Leopard Street (Oblate Street).
North and South Nebraska Avenue.
Raul Longoria Road.
Ridge Road (between I Road and S. Nebraska Avenue).
Sam Houston Blvd. (between I Road and Standard Avenue).
San Antonio Avenue (south of Sam Houston Blvd.).
Sgt. Trevino Street.
Sioux Road.
South Standard Avenue (between U.S. Highway 83 and Eleventh).
Stewart Road (south from Express 83).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/418
U.S. Highway 83.
(Ordinance 2002-012, sec. 1.00, adopted 8/27/02)
Sec. 12.04.003 Oversized commercial vehicle defined
For the purposes of this article, “oversized commercial vehicle” shall mean any vehicle designated below, or any
vehicle designed for the transport of property or cargo with a gross weight rating, as those terms defined in state
law, of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds, or any vehicle designed for the transport of more than
fifteen (15) passengers, inclusive of the driver. Designated vehicles, for purposes of this section, are dump
trucks, truck-tractors, concrete mixing trucks, stake-bed trucks, buses, trailers which are more than twenty (20)
feet in length from end to end, more than seven (7) feet in width at their widest point, or more than seven (7) feet
in height at their highest point, or vehicles similar to any of the listed vehicles. The term “oversized vehicle”
shall exclude any self-contained recreational vehicle which has a kitchen, bath or sleeping quarters and is
designed for recreational purposes. (Ordinance 2002-012, sec. 2.00, adopted 8/27/02)
Sec. 12.04.004 Use of truck routes required
It shall be unlawful to operate any truck on any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city except on
those streets designated as a truck route herein and as may be further excepted by these regulations or this
article. (Ordinance 2002-012, sec. 3.00, adopted 8/27/02)
Sec. 12.04.005 Parking of oversized commercial vehicles on street
It shall be unlawful for the driver, owner or operator of an oversized commercial vehicle, as the term is defined
in section 12.04.003, to park the same, or permit the same to be parked, stand or remain motionless, for a period
in excess of two (2) hours, on any street in the city. (Ordinance 2002-012, sec. 4.00, adopted 8/27/02)
Sec. 12.04.006 Parking of oversized commercial vehicles on residential property
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow to be parked any oversized commercial vehicle on any
property under his control on any portion of a front yard, side yard or rear yard of any area or district which is
residentially zoned under the comprehensive zoning ordinance or used for residential purposes. (Ordinance
2002-012, sec. 5.00, adopted 8/27/02)
Sec. 12.04.007 Parking in alleys
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any alley within the city; subject, however, to the
exception that such vehicles may be parked temporarily when engaged in a bona fide business purpose as set out
in section 12.04.008(a)(1), (2) and (3), and which must be completed within a reasonable period of time.
(Ordinance 2002-012, sec. 6.00, adopted 8/27/02)
Sec. 12.04.008 Exceptions
(a) Exceptions: A truck is being operated for the following limited purposes:
(1) A bona fide business purpose limited to pickup and delivery of goods, merchandise, or produce
at a point in the city which is not accessible in the truck route;
(2) To provide emergency medical services or conduct rescue operations for persons in health or
life endangered situations;
(3) The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city's public utilities, or any contractor or
materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street
improvements, or street utilities within the city limits;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/418
(4) To comply with an official detour order of the city or of another authorized public authority; or
(5) Private and public school buses.
(b) All trucks operating pursuant to the authority of this section:
(1) Shall proceed only over the truck route; and
(2) Shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted,
nearest to its destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to
the truck route by the shortest route available.
(c) Parking: When engaged in a bona fide business purpose as set out in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (3) of this
section, and which must be completed within a reasonable period of time.
(Ordinance 2002-012, sec. 7.00, adopted 8/27/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.05 BICYCLE CORRIDOR
Sec. 12.05.001 Findings
(a) The city has built, maintains and operates a public street system within its corporate boundaries.
(b) In the exercise of its police power reposed in it by law, the city finds that the use of certain streets and
highways can be shared safely and efficiently by motorists and bicyclists.
(c) The city seeks to maintain a high quality of life for its residents, and to promote the health and welfare of
its resident bicyclists by regulating the parking of traffic on certain streets and highways.
(d) The city seeks to protect its resident bicyclists by restricting the parking of motor vehicles on certain
streets and highways designated as “bicycle corridors” in the adopted Hidalgo County MPO bicycle plan.
(e) S.H. 495 is designated as a bicycle corridor in the adopted Hidalgo County MPO bicycle plan.
(f) The state department of transportation requires a no-parking ordinance in order to allow bicycle lanes on
each side of the roadway.
(Ordinance O-06-02, sec. 1.00, adopted 7/11/06)
Sec. 12.05.002 Definitions
Authorized emergency vehicle. A fire department or police vehicle and a public or private ambulance.
Bicycle. A device that a person may ride and that is propelled by human power and has two tandem wheels at
least one of which is more than 14 inches in diameter.
Designated bicycle corridor. Any public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city designed and/or
designated to accommodate self-propelled vehicles.
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is self-propelled by an engine or motor. Without
limitation, and by way of example only, motor vehicle includes truck-tractors, trailers, semi-trailers, housetrailers
and motorcycles.
Street. Any public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city designed primarily for accommodating
vehicular traffic, including any paved portions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/418
Vehicle. Every mechanical device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn
upon a public highway, which may be required to be registered or licensed under the laws of this state, including
motor vehicles, but excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
(Ordinance O-06-02, sec. 2.00, adopted 7/11/06)
Sec. 12.05.003 Designation
The city designates S.H. 495 between I Road and Cesar Chavez Road as a city bicycle corridor. (Ordinance O-
06-02, sec. 3.00, adopted 7/11/06)
Sec. 12.05.004 Parking of motor vehicles prohibited
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any designated bicycle lane or right-of-way in a designated
bicycle corridor within the corporate limits of the city. All motor vehicle traffic is prohibited from parking unless
further excepted by this regulation. (Ordinance O-06-02, sec. 4.00, adopted 7/11/06)
Sec. 12.05.005 Exceptions
The operation of any emergency vehicle may be permitted on any bicycle lane within the bicycle corridor within
the corporate limits of the city, provided such emergency motor vehicle is being operated or parked for the
following limited purpose:
(1) A bona fide business purpose requiring the use of emergency equipment, such as, but not
limited to, fire trucks, police cars, ambulances, or personnel associated with the emergency;
(2) To provide emergency medical services or conduct rescue operations for persons in health or
life endangered situations; or
(3) The operation of trucks or commercial motor vehicles owned or operated by the city, or any or
its lawful agents, while engaged in a legitimate governmental or proprietary function of the city, such
as, but not limited to, public utilities, public works, and police and fire activities, within the city.
(Ordinance O-06-02, sec. 5.00, adopted 7/11/06)
ARTICLE 12.06 VULNERABLE ROAD USERS
Sec. 12.06.001 Authority; area
(a) The city hereby adopts and enacts this article that shall be enforceable within the municipality's municipal
boundaries. This article and provisions herewith shall be included in this code.
(b) As matters related to the public's health, safety, and welfare is of the utmost concern, the city shall be
authorized to enforce, through its city attorney, this article as may be allowed by law herein.
Sec. 12.06.002 Definitions
Vulnerable road user.
(1) A pedestrian, including a runner, physically disabled person, community or school volunteers,
child, skater, highway construction or maintenance worker, tow truck operator, utility worker, law
enforcement personnel acting in furtherance of the color of law, worker with legitimate business on
or near the road or right-of-way, or stranded or detained motorist or passenger;
(2) A person on horseback; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/418
(3) A person operating equipment other than a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to: a
bicycle, moped, motor-driven cycle, or motor-assisted scooter.
Sec. 12.06.003 Restrictions on operating a motor vehicle near vulnerable road users
(a) An operator of a motor vehicle passing or approaching a vulnerable road user operating on a roadway,
street, or alley shall:
(1) Vacate the lane in which the vulnerable road user is located if the highway or street has two or
more marked lanes running in the same direction; and
(2) Pass the vulnerable road user at a safe distance and speed.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a) above, when road or travel conditions allow, a safe distance is not less
than:
(1) Three (3) feet if the operator's vehicle is a passenger car or light truck;
(2) Six (6) feet if the operator's vehicle is a truck, other than a light truck, or a commercial motor
vehicle as defined by Texas Transportation Code section 522.003.
(c) An operator of a motor vehicle that is making a left turn at an intersection, including an intersection with
an alley or private road or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to a vulnerable road user who is approaching
from the opposite direction and is in intersection, or is in such proximity to the intersection as to be an
immediate hazard.
(d) An operator of a motor vehicle may not overtake a vulnerable road user traveling in the same direction and
subsequently make a right-hand turn in front of the vulnerable road user unless the operator is safely clear of the
vulnerable road user, taking into account the speed at which the vulnerable road user is traveling and the braking
requirements of the motor vehicle making the right-hand turn.
(e) An operator of a motor vehicle may not maneuver the vehicle in a manner that:
(1) Is intended to cause intimidation or harassment to a vulnerable road user; or
(2) Threatens a vulnerable road user.
(f) An operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any vulnerable road user on a
roadway or in an intersection or roadways.
Sec. 12.06.004 Penalties; restitution
(a) All penalties for violators of this article shall be subject to a class C misdemeanor with a fine between
$50.00–$500.00. A violation shall be subject to the provisions contained in this chapter “traffic and vehicles.”
Violators shall also be subject to Texas Local Government Code section 431.001, Texas Transportation Code
section 542.202(a)(2), Texas Penal Code, and any other applicable laws. A violator shall also be subject to the
maximum penalties allowed by law for failing to appear in court when charged with an offense as described
herein.
(b) Should a violation result in property or other harm, restitution may be ordered.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article if at the time of the offense; the vulnerable
road user was acting in violation of law.
(Ordinance 13-23 adopted 9/24/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/418
ARTICLE 12.07 USE OF PORTABLE ELECTRONIC DEVICES
Sec. 12.07.001 Definitions
Authorized emergency personnel. A person who is a law enforcement officer, firefighter, member of a
governmental emergency medical services function, or member of a governmental emergency management
function.
Operating a motorized vehicle. To drive or be in physical control of a motor vehicle that is in motion.
Operating a nonmotorized vehicle. To drive or be in physical control of a vehicle that is allowed by law to be
used in a city public street but has no engine.
Portable electronic device. A handheld mobile telephone, personal digital assistant, text messaging device, MP3,
or other handheld music player, electronic reading device, laptop computer, pager, broadband personal
communication device, global positioning or navigation system, electronic game device, or portable computing
device.
Use of a portable electronic device. Without limitation, the following activities while holding or touching the
device:
(1) Dialing or deactivating a phone call;
(2) Speaking in or listening to a conversation;
(3) Viewing, taking, or transmitting electronic images;
(4) Composing, sending, viewing, accessing, browsing, retrieving, or saving email messages, text
messages, or other electronic data;
(5) Entering or changing information in a global positioning or navigation system or any software
or application designed for navigation;
(6) Accessing or viewing an internet website or computer application; or
(7) Playing a game.
Sec. 12.07.002 Use of a wireless communications device and fines
(a) An operator of a motor vehicle may not use a portable electronic device while the vehicle is in motion.
(b) A person may not use a portable electronic device while operating a nonmotorized vehicle.
(c) A person convicted of an offense under this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 per
violation.
Sec. 12.07.003 Exceptions
(a) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this section if:
(1) The motorized or nonmotorized vehicle is at a complete stop;
(2) The portable electronic device is used in a hands-free mode of operation and used to engage in
telephone communication or to listen to audio transmissions;
(3) The portable electronic device is a global positioning or navigation device, or global
positioning or navigation software on a device, and the device is affixed to the motorized or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/418
nonmotorized vehicle;
(4) Use of a portable electronic device is for obtaining emergency assistance to report a crime,
traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard, or to prevent a crime about to be
committed; or
(5) Use of a portable electronic device is in the reasonable belief that a person's life or safety is in
immediate danger.
(b) This section does not apply to authorized emergency personnel using a portable electronic device while
acting in official capacity.
(c) This section does not apply to an operator who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
while operating a radio frequency device other than a portable electronic device or an operator using a two-way
radio communication device in a commercial vehicle.
Sec. 12.07.004 Conflicting regulations
To the extent that this section conflicts with the Texas Transportation Code section 545.424, regarding the use of
wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors, or Texas Transportation Code
section 545.425, regarding the use of wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, this section does
not apply.
(Ordinance 15-24 adopted 12/10/15)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 13.02 SOLID WASTE AND STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION †
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Definitions
The definitions of this section shall apply to this article. Undefined terms for which a technical meaning is
intended shall be defined as defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
Collection service. Any service provided for a fee involving the picking up, transporting and/or disposal of solid
waste
Construction material. Roof shingles, ceramic tile, carpet, wood, cement, metal, brick and other materials used
to construct, reconstruct or remodel any building or accessory structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/418
Curbside solid waste collection. Collection of solid waste by the city and solid waste placed immediately
adjacent to the street curb.
Dumpster service. Commercial type garbage receptacle.
Garbage. All animal and vegetable matter, such as, but not limited to, waste material and refuse from kitchens,
grocery stores, butcher shops, cafes, restaurants, drug stores, hotels, rooming and boarding houses, or other
places, including, but not limited to, such items as meat scraps, other food scraps, bread, bones, fruit and
vegetable peelings and remains and other deleterious substances.
Head of family or household. The following:
(1) The father or mother in a family, then residing in, or in possession or control of, a building, lot
or property; or
(2) If no father or mother, then the oldest member of the family or household, then residing in, or
in possession or control of, a building, lot of property.
Immediately adjacent to. Immediately next to.
Occupant. The following:
(1) The record owner of a building, lot, or property:
(A) If the record owner (whether one or more) is in current possession;
(B) If the building, lot, or property is unoccupied or abandoned; or
(C) If the building, lot or property is occupied by more than one family or tenant, whether
authorized by the record owner or not.
(2) The tenant of a building, lot or property if the record owner is not current occupant of the
building, lot or property, and there is only one family occupying the property.
(3) Determination of occupant; rebuttable presumption. It shall be rebuttably presumed that the
owner of any structure, material or substance which has been placed or allowed to accumulate as
prohibited under section 13.02.004 hereof is the occupant of the lot, building or property to which the
structure, material or substance is immediately adjacent.
Solid waste. Any refuse, including but not limited to trash, garbage and construction materials.
Solid waste collection vehicle. Any vehicle, dumpster or bin, self-propelled, transported or towed, used for the
collection of solid waste.
Tenant. When used in connection with the use or occupancy of a building, lot, or property shall mean the head of
the family or household.
Trash. Rubbish such as, but not limited to, feathers, tin cans, bottles, paper, rags, grass, boxes and cartons, old
clothes and shoes, ashes, grass trimmings, hedge, tree, plant and shrub trimmings, leaves and limbs, yard
cleanings and construction materials and other similar items.
Sec. 13.02.002 Penalty; removal of nuisances by city
(a) Fines. A violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/418
(b) Nuisance removal. In addition to imposing a fine hereunder, the city may remove the nuisance and recover
all its reasonable costs incurred in removing the nuisance.
Sec. 13.02.003 Placement of waste in certain areas declared nuisance
Unless expressly exempted herein, the placement of any structure, equipment, material or substance, including,
but not limited to, debris, garbage, brush, rubbish, trash, building materials, furniture, and appliances and
mechanical items of any kind on any part or portion of a public or private street, sidewalk, walkway, alley,
public right-of-way, utility or other easement, or on a place immediately adjacent thereto, where it is visible
from a public place or public right-of-way is:
(1) A public nuisance and a detriment to the safety and welfare of the general public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates fire hazards;
(5) Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minor; and
(6) Is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city.
Sec. 13.02.004 Placement of waste or structures in right-of-way
It shall be unlawful for any person to: (1) build or construct, or allow or permit, any structure, including garbage
bins or racks to be used to hold garage receptacles, to remain upon; or (2) sweep, throw, dump, place, deposit, or
allow or permit any material or substance, including, but not limited to, debris, garbage, rubbish, brush, trash,
building materials, furniture, appliances, and mechanical items, to be placed or to accumulate upon or along, any
gutter, alley, sidewalk, drain, street, or street right-of-way, or any portion of any vacant lot between the curb and
property line, unless this article otherwise so permits or expressly exempts such act.
(Ordinance 15-03 adopted 2/17/15)
Sec. 13.02.005 Receptacles; placement of waste for collection
(a) Approved garbage receptacles. The temporary placement of garbage receptacles on a street right-of-way
by an occupant shall be exempt from the application of section 13.02.004 if the receptacle has been authorized
by the city. The currently authorized garbage receptacles are limited to city-issued 90-gallon containers for
single-family residential users and 300-gallon containers for multifamily residential, commercial and industrial
users. Authorized brush, leaves and trimming receptacles are plastic garbage bags with the following
specifications: 10 mils.
(b) Placing receptacles and trash for collection.
(1) It shall be the duty of every occupant of the lot, building or property, adjacent to a right-of-way
or other location from which the garbage or trash is to be collected to place the garbage receptacle at
a location on the street right-of-way:
(A) Between the street curb and the fence or property line; and/or
(B) Where it may be easily accessible to the person or equipment collecting and removing
trash or garbage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/418
(2) In the event it is not practicable to collect and remove the garbage receptacle from a street
right-of-way, the occupant of the premises shall place the receptacle at such location on his property
as the city shall assign and designate as the most convenient and accessible.
(3) At no time shall the receptacle be placed so that any alley, drain, gutter, sidewalk, street, or
street right-of-way will be blocked or obstructed from the city's garbage collection equipment.
(c) Placing brush for collection. It shall be the duty of every occupant of the lot, building or property, adjacent
to a right-of-way or other location from which the brush is to be collected to place the brush at a location on the
street right-of-way at a location:
(1) Between the street curb and the fence or property line; and/or
(2) Where it may be easily accessible to the person or equipment collecting and removing trash or
garbage.
(3) In accessible stacks or piles as herein set out to facilitate removal of same.
(4) The placement of brush shall be along the alley or within the front yard/front right-of-way
away from water or gas meters. In subdivisions that have no alleys no brush shall be placed behind a
back fence or behind a lot or parcel or along the side yard/side right-of-way on corner lots.
(5) When placing materials, other than construction materials, along the alley or along the front
right-of-way it shall be separated from the brush.
(6) No person shall be allowed to place brush along the alley or along the front right-of-way within
four (4) weeks of the pick-up of brush within that neighborhood.
(7) Violations of this subsection shall be punishable by fines not to exceed $2,000.00 for each
violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(d) Violation defined. It shall be unlawful for any person or occupant to:
(1) Sweep, throw, dump, place, deposit, or allow or permit any material or substance including, but
not limited to, debris, garbage, rubbish, brush, trash, building materials, furniture, appliances, and
mechanical items to be placed to accumulate upon or along any:
(A) Gutter;
(B) Alley;
(C) Sidewalk;
(D) Drain;
(E) Street;
(F) Street right-of-way; or
(G) Any portion of any vacant lot between curb and property line, unless this article
otherwise so permits or expressly exempts such act.
(2) Place or allowing to remain at a brush collection location:
(A) Tree limbs and trunks shall not exceed three (3) feet in length.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/418
(B) Brush, leaves and cuttings, unless placed in plastic container or a garbage container to
prevent from blowing or scattering.
(C) Leaves, hedge and shrub cuttings, and small loose material other than in an approved
receptacles as set out in subsection (a).
(Ordinance 15-14, sec. 2, adopted 9/21/15)
Sec. 13.02.006 Exemptions
(a) Exemptions specified. The following acts are also exempt from prosecution and proof thereof shall
constitute a complete defense hereunder:
(1) If a person places the material or substance in a suitable receptacle as set out in section
13.02.005 at a location under the orders or instructions of the city which may be issued in writing,
posted or other public notice thereof given;
(2) If a person places the material or substance in a suitable receptacle as set out in section
13.02.005(c) at a location under the orders or instructions of the city which may be issued in writing,
posted or other public notice thereof given; or
(3) If a person places the material or substance for a reasonable temporary period, not to exceed
five (5) business days, for pick up by the city, or another party with whom the person has contracted
or made specific arrangements for pick up within no later than five (5) business days.
(b) Reliance on exemptions. Exemptions shall not be improvidently granted by the court. The burden of proof
on an exemption claim shall lie with the occupant.
Sec. 13.02.007 Collection and removal generally
(a) Except as provided for in special cases, it shall be the duty of the city to collect and remove all garbage
from receptacles once a week as required by these regulations, in a reasonable and expeditious manner. The city
manager shall be responsible for establishing collection routes, days and times for collection.
(b) Nothing herein shall require the collection and disposal by the city of garbage and trash items which are of
such a nature and size as to not allow for the collection and disposal of garbage and trash; it being the
responsibility of the person, disposing of such items to arrange for removal and disposal.
Sec. 13.02.008 Removal of dirt and trash from yard leveling, landscaping, etc.
(a) It shall be the duty of a party responsible for dirt, trash and turf resulting from yard leveling or similar
work to remove same at his expense.
(b) This shall include trash accumulation of weeds, grass, trees, shrubs, or flowers resulting from landscaping,
and beautification of yards and grounds whether residential, business, industrial, school, church, public, private
or otherwise.
(c) This shall not apply to vegetation trash resulting from the operation of commercial florists, nurseries and
greenhouses where such vegetation trash accumulations result from the above enumerated vegetation items
being sold, processed or otherwise handled by such commercial florists, nurseries and greenhouses in the general
operation of their business for private gain.
Sec. 13.02.009 Removal of waste created by tree surgeons, nurserymen or landscapers
It shall be the duty of all tree surgery operators, nurserymen, or landscapers to provide their own facilities and
equipment for the removal and disposal of trees, tree trunks, or other similar accumulations of trash or debris
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/418
created by them.
Sec. 13.02.010 Disposal of heavy accumulations and industrial waste
(a) It shall be the duty of the owner/occupant to dispose of discarded automobile bodies, frames, or other
heavy, bulky refuse or trash, and all industrial waste resulting from manufacturing operations, canning plants,
packing plants, fruit and/or vegetable sheds, cotton gins, slaughterhouses for animals or poultry, and fish houses.
(b) A special charge for use of city disposal facilities shall be set by the city manager if said material can be
disposed of by the city.
Sec. 13.02.011 Exclusive municipal service for garbage collection
(a) The city shall be exclusively responsible for garbage collection service for all residential and commercial
accounts within the city limits.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership providing garbage collection within the city
limits shall be in violation of this section, guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to being fined, upon conviction
by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
Sec. 13.02.012 Commercial delinquent accounts
All commercial delinquent accounts that are past due must make payment arrangements within (10) business
days of the postmark of the city letter notifying the account holder of delinquent account. If no payment
arrangement is agreed upon within the ten-day allotted time the container will be removed by the city until the
delinquent account is paid in full. If the garbage container is removed the city's sanitation department will work
with the health department to close the business since no business in the city shall operate without regular
garbage removal.
(Ordinance 15-03 adopted 2/17/15)
Secs. 13.02.013–13.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Rates, Charges and Billing
Sec. 13.02.051 Customer classifications; rate schedule
(a) Classifications.
(1) Class I, single-family service 90 gallon container. Shall include all single family residences as
well as mobile home/travel trailer parks.
(2) Class II, multifamily and commercial service 300 gallon container. Multifamily shall include
travel trailer parks/mobile home parks, duplexes, apartments, including garage apartments, and other
properties on which more than one family resides. Commercial service includes any retail or service
business and industrial operations, churches, schools and nonprofit organizations.
(3) Class III, 3 cubic yard container. Includes all other customers not included in class I and II.
(4) Class IV. 6 cubic yard container.
(5) Class V. 8 cubic yard container.
(6) Class VI. 10 cubic yard container.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/418
(7) Class VII, pickup trucks. All size noncommercial pickup.
(8) Class VIII, trailers. All size noncommercial trailers.
(9) Class IX, brush truck. All size noncommercial brush trucks.
(10) Class X, roll off trucks. All size noncommercial roll off trucks.
(b) Monthly rates.
Container Service Rate Stormwater fee*
Class I
90 gallon (residential) Once-a-week $17.20 1.55
90 gallon
(commercial)
Once-a-week $30.50 2.00
Class II 300 gallon
Once a week $74.11 6.75
Twice a week $135.83 13.50
Three times a week $196.25 20.25
Class III 3 cubic yard
Once a week $74.11 $6.75
Twice a week $135.83 $13.50
Three times a week $196.25 $20.25
Four times a week $256.67 $27.00
Five times a week $317.09 $33.75
Six times a week $377.51 $40.50
Class IV 6 cubic yard Once a week $119.20 $12.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/418
Twice a week $238.39 $24.00
Three times a week $357.58 $36.00
Four times a week $476.77 $48.00
Five times a week $595.96 $60.00
Six times a week $715.15 $72.00
Class V 8 cubic yard
Once a week $149.20 $14.00
Twice a week $268.39 $26.00
Three times a week $387.58 $38.00
Four times a week $506.77 $50.00
Five times a week $625.96 $62.00
Six times a week $745.15 $74.00
Class VI 10 cubic yard Once a week $179.20 $16.00
Twice a week $298.39 $28.00
Three times a week $417.58 $40.00
Four times a week $536.77 $52.00
Five times a week $655.96 $64.00
Six times a week $775.15 $76.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/418
*Stormwater pollution prevention fee: This fee shall be used to purchase or finance a street sweeper and/or a road patcher
and all the expenses associated with the operation of these machines including personnel. Funds may also be used towards
the purchase of asphalt for the patching of potholes throughout the city or for drainage improvement projects. The
stormwater pollution prevention fees are to be held in a separate fund account.
(c) Disposal of construction debris rates. Must show proof of city residency and building permit:
(1) Class VII, pick-up truck: $55.00.
(2) Class VIII, trailer: $135.00.
(3) Class IX, brush truck: $200.00.
(4) Class X, roll off container: $325.00.
(d) Multiple classifications. In cases in which the premises consist of more than one classification (i.e.
residential and commercial), the rates to be charged shall be established as a combination of the rate for the
highest rate for one of the classifications, plus fifty-percent (50%) of the rate for the additional classifications.
(e) Additional containers. Upon request, an additional container shall be provided to a class I user at an
additional rate of $10.00 per month.
(f) A $50.00 deposit will be charged for all residential accounts.
(g) A $200.00 per container deposit will be charged for all commercial accounts.
(Ordinance 18-04 adopted 4/10/18)
Sec. 13.02.052 Special classifications; classification and rate adjustments
(a) Property, premises, or buildings with two or more classifications. If any business or commercial institution
in the city shall, in the same building, premises or area, engage in business activities listed in more than one of
the use schedules above, the primary business activity of said business or commercial institution shall prevail in
the determination of the classification and rate to be charged.
(b) Business property, premises or building not otherwise classified or covered. If any business, commercial
institution, or property situated in the city is not specifically listed in any of the foregoing schedules, said
business, institution, or property shall be classified and charged the rate of a similar business listed in said
schedule.
(c) Classification adjustments. If a business function or activity cannot be properly classified according to the
above schedules, or where the classification rate in the customer's opinion is manifestly unfair, and equitable
rates under their circumstances, the city manager is given the exclusive authority to resolve the classification,
with the right of appeal by the customer to the city commission, who shall, after a hearing with the affected
party, set the reasonable rate.
(d) Reporting. In all cases in which a rate adjustment has been made hereunder, the city manager shall keep a
record of same, which shall be a public record.
Sec. 13.02.053 Applicability of charges; appeal procedure
(a) The charges fixed for collection, removal, and disposal of garbage and trash within the city shall be levied
and assessed by the city against all occupants of a building, structure, premises, or other location where such
service is received or is available.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/418
(b) As soon as reasonably practicable after approval of this article, the city manager shall develop a written
procedure for hearing of appeals by customers which shall be finally resolved at the city manager's level and
submit same for approval by the city commission.
Sec. 13.02.054 Billing and payment of charges
(a) Charges for garbage collection shall be billed by the city each month as a separate item on the water bill of
all persons who received water bills from the utility billing department. For customers that get water from the
North Alamo Water Supply Corporation the garbage fee shall be billed through the North Alamo Water Supply
Corporation utility bill.
(b) Such charges shall be due and payable at the time and place and in the same manner as such water bills.
(c) A person who receives garbage and/or trash collection service and has a sewer or water charge, shall be
billed each month through regular U.S. Mail channels, addressed to such person's address, and the charge shall
be due and payable by such person to the city within ten (10) days after the date of the bill. The utility billing
department is authorized to collect all garbage and trash collection charges for the city, and shall account to the
city for such collections, and such charges shall be paid into the general fund of the city. The garbage department
shall pay the utility billing department a reasonable sum for its billing, collecting, and recordkeeping service for
garbage and trash.
(d) A person who does not receive water services from the city or the North Alamo Water Supply Corporation
shall pay to a third party as instructed by the city manager consistent with any agreement which may be made by
the city.
Sec. 13.02.055 Failure to pay charges
(a) Any person required to pay charges and who fails to do so before same becomes delinquent, i.e. ten (10)
days after the due date, shall have his/her water and sewer service through the municipal system discontinued
and his/her water meter cut off or disconnected. The city may refuse to provide water service until such time as
the delinquent garbage and trash service charge is paid in full.
(b) If any person has his/her garbage and trash collection service discontinued by the city, said garbage must
otherwise be collected and disposed of by such person. It shall be a violation to fail to collect and dispose of said
garbage and trash.
Secs. 13.02.056–13.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Private Collectors
Sec. 13.02.101 City to be notified of yard and construction site cleanup
Any property owner who engages the services of a person to perform yard cleanup, including trimming trees and
brush or construction site cleanup, and who will produce trimmings or other material that can be disposed of in
the city's standard solid waste containers, shall promptly notify the city of the week during which the cleanup
will take place.
Sec. 13.02.102 Vehicles; containers; duties of permittee on termination of service
(a) All vehicles used in the collection of garbage and trash by any permittee within the city shall meet the
minimum specifications relating to safety and health as promulgated and established by the department of state
health services for the purposes of collection of garbage and trash within the city.
(b) It shall be the obligation of the permittee to see that all containers used for trash collection by the
permittee meet the specifications for such containers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/418
(c) It shall be unlawful to use city right-of-way for the purpose of storing or collecting garbage or trash from
any commercial-type dumpster container, by any permittee.
(d) It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to remove the container and any accumulation of garbage,
trash, or brush should any customer of a permittee cancel or have service canceled as a final collection. The
permittee shall notify the city of the date of termination and the date of the above-mentioned final collection.
Sec. 13.02.103 Collectors operating on effective date
All persons collecting garbage and trash, other than the city, who come under the provisions of this division shall
apply for a permit from the city within thirty (30) days from the effective date. Any such persons applying for a
permit within the time limit as specified above or who shall have applied for renewal of a permit within the
appropriate time period shall have the right to continue operations during the pendency of the consideration of
such person's permit application.
(Ordinance 15-03 adopted 2/17/15)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Utility. Water, sewer and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof.
(Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (2), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.002 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance to a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each
transaction in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ordinance 99-014,
sec. IV, adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.003 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the mayor and/or his designated officer to enforce this division in accordance with chapter
54 of the Texas Local Government Code and any other relevant statutes. If such violation is not corrected within
the statutory period, the mayor and/or his designated officer is hereby authorized and directed to cause any
utility service to be disconnected. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. III, adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.004 Applicability
All pertinent provisions of this division are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city
shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections, or perform
any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the city commission. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (3), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.005 Mandatory connection
All dwellings and businesses within the boundaries of the city's corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction
(ETJ), the owners or occupants of which require water and wastewater services for the ordinary and customary
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/418
use and which are approximately located to water and wastewater facilities of the city such that water and
wastewater services may be reasonably provided therefrom [shall be connected to the city's facilities], unless it is
provided otherwise in writing by the city. When water or wastewater services become available to a dwelling or
business from facilities of the city in accordance with this rule, the dwelling or business must connect to the
city's facilities within a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days after service becomes available. The city
shall give notice of the mandatory connection requirement set forth in this rule to owners and occupants when
service become available. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (1), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.006 Compliance with applicable regulations
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this division shall be in accordance with and in compliance
with all applicable technical provisions of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (4), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.007 Establishment of standards for installation, construction and maintenance
The city commission shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications
as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system
owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the city commission.
Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. Violation of
such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II
(5), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.008 Water or sewer taps outside city
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any water or sewer taps outside the city limits
until the premises involved have been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. (Ordinance 99-014,
sec. II (6), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.009 Right of entry of inspectors
Any authorized inspector of the city shall [have] free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility
service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility service from abusive use.
(Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (7), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.010 Termination of refusal of service
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Failure to meet the applicable provisions of the law.
(2) Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service.
(3) Nonpayment of bills.
(4) Willful of negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or
otherwise.
(5) Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility
service.
(6) Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor.
(7) Vacancy of premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/418
(Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (8), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.011 Liability of city for damage
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to
backflow of the sewage system, failure of supply, or interruption of service, or for any other cause outside the
direct control of the city. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (9), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.012 Application for service
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for such service to the city
secretary. Such application shall contain the applicant's name and address and the uses for which such utility
service is desired. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (10), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.013 Refusal of service to persons in debt to city
The city [may] decline of [or] fail to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any
reason, except ad valorem taxes and special assessments. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (11), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.014 Damaging or tampering with equipment; trespassing on utility premises
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any
utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any
equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (12),
adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.015 Temporary interruption of service
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an
interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected
customers will be notified as circumstances permit. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (13), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.016 Right of city to restrict use
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the
city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. (Ordinance
99-014, sec. II (14), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.017 Resale of service
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell to others any utility service obtained from the city except only by
special arrangement with the city commission. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (15), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.018 Supervision of connections
Connection for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made only under the supervision of the public
works director. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (16), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.019 Separate connections required
Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. (Ordinance 99-
014, sec. II (17), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.020 Unlawful connections
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/418
Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or
not, without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (18), adopted 10/27/99)
Sec. 13.03.021 Work to be done by city employees
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn off or disconnect any utility
service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service.
(Ordinance 99-014, sec. II (19), adopted 10/27/99)
Secs. 13.03.022–13.03.060 Reserved
Division 2. Rates, Charges and Billing
Part I. In General
Sec. 13.03.061 Installation of connections and taps
The city hereby establishes the following general policy governing the operation and maintenance of its water
and sewer system:
(1) All connections of users to the city utility system shall be performed by city personnel or under
supervision of the city;
(2) Utility connecting operations will be performed in a manner and method determined by the city
engineer, except as specifically provided;
(3) A sewer tap may be performed by non-city personnel, but only where it is performed by a duly
licensed master plumber who is on the city's list of approved plumbers.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. I, sec. 1.00, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.062 Billing schedule
The city shall bill its water and sewer customers on a monthly basis. Water meters shall be read on or before the
30th day of every month and bills shall be mailed to customers no later than the 10th day of the following
month. The city manager is hereby authorized to alter the city's procedures regarding reading meters and the
billing of customers, including changes to the number of billing cycles per month, as necessary to serve new
customers added to the system. (Ordinance 2002-001, div. I, sec. 1.01, adopted 4/10/02)
Secs. 13.03.063–13.03.100 Reserved
Part II. Initiation of Service
Sec. 13.03.101 Application for service
(a) No new utility service shall be provided to any customer unless:
(1) An application for service has been completed.
(2) The application shall, at a minimum, require the following information of the applicant:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/418
(A) Name, social security number, and Texas driver's license or ID card of an adult 21 years
or older in the household;
(B) Current employer (address and phone number), if any;
(C) At least two credit references; and
(D) Legal documentation of ownership of real property (i.e., warranty deed or deed of trust).
(3) The applicant shall authorize the city in writing to inquire about the information supplied in the
application.
(4) The city's inspections department has approved the service.
(b) The city shall ensure that an application form is prepared.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. II, sec. 2.00, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.102 Denial of service
(a) Service shall never be denied to an applicant by the city's finance department unless the department has
made the following determination:
(1) It is likely that the applicant(s) will incur a combined water and sewer rate in excess of $150.00
for any 30-day period; and
(2) The applicant has provided insufficient or inaccurate information to establish the applicant's
credit status.
(3) Failed to satisfy the requirements of section 13.03.103(a).
(4) Failed to clear previous insufficient funds checks to the city.
(b) Upon the denial of service, the applicant shall have the right to:
(1) Provide a third party guarantee to assure that payment for service is promptly made; or
(2) Appeal the decision denying service to the city manager.
(c) In connection with these provisions, the city manager is authorized to establish reasonable rules for the
administration of these policies.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. II, sec. 2.01, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.103 Deposit
(a) New accounts. Any applicant for utility services that:
(1) Has never held a utility account with the city;
(2) Has been a previous customer whose utility service was terminated for failure to pay his/her
account; or
(3) Has previously been refunded their deposit;
shall be required to deposit at a minimum the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the city before being
provided utility services. The city manager is authorized to determine if an additional amount is required to be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/418
deposited on the basis of the projected use of utilities.
(b) Maintenance of special fund. The city's finance department shall take the action necessary to separately
account for customers' refundable deposits, including the maintenance of a separate bank account for these
funds.
(c) Temporary water service. Any applicant for temporary water services that requests a connection to a fire
hydrant or other service line for use in connection with a construction or other temporary use shall be required to
deposit the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the city before being provided utility services. The
balance on the deposit shall be refunded upon completion of the project after a deduction for the use and other
incidental expenses associated with that use.
(d) Outstanding balances. Any customer who requests reconnection to the utility system but who has an
outstanding delinquent balance with the city will be required to liquidate any delinquent balance in addition to
the payment of the deposit before being provided services.
(e) Refund policy. The deposit collected shall be held as a deposit, and not in trust, by the city, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) No interest will be accrued by the customer for the period of time during which the deposit is
held by the city;
(2) The city shall not segregate the amounts held in deposit;
(3) Fifty percent of the deposit shall be refunded to customers within 90 days of receipt by the city
upon satisfactory proof that the customer is the owner of the property receiving utility services;
(4) Tenants shall not be entitled to any refund of their deposit until such time that utility services
are terminated;
(5) Before a final refund upon termination of utility services, the deposit balance shall first be
applied to any delinquent balances on the customer's utility and garbage collection charge, and
remaining funds, if any, shall then be refunded to the customer within 30 days of termination of
services.
(f) Administrative regulations. The city manager is authorized to adopt reasonable regulations to enforce these
policies, including, but not limited to, the authority to retain the balance until 30 days after service is terminated
to pay for any contingencies.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. II, sec. 2.02, adopted 4/10/02)
Secs. 13.03.104–13.03.140 Reserved
Part III. Water Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.03.141 Property with existing service laterals
(a) Since 1975, the city has required all new subdivisions to have utility service laterals from the city's main
water and sewer lines to all subdivision lots installed. Where these laterals exist, the city engineer has approved
the construction of such laterals in conformity with the city's policy (subdivision development major
construction specifications and the subdivision ordinance).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/418
(b) Where these water line service laterals already exist in conjunction with other improvements so that in
installing the tap the city is only required to install the meter, meter couplings and the meter box, without any
other additional expenses of labor, equipment or materials, then the standard water meter tap fee shall be
imposed as provided in table A below.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. III, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.142 Standard meter and tap fees
(a) The city shall install a 3/4-inch water meter for each new account unless otherwise requested and
authorized.
(b) A water meter and tap fee shall be charged for each new tapping of a water main for a service connection,
said charge to be determined by:
(1) The size of the meter connection; and
(2) The character of the surface of the street or alley in which the connection is to be located.
(c) A water meter and tap fee set out at table A includes all of the pipe necessary for the tap not in excess of
eighty (80) feet from the main, valves, fittings, meter and box, and other materials (not including paving repairs)
necessary to convey water from the main to the meter.
(d) The city manager shall adopt, by memorandum, reasonable rates for installation of a water meter and tap
fee in cases in which the service lateral exceeds eighty (80) feet.
(e) If the water main is in the street, the meter shall be set no less than one foot inside the curbline.
(f) Table A shall be used to determine the minimum charge for making taps, said charge being payable in
advance. The water tap fee is in addition to the $100.00 deposit and $35.00 connection fee.
TABLE A
Diameter of Water Meter Minimum Water Meter and Tap
Fee
3/4-inch $300.00
1-inch $390.00
2-inch $960.00
3-inch $2,190.00
4-inch $2,625.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/418
5-inch $5,830.00
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. III, sec. 3.00, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.143 Oversized meter and tap fee
(a) Any meter tap requiring a meter larger than one inch in diameter or a service line greater than eighty (80)
feet in length shall require payment of a meter and tap fee equal to the actual cost of installation, plus ten (10)
percent, less the cost of the minimum charge as determined by table A.
(b) If it is necessary to cut paved streets to install a water meter and tap, a reasonable charge shall be made to
defray the cost of repairing the street.
(c) The city manager is authorized to adopt, by memorandum, the reasonable charges to defray the cost of
repairing streets or other structures.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. III, sec. 3.01, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.144 Additional meters for residential lawn sprinkler systems
Residential accounts needing separate water meters for automated lawn sprinkler systems may request wateronly
meters for an additional tap or half-tap charge respectively. (Ordinance 09-12, sec. (a)(3), adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 13.03.145 Customers outside city limits; inoperable water meters
(a) Meter and tap fee for customers outside city limits. A water meter and tap fee authorized herein shall apply
equally to customers outside the corporate limits of the city.
(b) Rates for customers outside city limits. Water service rates for all users outside the city limits are 1.5 times
the applicable charge for users within the city limits.
(c) Billing when water meter is inoperable. Customers shall be billed in accordance with the average water
consumption for the 6 months immediately preceding the month in which a water meter becomes inoperable or
fails to register correctly. This procedure shall continue until an operable water meter is installed. The sewer rate
shall also be similarly calculated.
(d) Compilation of list of inoperable water meters. The utility department director shall compile a list and
location of all inoperable water meters, and report his/her findings to the city manager on the last regular
meeting of every month. The list shall note the approximate week or month that the water meter became
inoperative and the replacement date.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. IV, sec. 4.00, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.146 Standard rate schedule
(a) Determination of type of use. The city's zoning regulations shall be relied on for resolving disputes
regarding what constitutes a specific type of use.
(b) Rate schedule for meters 3/4 inch in diameter (residential unit). Users shall be charged water rates on a
monthly basis as provided for in table B as follows.
(1) Gallons of water included in minimum rate. The initial amount of water covered by the
minimum rate is the total number of units multiplied by 2,000 gallons.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/418
(2) Rates for use beyond minimum rate. The water rates for water consumed in excess of that
covered by the minimum rate shall be charged as provided in table B as follows.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. IV, sec. 4.01, adopted 4/10/02)
TABLE B. STANDARD MINIMUM RATE
(A) The base rate for a residential account shall be $12.05.
(B) The rate of every 1,000 gallons of metered consumption shall be determined as follows:
Usage in Gallons Consumption Charge/1,000
Gallons
0–10,999 $1.65
11,000–15,999 $2.00
16,000–25,999 $2.35
26,000 – higher $3.10
(Ordinance 09-12, sec. (a)(1), adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 13.03.147 Nonstandard rate schedule
(a) Water meter sizes of one-inch diameter and greater. Users shall be charged water rates on a monthly basis
as provided for in table C.
(b) Multifamily and mobile home parks. The water rates for multifamily and mobile home parks are classified
as commercial use for utility billing purposes. Also see section 13.03.183(d).
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. IV, sec. 4.02, adopted 4/10/02)
TABLE C. MINIMUM WATER RATES, FIRST 2,000 GALLONS
The water rates for commercial, industrial, and institutional users for water shall be $1.90 for every 1,000
gallons consumed and a base charge to be determined by meter size of:
Meter Size Base Charge
3/4" $27.95
1" $33.28
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/418
2" $46.59
3" $56.00
4" $166.38
6" $332.75
(Ordinance 09-12, sec. (a)(2), adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 13.03.148 Reconnection of service after discontinuance for nonpayment
A request for reconnection or reinstallation of a water meter after discontinuance of service for the customer's
failure to make timely payment of his/her utility bill shall be accompanied by the following service charge:
(1) If the water meter was disconnected by the city, a service charge of $25.00;
(2) If the water meter was removed, a service charge of $60.00.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. IV, sec. 4.03, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.149 After-hours reconnection of service
After termination of utility services for nonpayment of a utility charge, a request for reconnection of water
services made to the city between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. shall include a charge of $25.00, and
shall be payable the next business day (by cash or certified check if the disconnection was due to insufficient
funds). This service fee shall be in addition to any charges called for in section 13.03.148, if applicable.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. IV, sec. 4.04, adopted 4/10/02)
Secs. 13.03.150–13.03.180 Reserved
Part IV. Sewer Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.03.181 Standby fee
Every tract of land within the corporate boundaries of the city (i) which is not in a residential zone by the city's
zoning regulations, (ii) upon which is a residential, commercial, commercial or industrial building or structure in
use, and (iii) which is being provided water services by the city shall be charged a sewer standby fee in the
amount of $20.00 monthly if the following conditions exist:
(1) There is no existing connection to the city's sewer system; and
(2) Sewer collection services are available for hookup within eighty (80) feet of the property.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. V, sec. 5.00, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.182 Inspection fee for new connections
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/418
A one-time sewer service inspection fee of $185.00 for new sewer connections shall be charged for inspection
by the city inspector prior to provision of sewer service. (Ordinance 2002-001, div. V, sec. 5.01, adopted
4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.183 Rates
(a) Base rate. The base rate for a residential account shall be $11.00.
(b) Consumption charge. The rate of every 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption shall be determined
as follows:
Usage in Gallons Consumption Charge/1,000
Gallons
0–10,999 $1.52
11,000–15,999 $1.52
16,000–25,999 $1.88
26,000 higher $2.48
(c) Commercial, industrial and institutional users. The sewer rates for commercial, industrial, and institutional
users for sewer shall be $1.40 for every 1,000 gallons of water consumed and a base charge of $25.00 regardless
of meter size.
(Ordinance 09-12, secs. (b)(1), (2), adopted 9/8/09)
(d) Mobile home and travel trailer parks. Mobile home and travel trailer parks are classified as commercial
use for utility billing purposes.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. VI, sec. 6.00, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.184 Sewer service line cleanout fee
(a) Sewer line cleanout service. A sewer line cleanout service is defined and determined when residential or
commercial private sewer lines are backed-up. The owner must agree to the following when the city dispatches
city personnel to clean out their private line.
(1) City services will not include replacement of broken lines, slopping lines, or bellied lines as a
result of contractor error or private damage unless a request is made by owner at which time
additional fees will be applied.
(2) Damage waiver.
(3) Fees must be paid in full prior to any services rendered.
(4) Services will be rendered during city business hours only.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/418
(b) Service line cleanout fees.
(1) 1st service call: $50.00.
(2) 2nd service call: $75.00.
(3) 3rd service call and thereafter: $100.00.
(Ordinance 10-04 adopted 3/9/10)
Secs. 13.03.185–13.03.220 Reserved
Part V. Delinquent Account Policy
Sec. 13.03.221 Procedures
(a) A delinquent account is a water and/or sewer account which is not paid within ten (10) days from the date
on which payment is due. The following procedures shall apply to a delinquent account:
(1) If, on the tenth day following the billing due date, an account remains outstanding, a $5.00 late
penalty shall be imposed. The city shall notify, in writing, and by U.S. mail, the holder of the account
of the delinquency and the penalty which has been imposed, stating the amount due, provide a second
ten-day period in which the account can be paid, and notify the account holder of impending
discontinuance of service if the account is not paid on or before the tenth day following the date of
the notice.
(2) If an account remains unpaid on the tenth day of the second ten-day period allowed a customer
for payment of a delinquent account, the city shall terminate service by turning off the valve on the
water meter. If the bill remains unpaid ten days thereafter, the city shall remove the water meter. The
city manager has the discretion to impose an additional administrative fee even if the account does
not go into delinquent status after the requisite number of days specified above.
(3) Upon payment of the delinquent balance, the city shall resume services, but only upon the
payment of a $25.00 reconnecting fee when services have been discontinued and a $60.00 fee when
the meter has been removed. The city may require an increase of fifty percent in the amount of the
deposit, plus after-hours charges, if any.
(b) On a monthly basis, the city manager shall report currently active delinquent accounts to the city
commission and include the following information: The account number, the type of account, the amount due,
and the number of months the account is delinquent shall be reported.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. VIII, sec. 8.00, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.222 Due process requirements
(a) Any city customer wishing to discuss their utility account will be given the opportunity to speak to an
administrator or manager regarding special circumstances about their bill. City staff will make themselves
available to discuss the customer's needs and complaints.
(b) The water and sewer billing shall contain a notice similar to the following:
IMPORTANT NOTICE Utility services will be terminated if the amount shown is not paid
within 10 days of the date of this notice. You have the right to contest this termination. Please
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/418
call 702-6400 during 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. to request a meeting to challenge this billing.
NOTICIA IMPORTANTE Sus servicios de utilidades seran descontinuados si no paga esta
cuenta durante los siguiente diez dias. Para presentarse en oposicion, favor de llamar al numero
702-6400 durante las horas de 8:00 a.m. a 5:00 p.m. y pedir una audiencia.
(c) Any account holder requesting a hearing to challenge a utility billing shall be granted a meeting with the
finance director or his/her designee. The meeting shall be conducted promptly, but in no case later than seventytwo
hours after the request is made. Documentation of the request and results shall be kept and shall include the
requestor's name, account number, billed amount, description of challenge, and action taken by city staff.
(d) The requestor is entitled to a copy of this documentation prior to the meeting, and may have up to fifteen
minutes to present his case. A decision will be one of the following or a combination thereof:
(1) Correct billing: Nothing presented at the meeting refutes correctness.
(2) Incorrect billing: Evidence presented at the meeting indicates an error has been made.
(3) Delayed collection: Scheduled payment of arrearage is in order.
(e) If, after the finance department's decision is rendered, the account holder is not satisfied with the outcome,
he may appeal the decision to the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager will review the
documentation and uphold or amend the decision. The city manager's decision is final.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. VIII, sec. 8.01, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.223 Delayed collection policy
(a) In cases where, after termination of service, the city manager determines that a utility account balance has
remained in arrearage for more than 90 days, and the arrearage is due, in part, to the failure of the city to use
reasonable delinquent collection efforts to terminate service, the account shall be placed in “delayed collection
status.”
(b) Every account declared to be in a delayed collection status shall be transferred from the utility
department's receivable ledgers to the delayed collection accounts receivable ledgers.
(c) Each individual delayed collection account ledger shall contain:
(1) The date the balance was transferred;
(2) The name of the clerk making the transfer; and
(3) The collection agreement for the specific account.
(d) The effect of this transfer shall be that delinquent account holders shall, upon transfer of accounts, be
required to maintain current payment of city utilities as they become due as well as to make timely payments
toward their arrearage. A petitioner shall have:
(1) A current account payment; and
(2) A delayed collection account payment.
(e) In setting up a written collection agreement for an account in delayed collection status, the hearing
officer's city manager's [sic] discretion is limited by the following:
(1) No payment period shall run for more than 12 months;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/418
(2) Only cash or money orders will be received as payment;
(3) The provisions of the delinquent account policy shall remain in effect and apply both to the
current account and to the account in delayed collection;
(4) The words “payment due” under the collection agreement shall be used wherever the word
“balance” or “account balance” is used.
(Ordinance 2002-001, div. VIII, sec. 8.03, adopted 4/10/02)
Sec. 13.03.224 Reports of accounts in delayed collection status
The city manager shall compile a monthly report of accounts in delayed collection status. (Ordinance 2002-001,
div. VIII, sec. 8.03, adopted 4/10/02)
ARTICLE 13.04 WATER CONSERVATION; DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT PLAN*
Sec. 13.04.001 Adoption of plans
The city council hereby adopts the April 2016 city water conservation plan and the April 2016 drought
contingency and emergency management plan, which are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth full. A
copy of the plan shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. The city manager is authorized to order
that the appropriate stage of emergency response, as detailed in the emergency water management plan, be
implemented. To be effective, the order must be:
(1) Made by public announcement; and
(2) Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within 24 hours after the public
announcement, which order becomes immediately effective upon publication.
Sec. 13.04.002 Violations, discontinuance of service and variance
(a) Generally.
(1) On the first violation, customers will be given a written warning that they have violated the
applicable water use restriction.
(2) On the second and subsequent violations, citations may be issued to customers, with maximum
fines established by ordinance.
(3) After three (3) violations have occurred, in addition to the authority to issue citations, the city
may cut off water service to the customer or seek civil remedies in court.
(b) Violation of water conservation plan. A person commits an offense if he/she knowingly makes, causes,
allows or permits:
(1) A use of water or waste of water contrary to any provisions of the adopted water conservation
plan or the terms and conditions of a variance approved under the provisions of the plan;
(2) The lawn or landscape at a premises owned by the person or under their control to be watered
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. between April 1st and October 31st of each year;
(3) Watering of lawn or landscaping at a premises owned by the person or under their control to be
watered during precipitation or below freezing weather conditions or to allow excessive runoff
flowing away from property; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/418
(4) Handwashing of a vehicle using a hose, providing, however, that it is an affirmative defense
that a hose end positive shutoff nozzle is used.
(c) Violation of drought contingency and emergency management plan. A person commits an offense if he/she
knowingly makes, causes, allows or permits:
(1) Use of water or waste of water contrary to the measures implemented by the city manager as
prescribed in the adopted drought contingency and emergency management plan. For purposes of this
subsection, it is presumed that a person has knowingly made, caused or permitted a use of water
contrary to the measures implemented if the mandatory measures have been formally ordered
consistent with the terms of the drought contingency and emergency management plan and:
(A) The manner of use has been prohibited by the plan;
(B) The amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the plan; or
(C) The manner or amount used violates the terms and conditions of a variance granted under
the provisions of the plan.
(d) Person defined. For purpose of this section, “person” shall include the owner or other person in control of
the property. Proof that a violation occurred shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that owner or person in
control of the property committed the violation. Parents or legal guardians shall be presumed to be responsible
for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property
within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation.
(e) Discontinuance of water service. Any person convicted of three (3) or more violations of the water
conservation plan or drought contingency and emergency management plan at the same premises within a 12-
month period, upon due notice sent to them by the city manager or his/her designee in the same manner and at
the same address as their water bill is sent for the premises where the violations occurred, shall have water
service discontinued to the premises where the violation occurred. Such discontinued water service shall be
restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, as establish by the city, which shall include all costs
incurred by the city, in disconnecting service, and upon giving written assurance, on a form provided by the city,
that violations will not be repeated. Compliance may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court.
(f) Variances.
(1) Standard of review. Variance to the water conservation plan or drought contingency and
emergency management plan shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the city manager or
his/her designee. The city manager may grant a variance if the failure to do so would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation or fire safety for the public or the
applicant; compliance with this plan cannot be accomplished due to technical or other limitations; or
alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be implemented. If
issued, approval of the variance may be subject to reasonable terms and conditions.
(2) Content of petition. All petitions for variances shall be in writing and must include the
following information:
(A) Name and address of the petitioners.
(B) Contact email address and telephone.
(C) Purpose of water use.
(D) Specific provisions from which relief is requested.
(E) Detailed statement on the adverse effect of the provision from which relief is requested.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/418
(F) Description of the relief requested.
(G) Period of time for which variance is sought.
(H) Other pertinent information.
(3) Effect of stage elevation. Variances are considered temporary and must be re-submitted for
reconsideration should the drought and emergency response stage elevate from the stage in which the
temporary variance was approved.
(4) Revocation of variances. The city manager may revoke a variance granted when the city
manager determines that:
(A) The conditions supporting the variance are no longer applicable;
(B) The terms or condition of the variance are being violated; or
(C) The health, safety or welfare of other persons requires revocation.
(Ordinance 16-13 adopted 5/24/16)
ARTICLE 13.05 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
Sec. 13.05.001 General provisions
It is the policy of the city, and the intent of this article, to reduce pollution and contamination entering the city's
separate stormwater sewer system (MS4) to the greatest extent practicable. Discharge to the city's MS4 that
cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards or that fail to protect and maintain the aquatic life
use of the Arroyo Colorado are hereby prohibited. New sources or new discharges to the city's MS4 of the
oxygen-demanding substances, nutrients and sediments are not authorized by this article unless otherwise
allowable under NPDES, TPDES, and the Texas Administrative Code.
Sec. 13.05.002 Definitions
Best management practices. Activities, prohibitions, maintenance procedures, structural controls, local
ordinances, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants.
Clean water act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as codified at 33 U.S.C. 1251–1376.
Common plan of development or sale. A construction activity that is completed in separate stages or phases or in
combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development or sale is identified by plats,
blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permit applications, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests,
or other similar documentation.
Construction activity (large). Construction activities that result in land disturbance of five or more acres of land.
Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than five acres of land area that is part of a
common plan of development or sale that will ultimately disturb five or more acres of land.
Construction activity (small). Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in
land disturbance of one or more but less than five acres of land. Small construction activity also includes the
disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if
the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one or more but less than five acres of land.
Construction site operator. The person or persons associated with a small or large construction project that is
either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/418
(1) The person or persons that have operational control over construction plans and specifications
including approval of revisions to the extent necessary to meet the requirements and conditions of
state and federal law, including TPDES or NPDES permits allowing stormwater discharge; or
(2) The person or persons that have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a
construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with stormwater pollution prevention plans
for the site.
Conveyance. Streets, curbs, gutters, manmade channels and ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed features
designed or used for drainage or flood control of to otherwise transport stormwater runoff.
Discharge. The drainage, release, or disposal of pollutants in stormwater and certain nonstormwater from areas
where land-disturbing activities, construction materials, equipment storage or maintenance, or other industrial
activities are located.
Final stabilization. Where the following conditions are met:
(1) All soil-disturbing activities have been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover
with a density of 70% of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on
all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
(2) For individual lots in a residential construction site either:
(A) The homebuilder completes final stabilization as specified in subsection (1) above; or
(B) The homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization for an individual lot prior to the
time of transfer of the ownership of the home to the buyer and informs the homeowner of the
need for, and benefits of, final stabilization.
(3) For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g. pipelines across crop or
rangeland), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its
preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural
activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to a surface water and areas which are not being
returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization conditions of
conditions in subsection (1) above.
Groundwater infiltration. Groundwater that enters the MS4 (including storm sewer service connections and
foundation drains) through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes.
Illicit connections. Any human-made conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to the MS4.
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except discharges
allowed pursuant to state or federal law, including TPDES or NPDES permits allowing stormwater discharge or
a separate authorization.
Industrial activities. Manufacturing, processing, material storage and disposal areas, and similar areas where
stormwater can contract industrial pollutants related to the industrial activity at an industrial facility described by
the TPDES Multi-Sector General Permit, TXR050000, as it may be amended, or by another TPDES or NPDES
permit.
Land disturbance (or soil disturbance). Any activity which involves the physical movement or disturbance of
earth material by mechanized means. This includes excavating, filling, stockpiling, clearance of vegetation,
grading, compaction of soil, creation of borrow pits, or combination thereof. Land disturbance does not include
plowing, seeding, planting, cultivation, or harvesting on a farm, including lands that have been lying fallow as
part of a conventional rotational cycle. Land disturbance does not include routine maintenance performed to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/418
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity and purpose of a ditch, channel or other similar
stormwater conveyance. Land disturbance does not include routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt
overlays of existing roads, routine clearing of existing rights-of-way or other similar maintenance activities.
Maximum extent practicable. The technology-based discharge standard for MS4s to reduce pollutants in
stormwater discharges established by the Clean Water Act.
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The conveyance or system of conveyances including roads,
streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains that are owned or operated by the
City of San Juan, the Hidalgo County Irrigation District #2, Hidalgo County of the Texas Department of
Transportation and that are designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; but which are not a
combined sewer (sanitary sewer and stormwater) and are not part of the city's sanitary sewer collection system.
MS4 operator. For the purpose of this article, the City of San Juan.
NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
Point source. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch,
channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
Pollutants of concern. Those pollutants identified as a cause of impairment of the Arroyo Colorado and
including biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and sediment or parameters that address sediment such as total
suspended solids, turbidity or siltation.
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing into groundwater, subsurface soils, surface soils, the MS4, the surface water of the state,
or the waters of the United States.
Site development permit. A permit issued by the city for the alteration of the ground for the construction or
installation of utilities, streets, sidewalks, structures designed to control erosion and runoff and other grading
activities that are not a part of a project that requires a building permit.
Stormwater management program (SWMP). A comprehensive program to manage the quality of discharges into
and from the city's MS4.
Stormwater runoff. Rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Structural controls. A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction or use of a device to capture or
prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. Structural controls and practices may include but are not limited to: wet
ponds, bio-retention, infiltration basins, stormwater wetlands, silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales,
vegetative lined ditches, vegetative filter strips, sediment traps, check dams, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet
protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent
sediment basins.
Surface water in the state. Lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries,
wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico from the mean high water level out 10.36 miles into the
gulf, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or
nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly
or partially inside or bordering the state or subject to the jurisdiction of the state; except that waters in treatment
systems which are authorized by state of federal law or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste
treatment are not considered to be water in the state.
TPDES. Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/418
Waters of the United States.
(1) All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in
interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
(2) All interest waters, including interstate wetlands;
(3) All other waters such as interstate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams),
mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds
that the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign
commerce including any such waters:
(A) Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other
purposes;
(B) From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign
commerce; or
(C) Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate
commerce;
(4) All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the U.S.;
(5) Tributaries of waters identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition;
(6) The territorial sea;
(7) Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in
subsections (1) through (6) of this definition; and
(8) Waste treatment systems, including manmade treatment ponds, lagoons or wetlands designed to
meet the requirements of CWA are not waters of the United States.
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Sec. 13.05.003 Pollution prevention and erosion control at construction sites
(a) General provisions. The intent of this section is to implement and enforce a program to reduce pollutants
in stormwater runoff from construction activities. To that end, all construction site operators, at a minimum,
must:
(1) As a precondition to receiving a building permit for a small construction site, prepare and
submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3).
(2) For projects that do not require a building permit, but will require excavation, fill or grading or
more than one acre of land, such as the construction or installation of utilities, new drainageways,
streets, or sidewalks, apply for a site development permit and prepare and submit a SWP3.
(3) Expert, no SWP3 is required to perform emergency work needed to protect life or property.
(4) For construction sites that will disturb less than one acre of land, the following provisions
apply:
(A) No SWP3 need be prepared or submitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/418
(B) Construction site operators are responsible for retaining all soil and sediments on site and
off of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. This includes dust control and control of
vehicle tracking of dirt off site.
(C) Soil and sediment that leaves the construction site must be cleaned up daily.
(D) Proper provision for solid waste, construction debris and sanitary waste must be made
and maintained.
(5) The operator of construction site, required to have a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater
shall submit a copy of the notice of intent to the city at the same time the operator submits the
original notice of intent (NOI) to the TCEQ. The copy of the NOI may be delivered to the city either
in person or by mailing it to: Planning Director, City of San Juan, 709 S. Nebraska Avenue, San Juan,
TX 78589.
(b) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3).
(1) Prior to commencing any construction activity and prior to receiving a building or site
development permit from the city, construction site operators that are required by the NPDES or the
TPDES to obtain a permit to discharge stormwater must:
(A) Develop and submit for review and approval a SWP3 that covers the entire site;
(B) Post a signed copy of the notice (attachment 1 or 2 attached to Ordinance 12-15) at the
construction site where it can be readily viewed;
(C) Ensure the project specifications allow or provide that adequate BMP's will be developed
and modified as necessary to meet the requirement of the SWP3; and
(D) Ensure all contractors and subcontractors are aware of the requirements of the SWP3,
that on-site personnel are responsible for the day-to-day implementation of and adherence to the
SWP3, and who to contact concerning SWP3 compliance; and
(2) The SWP3 must:
(A) Be completed and initially implemented prior to commencing activities that result in land
disturbance;
(B) Provide for compliance with the terms and conditions of this article and the NPDES and
TPDES for stormwater;
(C) Be available at the construction site or readily available at the time of an on-site
inspection to TCEQ; the EPA, or city personnel;
(D) Be amended whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or
maintenance that may have a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants or that was not
previously addressed in the SWP3; or because inspections by the site operator, TCEQ, EPA or
city indicate the SWP3 is ineffective in eliminating or minimizing pollutants in discharges;
(E) Identify the person or persons responsible for implantation of the plan.
(c) Issuance of a building permit or site development permit. Before authorizing the issuance or a building
permit or a site development permit, the city will review the proposed site plan and SWP3, as well as
construction documents, for compliance with this article and the NPDES and TPDES for stormwater.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/418
(d) City inspection of construction sites. City building inspection, code enforcement and public works staff
and the city engineer are hereby authorized to inspect construction sites for the purpose of ensuring compliance
and enforcement of control measures contained in the SWP3 and this article.
(e) Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plan. The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3)
required pursuant to this article, the Clean Water Act, NPDES, and TPDES must include the following
information.
(1) The SWP3 must include a project description which includes the following:
(A) The nature of the construction activity, potential pollutants and sources;
(B) The intended schedule or sequence of major activities that will disturb soils;
(C) The number of acres of the entire construction site property and the total number of acres
of the site where construction activities will occur, including off-site material storage areas,
overburden and stockpiles of dirt, and borrow areas;
(D) The soil type and the quality of any existing discharge from the site;
(E) A map showing the general location of the site (e.g. a portion of a city or county map);
(F) A detailed site map indicating the following:
(i) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities;
(ii) Areas where soil disturbance will occur;
(iii) Areas which will not be disturbed;
(iv) Location of all major structural controls either planned or in place;
(v) Location where stabilization practices are expected to be used;
(vi) Locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas;
(vii) Surface waters (including wetlands) either adjacent or in close proximity; and
(viii) Locations where stormwater discharges from the site directly to a surface water
body;
(G) The location and description of asphalt plants and concrete plans (if any) providing
support to the construction site and that are also authorized under the general permit TXR
150000, as it may be amended; and
(H) The name of receiving waters at or near the site that will be disturbed or that will receive
discharges from disturbed areas of the project.
(2) The following records must be either attached to or referenced in the SWP3 and made readily
available upon request to the city, TCEQ or the EPA:
(A) The dates when major grading activities occur;
(B) The dates when construction activities temporarily or permanently cease on a portion of
the site; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/418
(C) The dates when stabilization measures are initiated.
(3) The SWP3s must identify and describe the best management practices (BMP's) that will be
used, the general timing or sequence for implementation of such BMP's, and the party responsible for
implementation. At a minimum, the description must include erosion and sediment controls designed
to retain sediment on site to the maximum extent practicable with due consideration for local
topography and rainfall.
(A) Control measures must be selected, installed and maintained according to the
manufacturer's or designer's specifications.
(B) Sediment must be removed from sediment traps and sedimentation ponds no later than
the time that design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(C) If sediment escapes the site, accumulations must be removed at a frequency to minimize
further negative effects and, whenever feasible, prior to the next rain event.
(D) Controls must be specified that limit off-site transport of litter, construction debris and
construction materials.
(4) The SWP3 must describe interim and permanent stabilization practices and a schedule of when
the stabilization practices will be implemented. Site plans should ensure that existing vegetation is
preserved where it is possible.
(A) Stabilization practices may include but are not limited to: establishment of temporary
vegetation, establishment of permanent vegetation, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization,
vegetative buffer strips, and protection of existing trees and vegetation.
(B) Stabilization measures must be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site
where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, and except as provided
in subsections (i) and (ii) below, must be initiated no more than fourteen (14) days after the
construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased.
(i) Where the initiation of stabilization measures is precluded by seasonably arid
conditions, drought, excessive rainfall, or other weather or climatic conditions,
stabilization measures must be initiated as soon as practicable.
(ii) Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased but earthdisturbing
activities will be resumed within twenty-one (21) days, temporary stabilization
measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of site.
(5) The SWP3 must include a description of any structural controls that will be used to divert flows
away from exposed soils, to limit the contact of runoff with disturbed areas, or to lessen the off-site
transport of eroded soils.
(A) Sediment basins are required, where feasible, for common drainage locations that serve
an area with ten or more acres that are disturbed at any one time. Sediment basins may be either
temporary or permanent, but must be designed to store either the calculated volume of runoff
from a 2-year, 24-hour storm, designed to provide 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained.
When calculating the volume of runoff from a 2-year, 24-hour storm event, it is not required to
include the flows from off-site areas and flow from on-site areas that are either undisturbed or
have already undergone final stabilization, if these flows are diverted around both the disturbed
areas of the site and the sediment basin. In determining whether installing a sediment basin is
feasible, the permittee may consider factors such s site soils, slope, available area on site, and
public safety. Where sediment basins are not feasible, equivalent control measures, which may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/418
include a series of smaller sediment basins, must be used. At a minimum, silt fences, vegetative
buffer strips, or equivalent sediment controls are required for all down slope boundaries and for
those side slope boundaries as dictated by individual site conditions of the construction areas.
(B) Sediment traps and sediment basins may be used to control solids in stormwater runoff
for drainage location serving less than ten (10) acres. At a minimum, silt fences, hay bales,
vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent sediment controls are required for all down slope
boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as dictated by individual
site conditions) of the construction. Alternatively, a sediment basin providing storage for a
calculate volume of runoff from these areas for a 2-year, 24-hour storm or 3,600 cubic feet of
storage per acre drained may be provided.
(6) Other controls:
(A) The SWP3 must describe how off-site vehicle tracking of sediment and the generation of
dust will be minimized.
(B) The SWP3 must include a description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site and a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials.
(C) The SWP3 must include a description of pollutant sources from areas other than
construction (including stormwater discharges from dedicated asphalt plants and dedicated
concrete plants), and a description of controls and measures that will be implemented at those
sites to minimize pollutants discharges.
(7) The SWP3 must commit to ongoing maintenance to keep all erosion and sediment control and
other protective measures identified in the SWP3 in effective operating condition.
(8) Site inspections:
(A) The construction site operator shall provide for regular inspections by persons familiar
with the SWP3 of the disturbed areas that have not been finally stabilized, area used for storage
of materials that are exposed to precipitation, all structural control measures, and locations
where vehicles enter or exit the site for evidence of effectiveness and necessary maintenance.
Inspections must occur at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four
(24) hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater.
(B) As an alternative, the SWP3 may require that inspections will occur at least once every
seven calendar days; in which case additional inspections are not required following each
qualifying storm event. If this alternative schedule is developed, the inspection must occur on a
specifically defined day, regardless of whether or not there has been a rainfall event since the
previous inspection.
(C) The construction site operator must inspect all accessible discharge locations to
determine if erosion control measures are effective in preventing visually noticeable changes to
receiving waters, including persistent cloudy appearance in water color and noticeable
accumulation of sediments. Where discharge locations are inaccessible, nearby downstream
locations must be inspected to the extent that such inspections are practicable.
(D) The SWP3 must be modified based on the results of inspections, as necessary, to better
control pollutants in runoff. Revisions to the SWP3 must be completed within seven calendar
days following the inspection. If existing BMP's are modified or if additional BMP's are
necessary, an implementation schedule must be described in an amendment to the SWP3 and
wherever possible those changes implemented before the next storm event. If implementation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/418
before the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, these changes must be implemented as
soon as practicable.
(E) A report summarizing the scope of the inspection, names and qualifications of personnel
making the inspection, the dates of the inspection, and major observations relating to the
implementation of the SWP3 must be made and retained as part of the SWP3. Major
observations should include:
(i) The locations of discharges of sediment or other pollutants from the site;
(ii) Locations of BMP's that needed to be maintained;
(iii) Locations of BMP's that failed to operate as designed or proved inadequate for a
particular location;
(iv) Locations where additional BMP's are need; and
(v) Identification and location of the BMP's that are working effectively.
(F) Actions taken as a result of inspections must be described within, and retained as an
amendment to the SWP3. Reports must identify any incidents of noncompliance. Where a
report does not identify any incidents of noncompliance, the report must contain a certification
that the facility or site is in compliance with the SWP3 and this permit.
(9) The SWP3 must identify and ensure the implementation of pollution prevention measures for
all eligible nonstormwater components of the discharge. This article prohibits, and all SWP3s will be
presumed to prohibit:
(A) The discharge from a construction site of any water or other liquid having a pH value
lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.5;
(B) The discharge of any type of industrial waste from construction sites;
(C) The deposit of any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste other than at a facility licensed to
receive such debris;
(D) The discharge of paint of paint brush cleaning water or solvents, thinners or turpentine or
any combination thereof;
(E) Unused construction materials or used construction materials or debris remaining on the
site after construction is completed. All on-site debris shall be properly disposed of in the
landfill within thirty (30) days from the occupancy of the structures; and
(F) The washing of any type of trucks, including, but not limited to, ready-mix trucks or
material supply trucks on or around the construction site.
(f) Effective date of coverage. Operators of construction activities eligible for coverage under TXR150000, as
it may be amended, are authorized to discharge stormwater associated with construction activity upon issuance
by the city of the building permit or site development permit.
(g) Retention of records. The construction site operator must retain a copy of the SWP3 and all reports and
actions required by this article and state and federal law, including NPDES, TPDES and general permit no.
TXR150000, for a minimum period of three years from the date that final stabilization has been achieved on all
portions of the street.
Sec. 13.05.004 Illicit discharges
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/418
(a) Intent. The intent of this section of the article is to prohibit, detect, and eliminate illicit discharges to the
city's MS4.
(b) Allowable nonstormwater discharges. The following nonstormwater sources are not considered illicit
discharges to the MS4:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities (but excluding washing of trucks, run off water from
training activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and similar activities);
(2) Uncontaminated fire hydrant flushings from systems that utilize potable water, surface water,
or groundwater that does not contain additional pollutants (but excluding discharges of
hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to
adversely affect aquatic life and excluding flushing where recycled wastewater is used);
(3) Water from the routine external washing of vehicles, the external portion of building or
structures, and pavement, where detergents and soaps are not used and where spills or leaks of toxic
or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless spilled materials have been removed; and if local
state, or federal regulations are applicable, the materials are removed according to those regulations),
and where the purpose is to remove mud, dirt, or dust;
(4) Uncontaminated water used to control dust;
(5) Portable water including waterline flushings (but excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated
water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect
aquatic life);
(6) Uncontaminated air-conditioning condensate;
(7) Uncontaminated groundwater or spring water, including foundation or footing drains and water
from crawl space pumps where flows are not contaminated with industrial materials such as solvents;
(8) Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing
potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources;
(9) Diverted stream flows;
(10) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
(11) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(12) Individual residential vehicle washing;
(13) Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats;
(14) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and
(15) Street washwater.
(c) Prohibited discharges.
(1) No person shall deposit, release, throw, drain, cause or allow to be deposited, released thrown,
drained or discharged, or otherwise cause to enter the MS4, or any other drainage device which
connects with the MS4, any of the following described materials or substances:
(A) Any acidic waste materials (having a pH value lower than 6);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/418
(B) Any alkaline waste materials (having a pH value higher than 10.5);
(C) Any water or waste containing free-floating, or insoluble oil;
(D) Gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas;
(E) Any noxious, malodorous, poisonous, or reactive substance which, either singularly or by
interaction with other substances, or by its accumulation in the MS4 becomes injurious or
potentially injurious to human, plant or animal life, or property; or
(F) Any domestic wastewater or industrial wastewater.
(2) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that such person was authorized to
commit any act, under a valid permit from the TCEQ or the U.S. EPA, which would otherwise
constitute a violation at the time of commission.
(3) No person shall place or drop or cause or allow to be placed or dropped, brush cuttings,
clippings, or rubbish within the MS4 or on any street in the city in such a manner that the same may
be washed by the flow of water into the MS4.
(4) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic waste, or industrial
effluent to the MS4 or allow such a connection to continue.
(5) No person shall discharge or release, or allow or permit the discharge or release of any of the
following substances in a manner or location by which such substance may enter the city's MS4:
(A) Any washwater or wastewater from the washing or cleaning of pavement, including but
not limited to parking lots, driveways or carports, that contains soap, detergent, solvent,
degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other cleaning substance other than water;
(B) Any washwater or wastewater from cleaning of any pavement where a spill, leak, or
other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless
all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed or pretreated;
(C) Any washwater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soup, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other
harmful cleaning substance;
(D) Gasoline, motor oil, used oil filters, wax, grease, antifreeze or any other motor vehicle
fluids;
(E) Any contaminated water or waste from a commercial carwash facility, from any vehicle
washing, cleaning, or maintenance area at any new or used automobile or other vehicle
dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, maintenance facility, or from any washing,
cleaning, or maintenance area of any commercial or public service vehicle, including any truck,
bus, or piece of heavy equipment, by any business or public entity;
(F) Any contaminated water or waste from commercial establishments including but not
limited to gas stations, service stations, and auto repair shops with areas exposed to weather
conditions;
(G) Material from an oil/water separator or an oil/water interceptor, grit trap or grease trap.
Any oil/water separator or interceptor users who are discharging to the MS4 shall notify the city
of the existence of such connections to the MS4 within sixty (60) days of the effective date of
this article. If such notification is not made during the allocated sixty (60) days, then the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/418
detected connections to MS4 of an oil/water separator or interceptor shall be considered an
illicit connection and the city reserves the right to determinate [terminate] such connection
immediately, without prior notice;
(H) Any release from a petroleum underground storage tank (PUST), or any leachate or
runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PUST, or any discharge or pumped, confined, or
partially treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PUST unless release satisfies all
of the following criteria:
(i) Is in compliance with all municipal, state, and federal laws;
(ii) No discharge contains any harmful quantity of any pollutant; and
(iii) The discharge shall not have a pH value lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.5;
(I) Any public or private underground utility manhole, including but not limited to electric
power, gas pipeline, cable companies, telephone companies, the collected water, due to rain,
surface runoff, cross connection, or illegal discharge;
(J) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions
filter, or the blowdown from a boiler;
(K) Any type of wastewater from residential, commercial or industrial sources, any domestic
sewage or septic tank waste;
(L) Any runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock
containment area;
(M) Any swimming pool water or filter backwash from a swimming pool or fountain,
discharge from a water line if it has been disinfected by super-chlorination or other means and
the total residual chlorine exists in any harmful quantity or any other chemical has been used in
line disinfection.
(6) No person shall apply used oil or other vehicle fluid to a road or land for dust suppression,
weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil contamination into the environment;
(7) No person shall introduce any type of hazardous waste generated in and around a household
including, but not limited to batteries, used paints, solvents, used pesticide, and used toiletries into
the MS4;
(8) No person shall use, dispose of, discard, store, or transport an insecticide, herbicide, or
fertilizer, in a manner inconsistent with the proper usage, storage, transport and disposal set out in the
labeling in accordance with the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), such
that a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer may enter the MS4;
(9) No person shall wash a commercial dumpster, or residual ready mix concrete from concrete
mixing trucks in an area where it discharges into MS4.
(d) Mandatory reporting and clean up of any discharge of release.
(1) The person in charge of any facility, vehicle, or other source of any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping, leaching, disposing, or any other release of any
of the following quantities of any of the following substances that may enter the MS4, surface water
of the state or waters of the U.S., shall immediately notify by telephone the city's police department
concerning the incident:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/418
(A) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any hazardous or extremely
hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR parts 302 and 355, respectively;
(B) An amount of oil that either: (i) violates applicable water quality standards, or (ii) causes
a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of the water or an adjoining shoreline or
causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an
adjoining shoreline; or
(C) Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.
(2) The immediate notification required shall include the following information:
(A) The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and whether the substance is an
extremely hazardous substance;
(B) The exact location of the release, including any known name of the waters involved or
threatened and any other environmental media affected;
(C) The time and duration (thus far) of the release;
(D) An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the substance released;
(E) The source of the release;
(F) Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release and, where appropriate,
advice regarding medical attention that may be necessary for exposed individuals;
(G) Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
(H) Any steps that have been taken to contain and/or clean up the released material and
minimize its impacts; and
(I) The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be contacted for further
information.
(3) With fifteen (15) days following such reportable release, the responsible person in charge of the
facility, vehicle, or other source of the release shall submit, unless waived by the city, a written report
containing the information specified above in subsections (2)(A) through (I) as well as the following
additional information:
(A) The ultimate duration, concentrations, and quantity of the release;
(B) All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the released substances, and all
precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
(C) Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated with the release;
(D) The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives responding to the release;
and
(E) The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible person to prevent similar future
occurrences.
(4) The notifications required by subsections (2) and (3) shall not relieve the responsible person of
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the release,
including any liability for damage to the city, to natural resources, or to any other person or property;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/418
nor shall such notification relieve the responsible person of any fine, penalty, or other liability which
may be imposed pursuant to city ordinance, or state or federal law.
(5) Any person responsible for any release as described in this subsection shall comply with all
state, federal, and local law requiring reporting, clean up, containment, and any other appropriate
remedial action in response to the release.
(6) Any person responsible for a release described in this subsection shall reimburse the city for
any cost incurred by the city in responding to the release.
(e) Abatement of illicit conditions and assessment and collection of expenses. The city may abate illicit
discharges in the same manner and according to the same procedures provided for by the this code and assess
and collect any expenses incurred in the manner and procedure provided.
Sec. 13.05.005 Right of entry, inspection, and sampling
(a) City code enforcement, public works, building inspection staff and the city engineer are authorized to enter
and inspect sites and facilities subject to regulation under this chapter or discharging stormwater to the city's
MS4 to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any state or federal
discharge permit, limitation, or requirement.
(b) Facility operators shall allow such city staff access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination, photo recording, and copying of records that must be kept under this
article, NPDES, TPDES or TXR150000, as it may be amended, permit to discharge stormwater, including
pollution control measures or modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance
evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, report, or documents related to compliance with this chapter
and with any state or federal stormwater discharge permit.
(c) City staff shall have the right to setup on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the staff to monitor and/or sample the facility's or the site's stormwater discharge.
(d) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility or site to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator and the written or oral request of the city staff and
shall not be replaced. The cost of cleaning such access shall be borne by the operator.
(e) The city may require, at its reasonable discretion, any discharger to conduct specified sampling, testing,
analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of
any such required monitoring.
(f) The city may require, at its reasonable discretion, the discharger to install monitoring equipment at the
discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater
flow, wastewater and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(g) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the city staff will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of implementing and
enforcing this article.
Sec. 13.05.006 Enforcement and penalties
(a) Penalty for violation.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation or business entity that violates any provision of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, fined as provided in this code. Each day that the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/418
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. A culpable mental state is not required to
prove an offense under this article.
(2) The penal provisions imposed by this article shall not preclude the city from filing a suit to
enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local,
state and federal law. The city may, at its discretion, report alleged noncompliance to the EPA, the
TCEQ, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Texas Parks and Wildlife, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
or any other state or federal agency.
(b) Violations.
(1) It is a violation of this chapter to engage in construction activity without complying with this
article.
(2) It is a violation of this chapter to discharge any substance, other than stormwater or those
discharges listed in section 13.05.004(b), to the city's MS4 in violation of any provision in this
chapter.
(3) The operator of a facility or site with a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial or construction activity commits an offense if the person denies city staff reasonable access
to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility or site is a violation of
this article.
(4) A person commits an offence if the person operates a facility or site that is discharging
stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity without having submitted a copy of the
notice of intent to do so to the city.
(5) A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements of its TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity. A person commits an offense
if the person operates a facility or construction activity in violation of a requirement of the facility's
TPDES permit to discharge stormwater.
(6) The city may require any operator of a facility to modify the facility's or the site's SWP3 if in
the best professional judgment of the city staff, the SWP3 does not comply with the requirements of
the facility's or the site's TPDES permit to discharge stormwater.
(c) Notices of violations and stop-work orders.
(1) Notice of the deficiencies in a facility's or a site's SWP3 will be made in writing, and the city
will give the facility or construction site operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed thirty
(30) days, to make the necessary changes in the SWP3.
(2) Noncompliance flag and stop-work orders. If the city staff determines that activities are being
carried out in violation for this chapter, a notification of noncompliance shall be issued. In addition to
the notification, if the violation continues beyond five days, a “noncompliance flag” will be posted at
the site. Finally, if the violation continues after three days after the “noncompliance flag” is posted,
the city may stop all work until corrective measures have been completed. The site shall be posted
with a “stop-work order.” No other permits may be issued or inspections conducted by the city until
corrections have been made to the satisfaction of the city. To move or interfere with a
“noncompliance flag” or stop-work order shall constitute a violation of this article.
(3) Any person alleged to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be required to correct
the problem upon written notification from the city. Such written notification may require that certain
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/418
conditions be adhered to in the correction of the problem. These may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(A) Use of specific pollution prevention measures and techniques;
(B) Use of pretreated procedures;
(C) Modification of existing SWP3;
(D) Completion of work within a specified time period; and
(E) Submission of SWP3.
(d) Appeals. Any person denied permission to discharge to MS4 shall have the right to appeal such to the
board of adjustment or other board established by the city within forty-five (45) days of the date of such denial.
(Ordinance 12-15 adopted 10/25/12)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 14.01.001 Planning and zoning commission
(a) The planning and zoning commission of the city shall be composed of seven members.
(b) Three (3) planning districts shall be established as follows:
(1) District 1. From the north city limits line to Sioux Road.
(2) District 2. From Sioux Road to First/Carroll Street.
(3) District 3. From First/Carroll Street to the south city limits line.
(c) Each planning district shall be composed of a minimum of two residents who live or own real property
from each of the planning commission districts.
(Ordinance 13-06 adopted 4/2/13)
ARTICLE 14.02 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
Sec. 14.02.001 Adopted
The Unified Development Code, adopted by Ordinance 98-027, adopted February 10, 1999, is included at the
end of this code as appendix A. Due to the nature of the Unified Development Code and the technicalities
involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed as enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting
and style changes. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 14.03 HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND DISTRICTS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/418
Sec. 14.03.001 Purpose
The city commission hereby declares that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of landmarks or districts of historical and cultural importance and significance is necessary to the
economic, cultural, educational, and general welfare of the public. It is recognized that the city represents the
unique confluence of time and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens, collectively and
individually, and produced significant historic, architectural, and cultural resources that constitute their heritage.
This act is intended to:
(1) Protect and enhance the landmarks and districts which represent distinctive elements of the
city's historic, architectural, and cultural heritage;
(2) Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;
(3) Protect and enhance the city's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the
economy thereby provided;
(4) Insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city;
(5) Promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most
appropriate use of such property within the city;
(6) Encourage stabilization, restoration, and improvements of such properties and their values.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.002 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:
Alteration. A physical change in or to a building.
Architectural control. Regulations governing the appearance or architectural style of buildings or structures.
Architectural control is a form of aesthetic zoning.
Building. A building, such as barn, church, hotel, or similar construction, created to shelter any form of human
activity. “Building” also may be used to refer to a historically and functionally related unit, such as a courthouse
and jail or a house and barn.
Case law. A body of law developed through hearings and judgments of specific issues (cases) by courts of law.
Comprehensive plan. A document or series of documents prepared by a planning commission or department
setting forth policies for the future of a community. Enabling statutes in many states require zoning to be in
accordance with a comprehensive plan.
Design review. The decision-making process conducted by an established review committee of a local
government that is guided by the terms set in the historic preservation ordinance.
Design review guidelines. A set of guidelines adopted by the commission that details acceptable alterations of
designated properties. They are usually illustrated and written in a manner that would be understood by most
property owners.
District. A district possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or
objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/418
Due process (of law). A requirement that legal proceedings be carried out in accordance with established rules
and principles.
Enabling legislation. State legislation that grants certain authority to local governments so that they may direct
the development of their communities. Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code, Municipal Zoning
Authority, is the legislation that enables municipalities in the state to zone and designate historic landmarks and
districts as part of the comprehensive zoning plan.
General law cities. Incorporated municipalities with populations under 5,000. These cities must conform to the
general laws of the state.
Historic property. A district, site, building, structure, or object significant in history, architecture, engineering,
archeology, or culture at the national, state, or local level.
Historic resource. This generally is the same as a historic property. It includes architectural, historical, and
archeological properties as well as landscape features.
Home rule cities. Incorporated municipalities with populations over 5,000. These cities must adopt a home rule
charter and are granted more independence in their local decision-making.
Intensive survey. A systematic, detailed examination of an area designed to gather information about historic
properties sufficient to evaluate them against predetermined criteria of significance.
Integrity. The authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced by survival of physical characteristics that
existed during the property's historic or prehistoric period.
Inventory. A list of historic properties that have been identified and evaluated as meeting specified criteria of
significance.
Landmark. Any historical building, structure, or object that is significant for historical, architectural, or
archeological reasons.
Object. The term “object” is used to distinguish from buildings and structures those constructions that are
primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Although it may be, by nature
and design, movable, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment, such as statuary in a
designed landscape.
Ordinary maintenance. This generally refers to activities relating to a property that would be considered
ordinary or common for maintaining the property, such as the replacement of a porch floor with identical or inkind
materials. It also may include other activities such as painting.
Overlay zone. A set of zoning requirements that is described in the ordinance text, is mapped, and is imposed in
addition to those of the overlying district. Development within the overlay zone must conform to the
requirements of both zones or the more restrictive of the two.
Police power. The authority of government to exercise controls [over] the public's health, safety, morals, and
general welfare.
Preservation. The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and material of a
building or structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It may include initial stabilization
work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building materials.
Preservation planning. This refers to the planning for the continued identification and evaluation of historic
properties and for their protection and enhancement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/418
Rehabilitation. The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which
makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which
are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values.
Restoration. The act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it
appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing
earlier work.
Site. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure,
whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historical, cultural, or archeological
value regardless of the value of any existing structure.
Special district. A district established to accommodate a narrow or special set of uses or for special purposes.
The term can signify any district beyond the conventional residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural
districts. Examples include open space districts, hotel/motel districts, or historic preservation districts. The
establishment of special districts must have an appropriate police power basis.
Statutory law. A body of law established through statutes initiated and adopted by elected officials participating
in our legislative and executive branches of government.
Structure. The term “structure” is used to distinguish from buildings those functional constructions made usually
for purposes other than creating shelter.
Taking. The appropriation by government of private land for which compensation must be paid. Under the U.S.
Constitution, property cannot be condemned through eminent domain for public use or public purpose without
just compensation. This [is] reasonably clear when government buys land directly. But the “taking issue” is far
less clear when the imposition of police power controls.
Zoning. A police power measure, enacted primarily by general-purpose units of local government, in which the
community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted and special uses are established as are
regulations governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards.
(Ordinance 2002-003, app. A, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.003 Penalty
(a) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation and the violator
shall be liable for a misdemeanor charge, and/or imprisonment, for each day that the violation continues, in
conformation to the penalties provided for in the existing zoning ordinances.
(b) Be it noted that, if a violation occurs or is about to occur, the city is authorized to bring action to enforce
this article under section 211.012 of the municipal zoning authority Local Government Code or its successors.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 15, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.004 Grandfather clause
Nothing herein to the contrary, this article shall in no way be interpreted to require a permit to maintain
buildings, structures, objects, or signs as they exist. (Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 16(c), adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.005 Historic preservation commission
(a) Established. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the city historic preservation
commission, herein referred to as the commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/418
(b) Membership. The commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city commission, and
to include if possible:
(1) An architect;
(2) A planner;
(3) A historian or historical society member;
(4) A licensed real estate broker;
(5) An attorney;
(6) An owner of a landmark or of a property in a historic district.
(c) Qualifications of members. All commission members, regardless of background, shall have a known and
demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation within the city.
(d) Term. Commission members shall serve for a term of at least two years, with the exception that the initial
term [of] two members shall be one year, and one member shall be two years.
(e) Officers. The chairman and vice-chairman of the commission shall be elected by and from the members of
the commission.
(f) Duties. The commission shall:
(1) Make recommendations for volunteers, staff and professional consultants as necessary to carry
out the duties of the commission.
(2) Prepare rules and procedures as necessary to carry out the business of the commission, which
shall be ratified by the city commission.
(3) Adopt criteria for the designation of historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and the
delineation of historic districts, which shall be ratified by the city commission.
(4) Conduct surveys and maintain an inventory of significant historic, architectural, and cultural
landmarks and all properties located in historic districts within the city.
(5) Recommend designation of resources as landmarks and historic districts.
(6) Maintain written minutes which record all actions taken by the commission and the reasons for
taking such actions.
(7) Recommend conferral of recognition upon the owners of landmarks or properties within
districts by means of certificates, plaques, or markers.
(8) Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural, and architectural preservation by
developing and participating in public education programs.
(9) Make recommendations to the city commission concerning the utilization of state, federal, or
private funds to promote the preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the city.
(10) Prepare and submit annually to the city commission a report summarizing the work completed
during the previous year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/418
(11) Recommend approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of appropriateness
pursuant to this act.
(12) Prepare specific design guidelines for the review of landmarks and districts.
(13) Recommend the acquisition of a landmark structure where its preservation is essential to the
purpose of this act and where private preservation is not feasible.
(g) Meetings. The commission shall meet at least monthly, if business is at hand. Special meetings may be
called at any time by the chairman or on the written request of any two commission members. All meetings shall
be held in conformance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, Texas Government Code, chapter 551.
(h) Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of not less than a majority of the full
authorized membership.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 2, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.006 Appointment of historic preservation officer
The city manager shall appoint a qualified city official, staff person or appropriate resident of the city to serve as
historic preservation officer. If no qualified staff member is found, a volunteer may be appointed. This officer
shall administer this article and advise the commission on matters submitted to it. In addition to serving as
representative of the commission, the officer is responsible for coordinating the city's preservation activities with
those of state and federal agencies and with local, state and national nonprofit preservation organizations.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 3, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.007 Procedure for designation of historic landmarks
(a) These provisions pertaining to the designation of historic landmarks constitute a part of the comprehensive
zoning plan of the city.
(b) Property owners of proposed historic landmarks shall be notified prior to the commission hearing on the
recommended designation. At the commission's public hearing, owners, interested parties, and technical experts
may present testimony or documentary evidence, which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed historic landmark.
(c) Upon recommendation of the commission, the proposed historic landmark shall be submitted to the zoning
commission within thirty days from the date of submittal of the designation request. The zoning commission
shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation within thirty days of receipt of such
recommendation from the commission. Such hearing shall be in the same manner and according to the same
procedures as specifically provided in the general zoning ordinance of the city. The zoning commission shall
make its recommendations to the city commission within thirty days subsequent to the hearing on the proposed
designation.
(d) The city commission shall schedule a hearing on the commission's recommendation to be held within
thirty days of receipt of the recommendation of the zoning commission. The city commission shall give notice,
follow the publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its determination in the same manner as provided in
the general zoning ordinance of the city.
(e) Upon designation of a building, object, site, or structure as a historic landmark or district, the city
commission shall cause the designation to be recorded in the official public records of real property of the
county, the tax records of the city, and the Hidalgo Appraisal District as well as the official zoning maps of the
city. All zoning maps should indicate the designated landmarks with an appropriate mark.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 4, adopted 6/12/02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/418
Sec. 14.03.008 Procedure for designation of historic districts
(a) These provisions pertaining to the designation of historic [districts] constitute a part of the comprehensive
zoning plan of the city.
(b) Property owners within a proposed historic district shall be notified prior to the commission hearing on the
recommended designation. At the commission's hearing, owners, interested parties, and technical experts may
present testimony or documentary evidence, which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, and cultural importance of the proposed district.
(c) The commission may recommend the designation of a district if it:
(1) Contains properties and an environmental setting which [meet] one or more of the criteria for
designation of a landmark; and
(2) Constitutes a distinct section of the city.
(d) Upon recommendation of the commission, the proposed historic landmark shall be submitted to the zoning
commission within thirty days from the date of submittal of the designation request. The zoning commission
shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation within thirty days of receipt of such
recommendation from the commission. Such hearing shall be in the same manner and according to the same
procedures as specifically provided in the general zoning ordinance of the city. The zoning commission shall
make its recommendations to the city commission within thirty days subsequent to the hearing on the proposed
designation.
(e) The city commission shall schedule a hearing on the commission's recommendation to be held within
thirty days of receipt of the recommendation of the zoning commission. The city commission shall give notice,
follow the publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its determination in the same manner as provided in
the general zoning ordinance of the city.
(f) Upon designation of a building, object, site, or structure as a historic landmark or district, the city
commission shall cause the designation to be recorded in the official public records of real property of the
county, the tax records of the city, and the Hidalgo Appraisal District, as well as the official zoning maps of the
city. All zoning maps should indicate the designated landmarks with an appropriate mark.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 5, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.009 Criteria for designation of historic landmarks
A historic landmark may be designated if it:
(1) Possesses significance in history, architecture, archeology, and culture.
(2) Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of
local, regional, state or national history.
(3) Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past.
(4) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction.
(5) Represents the work of a master designer, builder, or craftsman.
(6) Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the city.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 6, adopted 6/12/02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/418
Sec. 14.03.010 Certificate of appropriateness required
No person shall carry out any construction, reconstruction, alteration, rehabilitation, or relocation of any historic
landmark or any property within a historic district, nor shall any person make material change in the light
fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving, or other exterior elements visible from a public right-of-way
which affect the appearance and cohesiveness of any historic landmark or any property within a historic district
[without a certificate of appropriateness]. (Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 7, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.011 Criteria for approval of certificate of appropriateness
In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall be guided by any adopted
design guidelines, and, where applicable, the following from the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the
Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings. Any adopted design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's standards
shall be made available to the property owners of historic landmarks or within historic districts.
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to adapt the property in a manner which requires
minimal alteration of the building, structure, object, or site and its environment.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, object, or site and its
environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures, objects, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time.
Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be
discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and
development of a building, structure, object, or site and its environment. These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a
building, structure, object, or site shall be kept where possible.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In
the event replacement is necessary, the new material should reflect the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historical,
physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different
architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible.
Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected
by, or adjacent to, any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be
discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or
cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of
the property, neighborhood, or environment.
(10) Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to buildings, structures, objects, or sites shall
be done in such a manner that, if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the building, structure, object, or site would be unimpaired.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/418
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 8, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.012 Procedure for issuance of certificate of appropriateness
(a) Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness, the owner shall file an
application for such a certificate with the commission. The application shall contain:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and a detailed description of proposed
work.
(2) Location and photograph of the property and adjacent properties.
(3) Elevation drawings of the proposed changes, if available.
(4) Samples of materials to be used.
(5) If the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering to be
used, all dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, method of illumination (if any),
and a plan showing the sign's location on the property.
(6) Any other information which the commission may deem necessary in order to visualize the
proposed work.
(b) No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until the commission has first issued a
certificate of appropriateness. The certificate of appropriateness required by this act shall be in addition to and
not in lieu of any building permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the city.
(c) The commission shall review the application at a regularly scheduled meeting within thirty days from the
date the application is received, at which time an opportunity will be provided for the applicant to be heard. The
commission shall recommend to the city commission to approve, deny, or approve with modifications the permit
within forty-five days after the review meeting.
(d) All recommendations by the commission shall be in writing. The commission's recommendation shall state
its findings pertaining to the approval, denial, or modification of the application. A copy shall be sent to the
applicant. Additional copies shall be filed as part of the public record on that property and dispersed to
appropriate city departments.
(e) An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness dissatisfied with the recommendation of the commission
relating to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to the city
commission within thirty days after receipt of notification of such action. The city commission shall give notice,
follow publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its decision in the same manner as provided in the
general zoning ordinance of the city.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 9, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.013 Certificate of appropriateness for demolition
A permit for the demolition of a historic landmark or property within a historic district, including secondary
buildings and landscape features, shall not be granted by the building inspector or other city official without the
review of a completed application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission, as provided for in
sections 14.03.010, 14.03.011 and 14.03.012 of this article. (Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 10, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.014 Economic hardship application procedure
(a) After receiving written notification from the commission of the denial of a certificate of appropriateness,
an applicant may commence the hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/418
unless the commission makes a finding that hardship exists.
(b) When a claim of economic hardship is made due to the effect of this article, the owner must prove that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return
represents the most profitable return possible;
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a
purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
(c) The applicant shall in consult in good faith with the commission, local preservation groups and interested
parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. Such efforts must
be shown to the commission.
(d) The commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within thirty days from the date the
application is received by the building inspector or preservation officer. Following the hearing, the commission
has thirty days in which to prepare a written recommendation to the building inspector or city official.
(e) All decisions of the commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the applicant by registered mail
and a copy filed with the city secretary's office for public inspection. The commission's recommendation shall
state the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application.
(f) An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness dissatisfied with the recommendation of the commission
relating to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to the city
commission within thirty days after receipt of notification of such action. The city commission shall give notice,
follow publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its decision in the same manner as provided in the
general zoning ordinance of the city.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 11, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.015 Enforcement
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this article shall conform to any
requirement included herein. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to inspect periodically any such work
to assure compliance. In the event work is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of
appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the commission and verification by the building inspector,
he/she shall issue a stop work order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken
on the project as long as a stop work [order] is in effect. (Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 12, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.016 Ordinary maintenance
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior
architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district which does not involve a change in
design, material, or outward appearance. In-kind replacement or repair is included in this definition of ordinary
maintenance. (Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 13, adopted 6/12/02)
Sec. 14.03.017 Demolition by neglect
No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within a historic
district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any
exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the commission, produce a detrimental effect upon
the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. Examples of such
deterioration include:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/418
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, or foundations, including broken windows or
doors.
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which leads to the claim that
demolition is necessary for the public safety.
(Ordinance 2002-003, sec. 14, adopted 6/12/02)
APPENDIX A
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATIVE*
ARTICLE I - GENERAL
SECTION 1.00: TITLE.
This Code shall be known and may be cited as the Unified Development Code of the City of San Juan, Texas.
SECTION 2.00: GENERAL PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(a) The Development Code has been adopted in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of
promoting health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the community. It is intended to consolidate in one
place and in logical order without unnecessary duplication all of the regulations pertaining to buildings, land use
and development. It is designed for those persons concerned with land use and development to have access to all
applicable City regulations in one convenient location.
(b) These regulations have been designed to assure the best possible community environment in accordance
with the master plan (the Comprehensive Plan) of the City; and to provide for adequate municipal services.
SECTION 3.00: ADOPTION OF LEGISLATIVE GRANT OF POWER.
The following sections of Vernon's Annotated Codes of the State of Texas are hereby adopted: Local
Government Code, Chapters 41, 42, 43, 54, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 241, 242, 243, and 431; Property
Code, Section 12.002; Water Code; Flood Control and Insurance Act, Sections 16.311 through 16.317; and
Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Article 1175 and Article 4436. Provisions of this Code are adopted in the
exercise of the power granted municipalities by these statutes and pursuant to the provisions of Article I of the
Home Rule Charter of the City of San Juan.
SECTION 4.00: SEVERABILITY OF ARTICLE.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/418
If for any reason any one or more sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this Code are held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining provisions of this Code but shall be confined in its
operation to the specific sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this Code held invalid. The invalidity of any
section, sentence, clause or part of this Code in any one or more instances shall not affect or prejudice in any
way the validity of this Code in any other instance.
SECTION 5.00: SCOPE OF ARTICLE.
This Code shall have application to all regulations and other matters governing the use and development of land,
including regulations governing building, zoning, subdivisions, platting, floodplains, regulations, manufactured
home parks and subdivisions and motor vehicle and pedestrian thoroughfares.
SECTION 6.00: APPLICABILITY.
(a) Zoning. The provisions of Chapter 2, the “Zoning Regulations”, shall not apply to property owned, used
by the City or to property used to provide City-owned utilities. In the erection of buildings or other structures,
City-owned facilities are to conform in architectural design or otherwise as nearly as possible to the buildings
permitted in the zoning district in which they are erected.
(b) Subdivisions. The subdivision and platting regulations as set out shall apply to all governmental units and
political subdivisions unless expressly preempted by state or federal law and to all areas within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as provided in Vernon's Local Government Code, Chapter 212.
SECTION 7.00: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(a) Words, phrases and terms not defined in this Code shall be given their usual and customary meanings
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(b) The text of this Code shall control captions, titles and maps.
(c) The word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive; the word “may” is permissive and not mandatory.
(d) Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular.
(e) Words used in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the future tense include the
present tense.
(f) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be deemed to set minimum
standards and whenever the provisions, standards or requirements of any other applicable article of this Code are
higher or more restrictive, the latter shall control.
SECTION 8.00: COMMENTARIES & MEMORANDA.
(a) Within this Code, subsections prefaced “Commentary” are included. Each commentary is intended as an
official statement similar to a legislative finding or statement of purpose or intent. Whenever a section of this
Code is deemed to require clarification, explanation of its intent or further elaboration, that section is followed
by a commentary. The commentaries have been legislatively adopted together with the formal text of this Code.
They are intended as a guide to the administration and interpretation of the article and shall be treated as
legislative history.
(b) “Memoranda” represent policy statements developed by City staff or the City Attorney and are intended to
represent the staff's considered views on specific provisions of the Code. Memoranda do not have the force of
law but are intended to provide a safe harbor to those relying on them.
SECTION 9.00: CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/418
(a) A member of the City Commission or Planning and Zoning Commission of the City who has a substantial
interest in a matter that is before consideration of the City Commission or the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall file, before a vote or decision regarding the approval of a plat for the tract, an affidavit stating the nature
and extent of the interest and shall abstain from further participation in the matter. The affidavit must be filed
with the City Secretary.
(b) For the purposes of this section a person with substantial interest is one who:
(1) has an equitable or legal ownership interest in the tract with a fair market value of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or more;
(2) acts as a developer of the tract,
(3) owns ten percent (10%) or more of the voting stock or shares of or owns either percent (10%)
or more or $5,000 or more of the fair market value of a business entity that:
(A) has an equitable or legal ownership interest in the tract with a fair market value of $2,500
or more; or
(B) acts as a developer of the tract; or
(C) receives in a calendar year funds from a business entity described by [this] subdivision;
(D) that exceed percent (10%) of the person's gross income for the previous year,
(c) A person also is considered to have a substantial interest in a subdivided tract if the person is related in the
first degree by consanguinity or affinity to another person who, under subsection (b), has a substantial interest in
the tract.
(d) Where a question of a member's interest is raised, the chairman shall rule on whether the member should
be disqualified.
SECTION 10.00: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
(a) An official zoning map of the City shall be kept at City Hall, under the responsibility of the City Secretary
and shall be available to the public at all times.
(b) It shall be the duty of the Planning Director to keep the official map and copies current by entering on such
maps any changes which the City Commission may order by amendments to the zoning regulation and map.
(c) The City Secretary, upon the adoption of this Code, shall:
(1) affix a certificate identifying the map in this office as the official zoning map of the City; and
(2) officially identify the copies directed to be kept by the Planning and Zoning Commission and in
the office of the Planning Director.
SECTION 11.00: THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
SECTION 11.01: DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission are as follows:
(a) To recommend the boundaries of original zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be
enforced;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/418
(b) To hold public hearings and prepare a final report for the City Commission on
recommendations for change in zoning district boundaries or regulations in zoning districts; and
(c) To perform such other functions as are necessary or required by state law or City regulations.
SECTION 11.02 ESTABLISHED[;] COMPOSITION.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five members and as many alternates as appointed by the
City Commission.
SECTION 11.03: TERMS OF MEMBERS.
The five members and alternates of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve for overlapping two-year
terms.
SECTION 11.04: CHAIRMAN.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect:
(a) a chairman; and
(b) a vice-chairman from its own membership who shall serve for one-year terms. No person shall
serve as chairman for more than two successive years.
SECTION 11.05: PRESIDING OFFICER.
The chairman shall preside over meetings of the commission. The vice-chairman shall preside in the absence of
or at the request of the chairman. An additional presiding officer pro-tem may be selected by the commission
members to preside over meetings in absence of both the chairman and the vice-chairman.
SECTION 11.06: QUORUM MAJORITY.
A quorum shall consist of four members of the commission. Final action on any matter shall require a majority
vote of three (3) members except when the commission has twice held a public hearing and considered a zoning
application and is unable to reach a majority vote. In such instances, the commission may submit a report instead
of a recommendation to the City Commission.
SECTION 11.07: MEETINGS
(a) Regular Meetings. Regular meetings shall be held the first and third Thursday of the month at 6:00 p.m. at
City Hall. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The place, day and/or hour of meetings
may be changed by vote of the commission at any regular meeting. Notice of such action shall be published in
the official City newspaper one (1) time at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date.
(b) Notice: Notice of each meeting shall be given;
(c) Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chairman, provided that written notice thereof is
mailed to each member at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time thereof;
(d) Zoning applications. Zoning applications shall be considered only at regular meetings.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
211.007.
SECTION 12.00: VOTING.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/418
(a) Zoning applications. Voting on zoning applications shall be called by roll call vote.
(b) Other Matters. All other matters may be voice vote, provided that roll call vote shall be taken upon
demand of any member.
SECTION 13.00: RECOMMENDATIONS.
The Commission shall take no final action on any planning and zoning matter before it without first obtaining a
recommendation from the Planning Director and reports from the other City departments concerned, as
determined by the Commission.
SECTION 14.00: PUBLICITY.
Releases and statements to the public and press in the name of the Commission shall be made only by the
presiding officer.
SECTION 15.00: COMPENSATION. (Reserved)
SECTION 16.00: THE CITY COMMISSION.
The City Commission may amend, supplement or change zoning districts or boundaries.
SECTION 17.00: ROBERT'S RULE OF ORDER.
Any question of order or procedure not covered by these rules shall be decided according to the latest edition of
Robert's Rules of Order, insofar as that may be applicable.
ARTICLE II - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 1.00: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL.
The administrative official for the purposes of this Code shall be the City Manager and his or her assistants,
deputies, and department heads insofar as they may be charged by the City Manager and the provisions of this
Code with duties and responsibilities with reference thereto. Without limitation, the Directors or Heads of
departments responsible for planning, public works, and building inspections shall ordinarily administer and
enforce the provisions of this Code.
SECTION 2.00: VIOLATIONS DEFINED.
Any act of commission or omission contrary to the commands or directives of this Code, or any breach of any
duty imposed by this Code, shall constitute a violation.
SECTION 3.00: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
(a) The City, or any proper person, may institute any appropriate civil action or proceedings to prevent
violations or threatened violations of these regulations. In particular, but without limitation, in case any building
or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this Code, the City or any proper person may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to:
(1) prevent such unlawful acts and to restrain, correct or abrogate such violation;
(2) prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land; or
(3) prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/418
The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the City or any proper person from instituting any appropriate
action or proceedings to require compliance with the provisions of this Code and with administrative orders and
determinations made hereunder.
(b) Any violation of any provision of these regulations or any other ordinance establishing rules and
regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land outside of the corporate limits of the City, but within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) Shall be reported to the City Commission for whatever action the commission may deem
proper, and the City Attorney shall, when so directed, institute an action in the district court to enjoin
the violation of any provision of these regulations or other ordinance in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction; and
(2) Shall not constitute a misdemeanor under such ordinance nor shall any fine provided for in
such ordinance be applicable to a violation within the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
SECTION 4.00: PENALTIES.
(a) The penalty for violation of any section or other part of this Code is hereby established so that the
minimum fine shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the maximum fine shall be two thousand dollars
($2,000.00). Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) In the event a defendant has once previously been convicted, the defendant shall be fined an amount no
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and shall be fined no less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a
third conviction and for each conviction thereafter. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
SECTION 5.00: REMEDIES.
(a) Offenses and liabilities preserved. All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective
date of this Code shall be treated as though all prior applicable zoning ordinances and amendments thereto were
in full force and effect for the purposes of sustaining any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such
offenses and liabilities.
(b) Effect of other ordinances and regulations. Wherever higher or more restrictive standards are established
by the provisions of any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation than are established by the provisions
of this Code, the provisions of such other statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
SECTION 6.00: NUISANCES.
(a) Nothing in this Code shall be construed as repealing any ordinance of the City regulating nuisances or
permitting uses which were prohibited prior to the adoption of this Code.
(b) The erection, threat of erection, construction or maintenance of any building or the use of any premises in
violation of the provisions of this Code shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a public nuisance when such
threat, building or use of the premises constitutes a fire, health or traffic hazard or interferes with the reasonable
peaceful enjoyment of their homes by citizens living in the vicinity of such buildings or premises.
(c) In addition to the other remedies provided for the enforcement of this Code, the City Commission is
authorized and empowered to hear and determine the facts in cases of alleged nuisances and where it finds that
facts exist which constitute a nuisance as specified in subsection (b) above, the City Commission may order the
cessation and abatement of such nuisance.
SECTION 7.00: RESERVED.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/418
ARTICLE III - DEFINITIONS
Access Lane: Traffic lane or thoroughfare contained entirely within a development which is intended to allow for
the movement of motorized traffic within the development (such as shopping center).
Accessory building: A subordinate building located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is
clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the main building or principal use of the property.
Accessory Use: A use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal use
of the premises and which is located on the same lot as the principal use.
Adopted policies: Written administrative interpretive directives and technical construction memorandum
recommended by the City's planning staff, discussed at a public meeting and officially adopted by a majority
vote of the City Commission through minute orders. All directives and technical construction memorandum
shall be numbered consecutively and shall have the effect of law.
Alley: A minor public right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular and utility service access to the back or
side of properties otherwise abutting on a public street.
Alterations: As applied to a building or structure - a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one (1) location or
position to another.
Antenna: Any system of electrical conductors used for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic
waves.
Antenna support structure: Any structure, mast, pole, tripod, or tower used for supporting an antenna or
antennae.
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in an apartment house or building with other such rooms or suites
arranged, designed or occupied as the residence of a single family, an individual or groups of individuals.
Apartment House: See Dwelling, Multiple.
Appeal: An appeal to the Board of Adjustment where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement in the zoning article of this
Code.
Associated recreation: Recreational uses which are an integral part of a common ownership or associated or high
density residential development (example: homeowners' association with a private club or facility)
Authorized agent: An architect, builder, developer or other person or persons empowered to act on behalf of
property owners or other persons.
Bar, cocktail lounge, tavern, saloon, cantina: An establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold for onpremises
consumption, other than a restaurant as defined in this section.
Base Zone: Base Zone shall refer to the base zone designations of the Zoning Regulations (Commercial,
Residential, Industrial, Multifamily-I, Multifamily-II, etc.).
Boardinghouse: A building, other than a hotel, where lodging and meals are served for compensation.
Buffer: A visual screen constructed of wood, concrete block, masonry, or landscape material in such a manner
that adjacent property will be screened from the use contemplated, so that noise, solid waste or other
objectionable influences will be avoided. Such buffer shall be horizontal to the ground, a minimum of six feet in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/418
height, and 100 percent opaque, except where extraordinary circumstances exist where additional height will
more adequately accomplish the desired end.
Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals,
chattels or property of any kind. The word building includes the word “structure.”
Building Line: A mandatory building line or setback established by the City in certain areas abutting a
thoroughfare either by special order, an Ordinance, this Code or a required covenant in a subdivision plat.
Building Official: The officer, or other person, charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or
his duly authorized representative.
Building Setback Line: The line within a property defining the permissible horizontal distance between a
building and the adjacent street right-of-way.
Building Site: The lot or portion of a lot which is designated on the building permit application and any existing
buildings and appurtenant parking on the lot; or if designated, an artificial lot contained therein and delineated
by the building official.
Business Park: A planned development with a common theme and name intended to be used primarily for office,
showroom, service, warehouse, and/or distribution purposes.
Business Services: Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or
contract basis, such as advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment service, management and
consulting services, protective services, equipment rental and leasing, commercial research, development and
testing, and photo finishing.
Caliper: The minimum diameter of a tree measured six (6) inches above the root collar for trees up to and
including four (4) inches in diameter; twelve (12) inches above the root collar for trees having a diameter greater
than four (4) inches and up to twelve (12) inches; and four and one-half (4.5) feet above the root collar for trees
having a diameter larger than twelve (12) inches.
Carport: Space for the housing or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed by not more than two (2) sides by
walls.
Child care facility: A facility that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for a
child who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of
the 24-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers.
City: The City of San Juan, Texas.
City Commission: The Board of Commissioners of the City of San Juan, Texas.
Clinic: An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for medical examination
and treatment by a physician or by a group of physicians.
Club: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, or person(s) for
a social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business.
Conditional use: A use which may be suitable in certain locations in a zoning district if developed and operated
under specific conditions and/or for a limited period of time.
Depth of Lot: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. See definitions of Front and
Rear lot lines under Lot heading.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/418
Detached structure: A structure having no party wall or common wall with another structure unless it is an
accessory structure.
District: A section of the City for which the regulations governing the areas, heights or the use of buildings are
uniform.
Driveway: That area not used for general circulation, providing access from a street to one (1) or more dwelling
units.
Dwelling: When used in this Code without other qualifications, means a structure occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, including multiple dwelling unit structures.
Dwelling unit: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used primarily for residential occupancy,
but not including hotels, boardinghouses or mobile homes:
(a) Single-family: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family as a separate
dwelling unit.
(b) Duplex: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living
separately and independently of each other.
(c) Triplex: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by three (3) families living
separately and independently of each other.
(d) Fourplex: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by four (4) families living
separately and independently of each other.
(e) Multiple-Family: A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by five (5) or more
families living separately and independently of each other.
(The determination of whether one family is living independently of another is based on one or more
of the following criteria:
(1) separate sanitary facilities;
(2) separate kitchen facilities;
(3) separate entrances; and
(4) separate utilities.)
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the
public, a corporation, another person, or entity.
Easement, utility: An easement granted for installing and maintaining utilities, across, over or under land
together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and other vehicles necessary for the maintenance of
utilities.
Easement, vehicular non-access: An easement established on a lot for the purpose of prohibiting ingress and
egress to vehicular traffic.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction: The areas of the City's jurisdiction to regulate growth as determined under Chapter
42 and Section 212.001 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Family: A family is any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit with common
sanitary and kitchen facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/418
Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a structure, including interior balconies and
mezzanines, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two
structures. The floor area shall include the area of roofed porches having more than one (1) wall and of
accessory structures on the same lot. Stairwells and elevator shafts shall be excluded.
Floor area ratio: The ratio of the total building floor area in square foot to the total land area in square feet.
Garage, Commercial: A building or premises used for storage, repair, rental or servicing of motor vehicles.
Garage, Mechanical: Any premises where motor vehicles are mechanically repaired, rebuilt or constructed.
Garage, Private: An accessory building, attached or detached, designed or used for the storage of motor-driven
vehicles owned and used only by the occupants of the buildings to which it is accessory. Not more than one (1)
of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two (2) ton capacity.
Grade:
(a) For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalks (or if no
sidewalk, the top of the street curb) at the center of the wall adjoining the streets.
(b) For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the
sidewalk (or if no sidewalk, the top of the street curb) at the centers of all the walls adjoining the
streets.
(c) For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of
the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five (5) feet from a street line is to be considered as
adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk or street exists the grade shall be established by the City Engineer.
Guest House: An accessory building designed for the temporary occupancy of guests of the primary dwelling for
which there is no remuneration.
Habitable Room: A space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments,
closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
Height: The height of a building or portion of a building shall be measured from the average vertical distance
established grade at the street lot line or from the average natural ground level, if higher, or if no street grade has
been established, to the highest point of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for
hip or gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys,
cooling towers, radio towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, television antennas,
ornamental cupolas, domes or spires and parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height.
Home Occupation:
(a) Any occupation or activity carried on by a member of the immediate family, residing on the
premises, in connection with which:
(1) there is no sign other than a nameplate not more than one (1) square foot in area, or
(2) no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in
part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling;
(3) no commodity sold upon the premises;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/418
(4) no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the
premises; and
(5) no mechanical equipment is used except of a type that is similar in character to that
normally used for purely domestic or household purposes.
(1999 Unified Development Code)
(6) Reserved.
(7) Home occupation shall not include:
(A) Reserved.
(B) Reserved.
(C) carpenters' shops;
(D) electricians' shops;
(E) plumbers' shops;
(F) radio and/or television repair shops;
(G) diners;
(H) transfer or moving van offices;
(I) auto repairing;
(J) auto painting;
(K) furniture repairing; or
(L) sign painting.
(Ordinance 12-19, sec. I, adopted. 11/27/12)
Hotel: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who lodge with or without
meals, in which; as a rule,
(a) parking may be conveniently located;
(b) the rooms are occupied singly for hire;
[(c)] provision is not made for cooking in any individual apartment;
[(d)] there are more than 12 sleeping rooms;
(e) a public dining room for the accommodation of more than 12 guests; and
(f) a general kitchen. (See definitions of Lodging House and Motel).
HUD-Code manufactured home: A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or,
when erected on-site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/418
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Institution: A:
(a) nonprofit organization or building of a public or charitable character;
(b) educational facility;
(c) places of worship; or
(d) agency of government.
Junk: Any worn-out, cast-off, or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has been collected
or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and
without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall not be
considered junk.
Junkyard or salvage yard: Any premises where junk, articles or materials, including junked, wrecked or
inoperable vehicles, which are ready for destruction or which have been collected are stored for salvage or
conversion to some use.
Large trees: A tree of a species which normally reaches a height of thirty feet or more upon maturity.
Loading Space: A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing,
loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of 12 by 50 feet and a vertical clearance of at
least 14 feet.
Lodging House: A building other than a hotel or motel where lodging for five or more persons is provided for
compensation. (See definitions of Hotel and Motel)
Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, and which is, or in the future may
be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement, which is designated, as a distinct and separate tract,
and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been
properly filed of record. The word “lot” includes the word “plot.”
(a) Building coverage means percentage of the lot that is occupied by the ground area of a building
and its accessory buildings.
(b) Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
(c) Lot, double frontage means a lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets as
distinguished from a corner lot.
(d) Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot.
(1) Front lot line means the property line between the front yard and the contiguous street
right-of-way boundary.
(2) Rear lot line means the property line between the rear yard and the adjacent property or
right-of-way, and contiguous with the legal boundary of such use.
(3) Side lot line means the property between two adjacent lots or between the side yard and
the contiguous street right-of-way boundary on corner lots.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/418
Lot of Record: An entire designated lot which is part of an urban or town lot subdivision, the map or plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Hidalgo County; or a tract of land not a part of an
urban or town lot subdivision, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Hidalgo
County.
Maintenance easement: An easement granted by the owner of a lot adjacent to a zero lot line development,
exclusively for the purpose of allowing the occupancy of a residence on the lot line access to the adjoining
property in order to maintain that portion of his dwelling situated on the property line.
Major thoroughfare plan: That part of the master plan designating the location, dimensions, and dedication
requirements of expressways, primary arterials and secondary arterials.
Maneuvering space: The space entirely on private property required for maneuvering vehicles in such a manner
as to preclude the backing of any vehicle into any street right-of-way.
Manufactured home or housing: A HUD-Code manufactured home or a mobile home. Term collectively means
and refers to both.
Manufactured home park: A plot or tract of land which is separated into two (2) or more spaces or lots which are
rented or leased or offered for rent or lease to persons for the installation of manufactured homes for use and
occupancy as residences; provided, that the lease or rental agreement is for a term of less than sixty (60) months
and contains no purchase option.
Manufactured home park plan: A complete and exact plan of the manufactured home park submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for final approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the director of
building inspections for filing.
Manufactured home setback line: The line within a manufactured home site defining the minimum horizontal
distance between a manufactured home and the adjacent private street line.
Manufactured home site: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park which is designed for and
designated as the location for only one (1) manufactured home and not used for any other purposes whatsoever
other than the customary accessory uses thereof.
Marginal access: The type of street which is used to provide direct access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
Miniwarehouse: A storage enterprise dealing with the reception of goods of residential or commercial
orientation which lie dormant over extended periods of time. Separate storage units are rented to individual
customers who are entitled to exclusive and independent access to their respective units.
Mobile home: A movable or portable dwelling originally constructed to be towed, on its own chassis, by a motor
vehicle over public roads. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in
length, or, when erected on-site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle Park or Modular Home Subdivision: A development of five (5) acres or
more where parking facilities and accommodations are provided by the day, week, month or for a longer period
of time, for or without compensation, arranged on a tract of land in such a manner as to provide an individual lot
for mobile homes and recreational vehicles, when such units are being used for human habitation.
Modular home: A dwelling unit in which more than fifty (50) percent of the structure is constructed at other than
the construction site, brought to the site in modules, and set on a permanent foundation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/418
Motel: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units for more or less
temporary abiding places, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently located to each unit. To qualify
under this category, there must be on the property an office which is open 24 hours a day identified as such by a
sign. (See definitions of Hotel and Lodging House.)
Mulch: Non-living organic and inorganic materials customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion, retain
moisture, maintain even soil temperature, control weeds, and enrich the soil.
Multiple Dwelling: Any building, or portion thereof, which is occupied as the home or residence of more than
two families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in such building, and shall include
flats and apartments.
Nightclub, discotheque, disco or dance hall: An establishment whose primary activity is the provision of
facilities for dancing, including a dance floor and live entertainment or amplified music. Such establishment may
or may not provide on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. Schools of dance are exempted from this
definition.
Nonconforming Use: A building or premises occupied by or devoted to, a use that does not conform to the
regulations of the use district in which it is situated.
Ornamental feature: An addition to a structure designed to enhance the appearance of the structure, in
compliance with all of the following criteria:
(a) Any space occupied by or enclosed by the ornamental feature should not be included in or
made a part of the air-conditioned, heated, or enclosed portion of the structure;
(b) The feature should serve no purpose or function for the structure other than ornamentation. The
building should be equally functional without the feature as with the feature; and
(c) The feature shall extend no further than 24 inches into a required yard.
Outside storage: The keeping, in an unroofed area of any goods, junk, material, or merchandise in the same
place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
Overlay Zone: Overlay Zone shall refer to a special zone designation applicable to one or more tracts or
geographic areas within one or more particular base zone classifications which, because of peculiar
circumstances, require compliance with (or lack of compliance with) a specified set of regulations applicable to
the Overlay Zone which are not applicable to other tracts in a Base Zone Classification (See definition of Base
Zone).
Oversized vehicle: A motor vehicle, trailer, or boat which by itself or together with other structure(s) or
vehicle(s) attached to it exceeds twenty-four (24) feet in length, eight (8) feet in width, or eight (8) feet in height,
exclusive or appurtenances such as antennas, air conditioners, luggage racks, and mirrors.
Owner: The holder of the title in fee simple, and any person in whose name tax bills on the property are
submitted. It shall also mean any person who, along or jointly or severally with others:
(a) Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual
possession;
(b) Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, executor,
executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in
possessions, or assignee of rents, lessee or other person in control of a building; or their duly
authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with
the provisions of this Code, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/418
as if he were the owner. It is his responsibility to notify the actual owner of the reported infractions of
this Code pertaining to the property, which apply to the owner; or
(c) Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which
dwelling units or rooming units are let.
Parking Area: An open, unoccupied space used or required for use for parking of automobiles exclusively and
for no other use and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold or no other business conducted and
no fees are charged for parking.
Parking Space: A paved area, either concrete or asphalt, enclosed in the main building or in an accessory
building, or unenclosed, not closer than six feet from the back edge of the curb having an area of not less than
180 square feet exclusive of driveways with a width and length which shall exceed by a minimum of two feet
the dimensions of the type of vehicle normally to be parked in the space, and permanently reserved for the
storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley by a driveway which affords satisfactory ingress
and egress, which driveway must also be paved with concrete or asphalt.
Parking structure, commercial: An area or structure used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor
vehicles.
Place: An open unoccupied space or a public [or] private thoroughfare other than a street or alley permanently
reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A real estate development which includes a combination of different
dwelling types and/or a variety of land uses which creatively complement each other and harmonize with
existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity, and which comply with provisions of the PUD provisions of the
Subdivision Regulation.
Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of San Juan, Texas.
Plumbing: The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alterations of
all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or
storm drainage facilities; the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent
to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and material used in the installation, maintenance,
extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste or sewerage, and water supply systems of any premises to
their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal.
Portable building: A temporary building that does not have a foundation and is transportable.
Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon.
Processing and warehouses: The storage of materials in a warehouse or terminal and where such materials may
be combined, broken down or aggregated for transshipment or storage purposes where the original material is
not chemically or physically changed.
Property owner: The person, entity[,] corporation, or partnership in whose name a certificate of occupancy
issued, or the current owner of the property if a certificate of occupancy is no longer valid, or, if the current
owner cannot be contacted after due diligence, the lessee/occupant of the property who is in actual control of
such property.
Recreational vehicle or travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the
manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding
eight feet and a body length not exceeding the requirements of state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/418
Repair: The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not
including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change
required existing facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations,
or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term “repair” or “repairs” shall not apply to
any change of construction.
Required: Required by some provision of this Code.
Residential building: Buildings in which families or households live, which include dwellings or dwelling units,
or in which sleeping accommodations are provided, and all dormitories, shall be classified as residential
occupancy. Such buildings include, among others, the dwellings, multiple dwellings and rooming houses.
Residential storage building: A building, either portable or constructed on-site, utilized for storage purposes and
not requiring plumbing and electrical wiring, and not used for living quarters.
Restaurant: A building or portion of a building where the primary business is the on-premises sale of prepared
food, with adequate kitchen facilities for the preparation of the food to be sold, the adequacy of said kitchen
facilities to be based upon the seating capacity of the restaurant and the type of menu offered, and where
alcoholic beverages may be sold under the following conditions:
(a) At least fifty-one (51) percent of the gross income shall be derived from the sale of prepared
food.
(b) Any outside entrances, outside separate identification, outside signs or other separate
advertising for lounge or bar areas shall be permitted only as an accessory or secondary feature of the
restaurant.
(c) Live entertainment may be permitted.
(d) Whenever the director of planning on the basis of a sworn complaint from any person
determines that a violation of this section exists, he may require any person serving alcoholic
beverages as an incidental use to provide the City, within 30 days of notification, a verified audit for
each quarter of the calendar year, showing the gross income derived from the sale of food.
Retail: The sale of goods directly to a consumer, engaged in, pertaining to or relating to the sale of merchandise
at retail; or selling by individual items, or by the piece, directly to a consumer.
Right-of-way line: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a public right-of-way.
Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living
and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
Root collar: an encircling structure of swollen tissue or a marked color change (from the tree bark) located at the
highest part of the root system joining into the trunk of a tree at or slightly below the surrounding soil line.
Root protection zone: An area with the radius of one (1) foot for each inch of trunk diameter measured at four
and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the existing soil line or if the tree branches below four and one-half (4-1/2) feet,
at the point where the smallest diameter closest to the branching occurs. The zone need not be exactly centered
around the tree or circular in shape, but it should be positioned so that no disturbance occurs closer to the tree
than one-half the radius of the zone, not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet in size.
Satellite dish antenna: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured; is
in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, or horn; and is to be used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic waves
between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/418
Sign: A name, identification, image, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an
object, product, place[,] activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization or business
and which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Customary
displays of merchandise or objects and material without lettering placed behind a store window are not signs.
Included in this definition are the following signs:
(a) Animated sign: A sign with action or motion, flashing color ranges requiring electrical energy,
electronic or manufactured sources of supply, but not including wind-actuated elements such as flags,
banners or special items.
(b) Directional sign: A sign containing directional information about public places owned or
operated by federal, state or local governments or their agencies; publicly or privately owned natural
phenomena; historic, cultural, scientific, educational and religious sites; and areas of natural scenic
beauty or naturally suited for outdoor recreation deemed to be in the interest of the traveling public
and having statewide or regional significance.
(c) Freestanding sign: A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or
upon the ground.
(d) Illuminated sign: A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message
readable. This definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized,
glowing or radiating signs.
(e) Nameplate: A sign attached to a building not more than one square foot in area identifying the
owner or lessor, and his title or occupation.
(f) Off-premises sign: A sign, including the supporting sign structure, which directs the attention of
the general public to a business, service or activity not usually conducted or a product not usually
offered or sold upon the premises where such a sign is located. None of the following shall be
deemed an off-premises outdoor advertising sign:
(1) Drawing and other official signs authorized by law;
(2) Real estate signs;
(3) Political signs; and
(4) Signs which have a significant portion of their face area devoted to giving public service
information such as, but not limited to, time, date, temperature, weather or similar information.
(g) Official signs: Directional and other official signs authorized by law, including signs pertaining
to scenic, historic, or other attractions, and signs which have as their purpose the protection of life
and property.
(h) On-premise sign: A sign which directs the attention of the general public to a lawful use of the
premises on which it is located, including signs or sign devices indicating:
(1) the business transacted;
(2) services rendered;
(3) goods sold; or produced on the premises;
(4) name of the business; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/418
(5) name of the person, firm or corporation occupying the premises.
(i) Political sign: Any sign whose sole purpose is the transmittal of information concerning:
(1) an upcoming political issue or campaign; or
(2) a public issue of potential concern to the community as a whole.
(j) Portable sign: A freestanding and movable sign, designed to be temporary and mobile. This
definition includes signs attached to trailers, but does not include signs permanently placed on the
sides of motor vehicles.
(k) Private directional signs: A sign:
(1) not erected by or under authority of any governmental agency;
(1[a]) which contains only information designed to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
(2) and which contains no advertising material or a business name.
Examples of private directional signs include signs bearing only the word “entrance” or
“exit” located on or near a parking lot. No sign which contains the name of a business or
activity or any other advertising material shall be considered a private directional sign,
even though such sign may also contain the word “entrance” or “exit”. A sign containing
the word “parking” at any parking lot where any person is charged any fee or other
monetary consideration for parking shall be considered an advertising sign, not a private
directional sign.
(l) Real estate signs: Any sign smaller than three (3) feet by four (4) feet, temporarily advertising
the sale or lease of the property upon which it is located, or any permanent sign affixed to a gate or
entryway advertising only the name and address of a subdivision, apartment complex or residential
district.
Stairway: One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a
continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure.
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above it; or if there be no floor above it then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
Story, Half: A partial [story] under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite
exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for
residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family, or by a family occupying the floor
immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story.
Street: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property,
excluding alleys.
Street Line: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Street Yard: The area of a lot which lies between the property line along a dedicated street and the actual wall
line of the building or, if no building exists, to the rear property line. Such building wall lines extend outward
from the corners of the buildings.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/418
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the
ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, advertising signs,
billboards, backstops for tennis courts, and arbors.
Supplied: Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under control of the owner or operator.
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series, or a group of units having common walls,
each on a separate lot.
Understory: Grass or low-level brush or other ground cover.
Utility: A public utility that provides water, sewer, gas or electricity or a water or sewer supply service
corporation.
Ventilation: The process of supplying and removing air, by natural or mechanical means, to or from any space.
Wheelchair ramp: A sloping concrete pad constructed at sidewalks to assist mobility-impaired citizens using the
sidewalks and crosswalks.
Wholesale: The sale of commodities for the purpose of resale, as to retailers or jobbers rather than to consumers
directly; opposed to “retail.” Of, pertaining to, or engaged in sale at wholesale.
Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
(1) Front yard: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the
minimum horizontal distance required between the street or place line and the main building or any
projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots the
front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
(2) Rear yard: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the minimum required horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than the
projections of the uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On all lots the rear
yard shall be in the rear of the front yard.
(3) Side yard: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from
the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between
a side lot line and the sides of the main buildings or any projections thereof.
(4) Width of Side Yard: The main horizontal distance between a side wall of a building and side line
of the lot or to the centerline of any alley adjacent to such side lot line.
CHAPTER 2 - ZONING REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE I - MASTER PLAN, OBJECTIVES, AND CONFORMITY
Prior to 1968, the City's basic land and building regulatory controls consisted of a platting ordinance and the
standard building codes. In 1971, the first “master plan” was developed and adopted, and constitutes the general
outline of development for the City. In 1974, the first Major Thoroughfare Plan was adopted. This plan was
amended in 1994. During 1975 and 1976, the master plan was expanded. In 1980, the first Zoning Ordinance
was adopted. The City's Annexation Plan is currently under development. A facilities plan for water and
wastewater services has been finalized as of early 1998. An Open Space, Parks and Recreation Committee has
been appointed which, in addition to other responsibilities, will assist in recommending an Open Space, Parks
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/418
and Recreation Plan for the City to include the improvement of existing parks and open space and the
development of future open spaces for use by the public. In early 1998, Ordinance No. 94-002 (the “Zoning
Ordinance”) was readopted as Ordinance No. 98-006. In anticipation of that amendment, the City's planning
department prepared an existing land use map, Ordinance No. 98-007, dated July 1, 1998 (The “Land Use
Map”), which will be contained in the 1999 Comprehensive Plan. Thereafter, the City Commission held work
sessions on March 16, 1998, March 23, 1998, March 30, 1998, and June 30, 1998 at which the public was
invited to provide comments on the proposed zoning ordinance and the zoning maps. Public hearings were held
on March 19, 1998, March 26, 1998, April 2, 1998, and June 25, 1998.
The minutes of the commission meetings and the public hearings are contained as part of the “Record of
Proceedings” in the 1999 Comprehensive Plan. Collectively, the foregoing are statements of the development
policy of the City.
By mid-1999, the City Commission anticipates adopting an impact fee ordinance which will require all future
development to contribute a pro rata share of new capital facilities as well as a storm drainage plan.
(1999 Unified Development Code)
ARTICLE II - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION 1.00: HISTORY OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
(a) The original zoning ordinance of the City and the amendments thereto divided the City into five districts:
(1) Single-Family;
(2) Multifamily;
(3) Commercial;
(4) Industrial; and
(5) Open Space.
(b) For the purpose of this Article, the City is now hereby divided into eleven (11) districts as follows:
(1) R-S Single-family Residential district;
(2) R-MF Multifamily Residential district;
(3) R-MH Manufactured Home Residential district;
(4) C-1 Office Building district;
(5) C-2 Neighborhood Commercial district;
(6) C-3 Heavy Commercial district;
(7) I-1 Light Industrial district;
(8) I-2 Heavy Industrial district;
(9) O Undeveloped - open space district;
(10) IN Institutional district; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/418
(11) EC Expressway Corridor district.
These shall be known as the Base Zone Classifications.
SECTION 1.01: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to:
(a) The boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning map; or
(b) The location of zoning district boundaries on the official zoning map, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) Boundary Lines - Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot
lines, alley, street or highway right-of-way lines, or extensions of such lines, such lines shall be
construed to be boundary lines;
(2) Parallel Line Rule - Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines of street lines of streets, or the centerlines of right-ofway
lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and
at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map;
(3) Unsubdivided Property - On unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the
Zoning Map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Map unless the boundary
lines are extensions of lines on neighboring developed tracts;
(4) Vacation of Property - Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by
official action of the City Commission, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area
included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts;
(5) Intent and Purpose Rule - When the street layout on the ground varies from that shown on
the map, the designations shown upon the mapped streets shall be applied in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the plan for the particular area in question.
ARTICLE III - COMPLIANCE WITH THE REGULATIONS
Except as hereinafter provided no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered and no
premises shall be used except in conformity with the regulations prescribed for the district.
ARTICLE IV - DISTRICT USE AND AREA REGULATIONS
SECTION 1.00: “R-S” SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
Use Regulations: A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) One-Family Dwelling;
(b) Churches;
(c) Public parks, including playgrounds;
(d) Farming, truck gardening, citrus orchards, nursery and greenhouses;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/418
(e) Accessory building or use, including a private garage customarily incident to the above uses,
but not involving the conduct of a business;
(f) Country club or golf course, not less than 40 acres in area, except a golf course or miniature
course or practice driving tee operated for commercial purposes;
(g) Home occupation incidental to a permitted use provided such occupations are conducted in the
main building and only by a person resident of such building. A nameplate not to exceed one square
foot in area containing the name and occupation of the resident may be displayed;
(h) A temporary sign appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which sign or
bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area;
(i) Any other sign:
(1) remaining on the property for no more than 45 days; and
(2) not exceeding twelve (12) feet in area; or
(j) A nonenclosed metal carport bolted to concrete shall be allowed within the front setback along
residential streets in subdivisions recorded before 1990. The carport shall not be bigger than 18 feet
in length and 18 feet in width.
SECTION 1.01: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
The height and area regulations set forth in Article VI shall be observed.
SECTION 1.02: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Chapter 6, Off-
Street Parking Regulations, but under no circumstances shall:
(a) the paved parking area be less than 400 square feet; nor
(b) the driveway entrance width exceed 15 feet.
SECTION 2.00: “R-MF” MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) Duplex, Triplex, and Fourplex family dwelling and more intense multifamily uses;
(b) Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge, excepting one of the chief activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business;
(c) Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any of the above uses, including a storage
garage on a lot occupied by a multiple dwelling, hospital or institution;
(d) Parking spaces, laundry room, etc., if covered are to be considered as part of the area of the
main building; or
(e) Day nurseries.
SECTION 2.01: RESERVED:
SECTION 2.02: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/418
The height and area regulations set forth in Article VI shall be observed.
SECTION 2.03: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Off-Street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the Off-Street
Parking Regulation, Chapter 6.
SECTION 3.00: (R-MH) MANUFACTURED & MODULAR HOME DISTRICT-PERMITTED USES:
(a) Manufactured homes on spaces approved for manufactured homes;
(b) Recreational vehicles;
(c) Modular homes on spaces approved for modular homes;
(d) Accessory buildings;
(e) Recreational and commercial facilities designed for exclusive use of the subdivision's occupants;
(f) On-premises signs including illuminated or animated signs, in accordance with adopted City regulations;
or
(g) Storage buildings;[.]
SECTION 3.01: CONDITIONAL USES (REQUIRE “CONDITIONAL” USE PERMITS):
(a) Home occupations that meet applicable conditions (see Article VIII, Section 8.00);
(b) Amusement parks, circus or carnival grounds, commercial amusement or recreation developments, or tents
or other temporary structures used for temporary purposes in accordance with all applicable City regulations;
(c) Facilities for railroads or those utilities holding a franchise under the City;
(d) The owner's or manager's home on a six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square foot lot or larger;
(e) Portable buildings;
(f) Parking facilities for nonresidential uses that meet applicable requirements of the Off-Street Parking
Regulation.
SECTION 3.02: PROHIBITED USES:
(a) Any building or land used for other than one or more of the preceding specified uses;
(b) No more than one manufactured home or recreational vehicle may occupy any approved space;
(c) Off-premises signs;
(d) Any use of property that does not meet:
(1) the required minimum lot size;
(2) front, side and rear yard dimension; and/or
(3) lot width; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/418
(4) exceeds the maximum heights, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in
Article VI;
SECTION 3.03: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
(a) A development designed as a manufactured home, modular home or recreational vehicle park shall meet
all requirements of:
(1) the manufactured home and recreational vehicle park regulation of the City; and
(2) and any applicable sections of the City subdivision regulation.
(b) Said facility shall be for the purpose of:
(1) renting; or
(2) leasing of manufactured home sites.
(c) Said facility shall not be construed to permit the sale of such lots.
(d) A development designed as a:
(1) manufactured home;
(2) modular home; or
(3) recreational vehicle subdivision shall meet all requirements of:
(A) the City subdivision regulation, and
(B) any applicable sections of the City manufactured home and recreational vehicle park
regulation.
(e) Such subdivision shall have as its major purpose:
(1) the sale and conveyance of property rights, and
(2) ownership of individual lots to consumers.
(f) At no time may an existing manufactured home, modular home or recreational vehicle park be converted
to:
(1) a manufactured home;
(2) modular home; or
(3) recreational vehicle subdivision without first meeting all the requirements of the City
subdivision regulation and receiving approval by the City Commission.
SECTION 4.00: (C-1) NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
(a) Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises primarily for persons
residing in adjacent residential areas, such as groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods, clothing and
notions, or hardware and similar uses;
(b) Personal services establishments which perform services on the premises such as repair shops (watches,
radios, T.V., shoes, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops, photographic studios and self-service
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/418
laundries; and similar uses but not including automotive or other repair services and armature repair services;
(c) Dry-cleaning establishments or pickup stations dealing directly with the consumers. Central dry-cleaning
plants servicing more than one retail outlet are not permitted;
(d) Business establishments which perform services on the premises such as banks, loan companies, insurance
and real estate offices;
(e) Personal services including the following: Outpatient medical clinics, offices of doctors, dentists,
osteopaths and similar or allied professions;
(f) On-premises signs, including those that are animated or illuminated;
(g) Commercial parking lots; or
(h) Other uses similar to the above.
SECTION 4.01: CONDITIONAL USES (REQUIRE “CONDITIONAL” USE PERMITS):
(a) All R-MF uses including conditional uses, except manufactured homes;
(b) Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold;
(c) Drive-in business establishments serving nearby residences which are so developed that its retail or service
character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles, rather than
within a building or structure, including drive-in restaurants;
(d) Restaurants or bars in accordance with the adopted policies of the City, provided the site is not larger than
four acres and that access be provided from a collector or larger street;
(e) Planned neighborhood convenience centers, including any or all of the above permitted or conditional
uses, provided the site is not larger than four (4.0) acres and that access to such center be from a designated
collector or larger street;
(f) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses;
(g) Portable buildings that meet applicable conditions (See Art. VIII Section 8.00(c))[.]
SECTION 4.02: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
(a) All business establishments shall be retail service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All
goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail prices on premises where produced;
(b) All businesses, servicing or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building (except
for off-street parking or loading) excluding drive-in businesses or gasoline service stations or retail outlets where
gasoline products are sold;
(c) Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold at retail prices, are limited in
their activity to the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and incidental service. Repair work, steam
cleaning or undercoating, vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling,
upholstery, auto glasswork and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the
property line are not permitted;
(d) The curb cut, or ingress and egress to gasoline service stations, retail outlets for gasoline products and/or
drive-in businesses shall not be permitted at locations where it will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/418
immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than thirty (30) feet from any street intersection
(measured from right-of-way);
(e) A front setback of sixty (60) feet from the right-of-way of any existing or proposed street shall be
maintained by gas service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold unless otherwise approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Gas pumps or driveway covers may be placed within the setbacks.[;]
(f) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts;
(g) A six-foot-high, completely obscuring wall shall be provided by all gasoline service stations, retail outlets
where gasoline products are sold, or drive-in businesses, when abutting or adjacent to districts zoned for any
residential use;
(h) The minimum lot area for a gas service station or a retail outlet where gasoline products are sold should be
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are
required to wait, except that gasoline service stations intended solely for the purpose of selling gasoline, oil and
minor accessories and having no facilities for repair or servicing automobiles may be permitted on lots of less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet subject to all other provisions required;
(i) Veterinary hospitals or clinics are subject to the limitation that all activities be conducted within a totally
enclosed building with no open-air impoundment and no external effects such as noise or odor which could
adversely extend beyond the property lines; and
(j) The City may require a building line along any streets.
SECTION 4.03: PROHIBITED USES:
(a) Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the preceding specified uses;
(b) Off-premises signs;
(c) Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimension;
and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in
Article VI.
SECTION 5.00: (C-2) GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
SECTION 5.01: PERMITTED USES:
(a) All uses listed as permitted uses in C-1 districts;
(b) Any retail business, personal services, business services except the following: Lumberyards or contractor
yards, farm equipment or other heavy equipment sales or service, farm products warehousing and storage or
stockyards, general warehousing and storage. Household goods warehousing and storage in individually rented
storage units is permitted;
(c) Hotel, motel and/or eating places;
(d) Printing, publishing and allied products manufacturing;
(e) Rail and motor vehicle transportation passenger terminals;
(f) Telephone, telegraphs, television, radio or similar media stations, centers, studios, but not including public
microwave, radio and television towers;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/418
(g) Any wholesale trade or wholesale trade accessory to any permitted retail operation except the following:
Raw cotton, grain, hide, skins and raw furs, tobacco, wool or mohair, livestock, commercial or industrial
machinery or supplies, metals and minerals, petroleum bulk stations and terminals, scrap or junk waste
materials;
(h) Signs in accordance with adopted ordinances; or
(i) Automotive repair as an accessory use to a permitted retail use, such as retail sale of automobiles or retail
sale of automotive parts.
SECTION 5.02: CONDITIONAL USES (REQUIRE USE PERMITS):
(a) Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold;
(b) Drive-in businesses;
(c) Planned shopping centers;
(d) Bars, nightclubs and social event centers in accordance with adopted policies;
(e) Amusement parks, circus or carnival grounds, commercial amusement or recreation developments, or tents
or other temporary structures used for temporary purposes, in accordance with all applicable City regulations
and ordinances;
(f) Portable buildings;
(g) Owner-occupied residence in compliance with the setback requirements of this zoning district;
(h) Automotive repair and service as a primary use, including auto paint and body work as a primary use,
subject to required conditions. (See conditions listed in Section 5.04 hereof).(1)
(1) All establishments engaged in automotive repair, services, maintenance, or paint and body work that are under
construction or in existence and located in C-2 zone as of the date of adoption of this subsection shall hereby be classified
as conforming uses and shall not be denied the right to expand, repair or rebuild such establishments.
SECTION 5.03: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, drive-in businesses, and veterinary hospitals
shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in the C-1 district for these types of uses. Access lane shall be clearly
designated on subdivision plat.
SECTION 5.04: REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AS A PRIMARY USE:
(a) Such establishments shall be located on a lot or tract of land of sufficient size to accommodate the
proposed use. In no case shall the building site be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
(b) All service, repair, maintenance, painting, and other work shall take place within an enclosed area;
(c) There shall be no outside storage of materials;
(d) The building where the proposed work is to take place shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from the
nearest residence;
(e) A six-foot wall or opaque fence buffering the proposed use from any residential use of residentially zoned
area may be required; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/418
(f) All new buildings and all conversions of existing buildings to such uses shall meet current building code
and fire code requirements in terms of separation of high hazard uses from other occupancy use classifications,
etc.
SECTION 5.05: PROHIBITED USES:
(a) Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the preceding specified uses; or
(b) Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimension;
and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in
Article VI.
SECTION 6.00: (C-3) HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
SECTION 6.01: PERMITTED USES:
(a) All uses listed as permitted uses in the C-2 district;
(b) Drive-in business;
(c) Gasoline service stations, automotive and other repair services or retail outlets where gasoline products are
sold;
(d) Lumberyards or contractor yards, farm equipment or other heavy equipment sales and service, farm
products warehousing and storage, general warehousing and storage;
(e) Motor vehicle transportation freight terminals;
(f) Any wholesale trades or wholesale trade accessory to any permitted retail operation including raw cotton,
grain, hides, skins and raw furs, tobacco, wool or mohair, commercial or industrial machinery or synthetics,
metals and minerals, petroleum bulk stations and terminals;
(g) Those uses of a commercial retail or wholesale nature requiring large outdoor loading areas, generating
heavy truck or rail traffic and requiring access to major transportation channels and/or creating influences not
acceptable in the C-2 district;
(h) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, including the residence for
night watchman or caretaker employed on the premises;
(i) Other uses of similar character; and
(j) Signs in accordance with adopted regulations and ordinances;[.]
SECTION 6.02: CONDITIONAL USES (REQUIRE USE PERMITS):
(a) Planned shopping center;
(b) Amusement parks, circus or carnival grounds, commercial amusement or recreation development or tents
or other temporary structures used for temporary purposes, in accordance with all applicable City regulations
and ordinances;
(c) Facilities for railroads or those utilities holding a franchise under the City; or
(d) Owner-occupied residence in compliance with the setback requirements of this zoning district.
SECTION 6.03: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/418
All -
(a) Gasoline service stations;
(b) Retail outlets where gasoline products are sold;
(c) Drive-in businesses; and
(d) Veterinary hospitals -
shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in subsections (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of Article IV section 4.02
herein.
No permit shall be issued unless an access lane has been clearly designated on the subdivision plat.
SECTION 6.04: PROHIBITED USES:
(a) Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the preceding specified uses.
(b) Any use of property that does not meet:
(1) the required minimum lot size;
(2) front, side and rear yard dimension; and/or
(3) lot width; or
(4) exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in Article
VI.
SECTION 7.00: (I-1) LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
SECTION 7.01: PERMITTED USES:
(a) Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding or processing is conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building. That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or
equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those
sides abutting a residential district and C-1 and C-2 districts.
(1) The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as
bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery;
(2) The manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the
following previously prepared materials: Bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber,
fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheetmetal
(excluding saw and planing mills) and yarns;
(3) The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only
previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas;
(4) Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other small
molded rubber products;
(5) Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios
and phonographs;
(6) Laboratories - Experimental, film or testing;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/418
(7) Manufacture and repair of electric or neon signs, sheetmetal products, including heating and
ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like;
(8) Tool, die, gauge and machine shops;
(9) All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related
uses;
(10) Any use listed as permitted in C-4.
(b) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
(c) Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to those principal uses permitted subject to
any and all provisions of regulations relating to the use of property within the City.
SECTION 7.02: CONDITIONAL USES (REQUIRE USE PERMITS):
(a) Planned shopping centers;
(b) Planned industrial parks;
(c) The residence of a watchman or caretaker employed on the premises;
(d) Amusement parks, circus or carnival grounds, commercial amusement or recreation developments, or tents
or other temporary structures used for temporary purposes, in accordance with all applicable City regulations;
(e) Facilities for railroads or those utilities holding a franchise under the City;
(f) Portable buildings other than storage buildings; or
(g) Owner-occupied residence in compliance with the setback requirements of this zoning district
SECTION 7.03: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, drive-in businesses, and veterinary hospitals
shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in Article IV sections 4.02(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) herein. No permit
shall be issued unless an access lane has been clearly designated on the subdivision plot.
SECTION 7.04: PROHIBITED USES:
(a) Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the preceding specified uses.
(b) Any use of property that does not meet the:
(1) required minimum lot size;
(2) front, side and rear yard dimension; and/or
(3) lot width; or
(4) exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in Article
VI.
SECTION 8.00: (I-2) HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
Permitted uses:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/418
(a) All uses listed as permitted in the I-1 district, provided that the manufacturing, compounding or
processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building and that the portion of land
used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in manufacturing, compounding or
processing be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting RS, RMF, RMH, C-1 and C-2
districts; or
(b) Any use not previously listed subject to any and all provisions of all regulations relating to the
use of property within the City.
SECTION 8.01: CONDITIONAL USES (REQUIRE USE PERMITS):
(a) Planned shopping center;
(b) Planned industrial park;
(c) Amusement parks, circus or carnival grounds, commercial amusement or recreation developments, or tents
or other temporary structures used for temporary purposes, in accordance with all applicable City regulations;
(d) Facilities for railroads or those utilities holding a franchise under the City;
(e) The residence of a watchman or caretaker employed on the premises;
(f) Owner-occupied residence in compliance with the setback requirements of this zoning district; [.]
SECTION 8.02: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Gasoline service stations or retail outlets where gasoline products are sold, drive-in businesses and veterinary hospitals
shall be subject to the same limitations as set forth in Article IV, Section 4.02(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) herein. No permit
shall be issued unless an access lane has been clearly designated on the subdivision plat.
SECTION 8.03: PROHIBITED USES:
(a) Those uses, which in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City commission, would
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens or to adjacent development; or
(b) Any use of property that does not meet:
(1) the required minimum lot size;
(2) front, side and rear yard dimension;
(3) and/or lot width; or
(4) exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required in Article
VI.
SECTION 9.00: “O” UNDEVELOPED - OPEN SPACE DISTRICT:
Land use activities shall be allowed only for the following purposes:
(a) Public parks and playgrounds; or
(b) Agricultural uses provided that any structure or enclosure for the shelter of livestock and
poultry shall be located not less than 200 feet from any street or lot line.
SECTION 10.00: “IN” INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/418
Land use activities shall be allowed only for the following purposes:
(a) Public and private schools;
(b) Community or other civic buildings including museums;
(c) Libraries and auditoriums;
(d) Institutions of educational, charitable or philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental
institution;
(e) Nursing or convalescent home; and [sic]
(Ordinance 17-13 adopted 6/27/17)
SECTION 11.00: EXPRESSWAY CORRIDOR DISTRICT:
SECTION 11.01: PURPOSE:
The Expressway Corridor District (ECD) is a special purpose district created to identify uses and regulations for properties
adjacent to and in the proximity of the US 83/IH2. These regulations are intended to encourage new and appropriate uses
and design, and to protect existing uses that will benefit the City of San Juan. This district is intended to support businesses
that complement each other and to be a destination in the Rio Grande Valley for shopping, entertainment, and employment.
Except as hereinafter provided no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered and no
premises shall be used except in conformity with the regulations prescribed for the district.
The following district regulations replace the current uses as a distinct new district. Where there is any ambiguity, the
Planning and Zoning Commission, upon the recommendation of Staff, will be the deciding body, and if appropriate, a
recommendation will be forwarded to the City Commission.
SECTION 11.02: DISTRICT USES:
(a) Uses Permitted By Right - The uses as shown in the following Zoning Use Chart are permitted by right
and are subject to the restrictions of this district. In general, definitions are defined by terms in general use or in
Appendix A, Unified Development Chapter 1, Article III. Definitions of uses specific to this District are found
in Section 11.03 of Appendix A, Unified Development Code.
(b) Conditional Uses - As identified in the Zoning Use Chart, some uses may be considered when it is shown
that such a use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or
operation for the use. The conditions shall be specified and recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and approved by the City Commission. Appendix A, Chapter 2, Article VIII, Conditional Use
defines the process in for conditional uses that are listed in the following Zoning Use Chart.
(c) Nonconforming Uses - With the creation of the new Expressway Corridor District (ECD) some current
land and building uses may become existing nonconforming uses. They will not be required to close or relocate,
however they become subject to the requirements and regulations in Appendix A, Chapter 2, Article VII,
Nonconforming Uses.
SECTION 11.03: DEFINITIONS
In addition to the definitions in Appendix A, Unified Development Code, Chapter 1, Article III, Definitions, the following
definitions apply specifically to this district.
The following definitions are to be used in the application of this district. They are terms that are accepted in standard
planning and zoning usage. If a word or term is not defined herein, a definition from a dictionary in general usage shall be
applied.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/418
Antique shop: An establishment offering for sale articles such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishing or
decorations which have value and significance as a result of age, design or sentiment.
Automobile Sales: The use of land and buildings primarily for the display, sale, lease, and rental of new or pre-owned
automobiles (may include utility vehicles, light trucks and vans) and including vehicle preparation, warranty and repair
work as an accessory use. Vehicles that are wrecked or require additional repair work shall be screened from view.
Bakery or confectionery shop (retail): A place for baking or selling baked goods, or a place for preparing, cooking,
making or selling candy or other sweets.
Bank or Credit Union: A facility which has as its primary purpose the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the
extension of credit and the transmission of funds, including drive-in facilities and automatic teller machines.
Bar, lounge or tavern: An establishment, the primary activity of which is the sale and consumption on the premises of
beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages, and where any food service is secondary alcoholic beverages and where the sale of
said beverages constitute more than fifty [percent] (50%) of the business income of that establishment.
Barber or beauty shop: A facility licensed by the state where hair cutting, hair dressing, shaving, trimming beards,
facials, manicures, tanning or related services are performed.
Buffer: A permanent natural or landscaped area serving to separate two (2) different land uses or developments. It may be
in the form of a strip of land lying parallel and adjacent to a property line common to a dissimilar use of a more restrictive
nature. The purpose of this buffer is to provide for minimum livability and maximum required visual screening and
physical separation of uses of a dissimilar nature.
Carwash facility: A semi-enclosed structure for washing automobiles with automatic application of cleaners, brushes,
rinse water, and heat for drying. May include manually operated exterior located vacuuming equipment and detailing
operations.
Day spa: A facility for personal services including hair care, manicure, pedicure, waxing, and tanning. If the spa services
include massages, the use must comply with the following definition.
Massage establishment: Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by a massage
therapist, as defined by Texas Law. “Massage therapy”, as a health care service, means the
manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to,
effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration,
friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical
apparatus for the purpose of body massage. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows,
heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub shower, or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for massage therapy
are massage, therapeutic massage, massage technology, myotherapy, or any derivation of those terms.
The terms “therapy” and “therapeutic” do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or
any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or
podiatry is required by law. Also see definition of Health Studio.
Florist flower or plant shop: A facility for the retail sale of cut or uncut flowers and ornamental plants and accessory
items. Enclosure of use required.
Furniture store: A retail facility displaying and selling new furniture, and may include appliances such as radios,
televisions, stereos, refrigerators, and stoves.
Hardware store: A retail facility for selling cutlery, tools, utensils, screws, nails and similar items.
Health studio or fitness center: An indoor facility operating for a profit to promote physical fitness or weight control.
Hobby shop: An establishment for the retail sale of hobby supplies such as model kits, art equipment and materials.
Home center: A facility which retails appliances, fixtures, building materials and other similar items for the maintenance
and improvement of residential structures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/418
Hospital: An institution licensed by the state that provides health services primarily for human inpatient, medical or
surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities.
Hotel: A building or a group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6) or more sleeping rooms occupied,
intended or designed to be occupied as the temporary abiding place for persons who are lodged with or without meals for
compensation, but not including a hospital or recreational vehicle camping area.
Jewelry store: A facility which retails watches, rings, bracelets, necklaces and similar items.
Landscape service: A facility for the design and implementation of design of residential and business landscaping. This
facility does not include the storage of landscape materials in bulk form as well as the required machinery or equipment for
installation.
Library, art gallery or studio, museum: An establishment for the loan or display of books, or objects of art or science
which is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and which institution is open and available to the general public.
Live-Work: A dwelling unit that is a combination of the residence and place of commercial business or studio and may be
found in mixed-use developments.
Microbrewery: A limited-production brewery, typically producing specialty beers and often selling its products only
locally.
Mixed-use development: Development projects that combine residential with nonresidential uses in the same building or
building site area as a means to create an active street life, enhance the vitality of businesses, and reduce the need for
automobile travel; provide a meaningful blend of residential and nonresidential uses that enhances and builds upon the
city's commercial base; provide additional housing options for people, including but not limited to, young professionals
and older people, who want to live near their workplace and/or near retail and other nonresidential uses; and encourages
consolidation of small parcels into viable, block-size mixed use development in designated areas; while ensuring on-site
compatibility of residential and nonresidential uses. There are two generally recognized types of mixed use:
Horizontal Mixed-Use Blocks: Combines single-use buildings on distinct parcels in a range of land
uses within one block. In more urban areas, this approach avoids the financing and coding
complexities of vertical layered uses while achieving the goal of placemaking that is made possible
by bringing together complementary uses in one place. In less urban areas, horizontal mixed-use
offers the advantage of sharing utilities and amenities while providing an easier to build and entitle
mix of uses within a walkable block circumscribed by thoroughfares.
Vertical Mixed-Use Building: Combines different uses in the same building. Lower floors should
have more public uses with more private uses on the upper floors. For example, the ground floor
could have retail, second floor and up having professional offices, and uppermost floors being some
form of residential, such as flats or a hotel. In more urban areas, an entire block or neighborhood may
be composed of vertical mixed-use buildings.
Mortuary or funeral service: A facility where deceased bodies are prepared for burial and kept until burial, and where
funeral services may be conducted. A crematorium may be part of the services provided by a full service funeral home
operation with a conditional use permit.
Newspaper, magazine, book or stationery store: A facility for the sale of books, pamphlets, paper, pens, ink and
associated items; not involving wholesale distribution.
Nonconformance: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is situated. This may include but is not limited to a failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage, or
off-street parking requirements established prior to the adoption of the Zoning ordinance or annexation into the city.
Nonconforming Use: A use, activity, structure or a parcel of land occupied by a land use activity that was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but fails to conform to the regulations of this Zoning
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/418
Ordinance and the district in which it is situated and which has been identified as a nonconforming use.
Office equipment sales and service: A facility for the display, sales, service or repair of equipment, machines or
computers typically utilized in daily activities of offices.
Office, general or professional: A place for the regular transaction of business, but not to include the occupation by
retail sales, transfer of manufactured goods of storage of commodities.
Office, showroom and warehouse: A facility for mixed use with the following characteristics:
(a) A showroom for display of product lines including items for user purchase,
(b) Storage or warehouse facilities and occupies not more than sixty (60) percent of the gross floor
area of the structure(s).
(c) A principal office of the business;
(d) Sales to contractors or other businesses installing or delivering to consumer and user.
(e) A facility, combining office and warehouse functions in a single structure.
Offsite: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership
of the applicant.
On premises: Inside a building or on the area of land that it is on, [sic]
Open Space: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated or reserved for resource
protection, public or private use and enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space. Open space shall not include land occupied by nonrecreational structures, roads, street
rights-of-way, parking lots, land reserved for future parking, or any portion of required minimum lot areas as required by
this Ordinance.
Open storage: The storage of any equipment, machinery, commodities, raw semi-finished or finished materials, and
building materials, which is visible from any public street.
Optical shop: A facility for a dealer in optical items or for correcting vision.
Paint and wallpaper store: A facility for selling paints, painting equipment and wallpaper.
Parking space: A paved area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile together with a paved
driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile.
Parking, commercial lot or garage: A facility for temporary storage of motorized or wheeled vehicles.
Personal services: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services the care of a person's personal needs and
include laundry, dry cleaning, beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, reducing salon, health clubs, and clothing rental
services.
Pet shop: A facility for the display and sale of small animals, fish and birds and pets, such as dogs, cats, parakeets,
goldfish, tropical fish or canaries, without involving commercial boarding or treating of any animal, fish or bird.
Pet supply and pet grooming: An indoor facility that sells pet food and supplies and may include grooming area.
Pharmacy or drugstore: A facility for preparing, preserving, compounding and dispensing drugs and medicines; and
may include the display and sale of other merchandise such as cosmetics, notions, fountain services and similar items.
Photography studio: A facility for taking and processing pictures, not a bulk processing plant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/418
Plant nursery: A facility for the sale or rental of plants and other landscaping or gardening supplies and the equipment
used in the installation of maintenance thereof.
Restaurant or cafe with drive-in/thru service: An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by the type of
service and packaging permits or encourages the purchase of prepared, ready-to-eat foods for consumption on or off the
premises and which does permit consumption on the premises in motor vehicles. A conditional use may be required for the
drive thru to ensure adequate stacking and speaker location.
Restaurant or cafe without drive-in/thru service: An establishment where food is available to the general public
primarily for consumption within a structure on the premises or which by design of physical facilities or by type of service
and packaging permits or encourages the purchase of prepared, ready-to-eat foods intended for consumption off the
premises, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises is neither permitted nor encouraged. May
include covered or uncovered patio seating.
Retail: An establishment engaged in the selling or rental of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal use or
household consumption.
Seasonal and temporary sales, outside: An activity conducted involving sales of merchandise customarily sold within
the principal structure and those sales by transient users permitted in the district. This activity shall be deemed to be an
extension of the principal use of the land and subject to bulk, area and parking regulations. Displays may be located within
approved temporary structures or as open display.
Shopping center: A group of unified commercial establishments built on a site which is planned, developed, owned, and
managed as an operating unit related in its location, size, and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves with
customer and employee parking provided on-site.
Sporting goods store: A retail establishment selling athletic uniforms, sport clothing and sporting equipment.
Studio (art, music, speech, drama, dance or other artistic endeavors): A facility for instruction, counseling or
coaching in the arts, and for the development of person skills or talents. This includes but is not limited to graphic,
performing and literary arts limited to instruction, counseling or coaching.
Tailor: A shop to alter, repair, fabricate or fashion garments.
Technology sales and service: A retail shop which sells and services digital devices including computers, cell phones,
video equipment,[.]
Theater, not drive-in type: A facility for presenting movies and live performances to an audience inside an enclosed
structure.
Travel agency: A business engaged in selling or arranging transportation, trips or tours for individuals or groups.
Veterinary clinic: A medical facility where animals are given medical care. Long-term boarding is not allowed in this
district, but short-term or overnight stays related to medical procedures is permitted. No breeding or laboratory uses are
permitted.
Wine Bar: Is a tavern-like business focusing on only selling wine, rather than liquor or beer. A typical feature of many
wine bars is a wide selection of wines available by the glass and small portion food service.
SECTION 11.04: ZONING USE CHART:
Uses Permitted by
Right
P
Conditional
Use
C
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/418
Automotive
Automobile, new and preowned sales
C
Automobile, preowned sales
C
Automotive supply
C
Automobile service center
C
New Tire sales and service
C
Vehicle rental
C
Carwash facilities
C
Retail (free standing or in center)
Antique shop P
Bakery, ice cream, or confectionery shop P
Cellphone/computer/technology sales and service P
Clothing store (men's, ladies', and children's including shoes and other
apparel)
P
Convenience store P
Convenience store fuel islands
C
Florist shop P
Home furnishings/Furniture store P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/418
Hardware store P
Hobby shop P
Jewelry store P
Office equipment sales/service P
Paint and wallpaper store P
Pharmacy or drugstore P
Sporting goods store P
Shopping center up to and including 30,000 square feet P
Shopping center 30,000 to 75,000 square feet P
Shopping center greater than 75,000 square feet
C
Grocery store
C
Big box including grocery and home improvement (over 100,000 square
feet)
C
Eating and Drinking Establishments
Restaurant or cafe without drive-in service, with covered patio P
Restaurant or cafe drive-in/thru service
C
Bar, Lounge, Tavern or Cantina
C
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/418
Coffee shop P
Delicatessen/Specialty foods P
Microbrewery
C
Wine bar
C
Personal Services
Day Spa P
Fitness Center/Health Club P
Dry cleaning/Laundry (drop off and pick-up only) P
Barber or beauty shop P
Nail salon P
Shoe repair P
Alterations and Tailor P
Medical and Care facilities
Clinic: medical, dental, optical, chiropractor, health care services P
Emergency/medical ambulatory care facility (limited overnight stays) P
Hospital P
Optician, Optical shop P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/418
Pharmacy or drugstore P
Lodging*
Hotel P
Live/work
C
Multifamily - apartments and condominiums
C
Assisted Living
C
Nursing Home (licensed)
C
Mixed Use Development*
Retail/Residential
C
Retail/Live-Work/Residential
C
Residential/Retail/Office
C
*Planned Unit Development encouraged
Office, Professional
Office building P
Attorney, Engineer, Architect, Landscape architect, Insurance, Financial
advisor, Travel agent
P
Bank or credit union P
Pet
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/418
Veterinary office without boarding except for medical need, no outside
runs
P
Veterinary Clinic with boarding and outside runs
C
Pet Supplies P
Pet Grooming (no boarding) P
Outdoor Equipment and Supplies
Plant nursery
C
Landscape and garden supplies
C
Seasonal/temporary sales
C
Lawn, garden, and play structures
C
Miscellaneous
Office/showroom/warehouse P
Light Manufacturing in conjunction with office/showroom/warehouse
C
Mortuary
C
Open space/Plaza P
Library, art gallery, studio, museum P
Theater P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/418
Bike Racks P
Automobile charging station
C
ATM (free standing)
C
Public and Private Utilities
City infrastructure (water, waste water, drainage, fire, police) P
Government offices P
Private Utilities (telephone, cable) P
Cell and telecommunications towers
C
SECTION 11.05: AREA AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
(a) Building height:
(1) 12 stories or 160 feet (may exceed if recommended by Planning Director to Board of
Adjustment with input from the Fire Marshal). See note below
(2) 1 story if building setback is less than 60 feet
(b) Building Front setback:
(1) 60 feet from the right-of-way of the frontage road
(2) 25 feet if parking is on the side are in the rear of one story building
(3) 100 feet for hotel, multifamily (apartments and condominiums), assisted living, and nursing
homes
(c) Side and Rear setback:
(1) Side Interior: 0 unless adjacent to residential, then 15 with landscaping buffer
(2) Side Exterior: 15 feet
(3) Rear: 10 feet unless adjacent to residential then a setback of a minimum of 20 ft. with
landscaping buffer
(d) Lot width: 100 feet minimum
(e) Lot depth: 200 feet minimum
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/418
(f) Lot coverage: 75 percent of total area and incorporates low impact development criteria
A building may exceed ten stories or 160 feet if set back one (1) foot for every two (2) feet of height above 125 feet but in
no case shall the height of a building exceed the total of the street width on which it faces plus the depth of the front yard
and when it is adjacent to a residential use.
SECTION 11.06: PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS:
Parking requirements shall be in accordance with Appendix A, Unified Development Code, Chapter 6 - Off-Street Parking
Regulations with the following additions or exceptions.
(a) Parking lot location is encouraged to be on the side and rear except for automobile sales,
grocery and large scale retail development. For properties with 25-foot to 60-foot front setbacks, the
parking shall be on the side or rear of the building.
(b) Angle parking is allowed.
(c) Landscaping shall be provided where large expanses of concrete or asphalt occur. Parking Lots
with 150 or more spaces shall be divided by landscaped areas including walkways and/or landscaped
areas.
(d) The areas between rows of parking can be design in either raised medians or bio-swales. Raised
medians shall have a concrete curb edging. See Appendix A, Unified Development Code, Chapter 6 -
Off-Street Parking Regulations[; chapter 5, section 8.00] Section 8 - Interior Parking Lot
Landscaping[.]
(e) Plants shall be low-maintenance, water-wise selected from the list provided in Appendix A,
Unified Development Code, Chapter 5 - Landscaping Regulation, Section 11, Table A.
(f) Shade trees may be planted in the median or landscape areas when there is adequate room for
the root ball and irrigation is provided. Otherwise, trees should be planted on the perimeter of the
development or in groups in open space or around detention facilities.
(g) Bio-swales shall be designed to support vegetation and handle sheet flow drainage in the
parking lot. Plants in the bio-swales should be appropriate to handle temporary excess water as well
as drought conditions.
(h) No loading docks shall back onto the frontage or arterial roads.
(i) Loading docks shall be to the side or rear of the building, except loading docks shall not back to
residential areas unless there is landscaping or buffering.
SECTION 11.07: DRIVEWAYS:
(a) All driveways connecting with the US83/IH2 frontage road are subject to Texas Department of
Transportation requirements and regulations for location and spacing.
(b) Shared driveways are encouraged for coordinated access to and from the frontage roads.
(c) All driveways shall be paved.
No separate direct access from a frontage road shall be permitted to any property whose frontage on the frontage road is
less than three hundred feet (200') [sic]. Unless it would be unreasonable to impose this requirement, a public street more
or less perpendicular to the frontage road and Access Lanes shall be required in all cases to provide access to properties
along the frontage road.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/418
(d) If required for development access, a paved access drive shall be provided more or less reasonably parallel
to the frontage road. Said access lane shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) may be located in the front building setback if approved by the Planning Director;
(2) shall be designed and constructed to permit two-way traffic and to allow access to tracts along
the frontage road;
(3) shall be paved;
(4) shall be set aside by curbs, landscaping or otherwise marked as approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission;
(5) shall be designed and constructed to intersect (at 90 degrees) with a public street; and
(6) shall be provided with directional signs and traffic-control signs or devices.
SECTION 11.08: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping for new construction and site redevelopment shall follow Appendix A, Unified Development Code, Chapter 5
- Landscaping Regulations with the following additions.
(a) Underground automatic sprinkler systems shall be required for all multifamily, commercial and
office projects. When 100 percent native drought-tolerant landscaping is proposed, temporary
irrigation for plant establishment, of not less than two years, may be installed in place of a permanent
sprinkler system as approved by the city.
(b) Landscape plans for multifamily, lodging, commercial, and office development shall
incorporate common open space or park areas as required with trails, interior courtyards and
recreation facilities suitable for the benefit of the project's anticipated residents.
(c) Foundation Planting.
(1) For all commercial buildings, foundation plantings shall be provided around all areas of
the base of the building not directly abutting a sidewalk, plaza, service, or loading area.
Foundation plantings shall be scaled according to the nature of the wall area, limited at primary
building facades and around features such as windows, entries, and architectural elements, and
increased for areas of blank walls and utilities.
(2) For all office buildings, an average depth of 15 feet from the face of the building shall be
provided around the building; provided, that pedestrian facilities, such as sidewalks, may be
located within this 15 feet area and shall count as landscaping; and provided further, that
building loading areas shall not be subject to this requirement.
(3) For all mixed-use, lodging and multifamily buildings, foundation plantings shall be
provided to soften the overall impact and scale of the buildings. Foundation plantings shall be
provided around each individual building, at the base of the building.
(4) Trees and plant materials shall be in accordance with Chapter 5, Table A.
(5) Required trees may be planted on the perimeter of the development, in groupings in open
space areas, and on the perimeter of stormwater detention areas in lieu of planting in parking lot
medians.
SECTION 11.09: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/418
The purpose of the following architectural standards is to ensure that new construction and additions to existing buildings
are well designed, detailed, and crafted to embody high standards of architectural design that will promote the long-term
viability on both sides of US 83/IH2. By encouraging new buildings to be designed with plazas and situated perpendicular
to the roadway, future development will not only take advantage of the tract depths, but provide the opportunity for more
visual interest. The designs, including colors, shall be of such as to express the vitality of the area and take advantage of
the City's heritage, growing international culture, and climate, thereby making San Juan's highway frontage a unique
destination in the Rio Grande Valley.
The following standards shall apply to all development. For the purposes of this section, the Planning Director, in
coordination with other applicable city departments, shall be authorized to review and make decisions on the following
architectural standards.
[(a) Reserved.]
(b) Building Materials.
(1) Exteriors shall be constructed of stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement or a combination of
these materials, EFIS (synthetic stucco) is not allowed.
(2) No metal siding is allowed except for architectural details less than 20% of the building
facade, however a standing seem metal roof is allowed if it is in keeping with the design of the
building.
(c) Ornamentation.
(1) Building recesses and protrusions are strongly encouraged on larger buildings to break
long uninterrupted building walls.
(2) All visible elevations should include decorative features such as cornices, pilasters, and
friezes.
(d) Facade Massing.
(1) Front facades 60 feet wide or wider shall incorporate wall offsets of at least two feet in
depth (projections or recesses) a minimum of every 40 feet. Each required offset shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet.
(2) The following alternatives can be used in place of the required front facade offsets:
(A) Facade color changes following the same dimensional standards as the offset
requirements;
(B) Pilasters having a minimum depth of one foot, a minimum width of one foot, and a
minimum height of 80 percent of the facade's height; and/or changes;
(C) Roofline changes when coupled with correspondingly aligned facade changes.
(e) Roofline Changes.
(1) Roofline changes may include changes in roof planes or changes in the top of a parapet
wall, such as extending the top of pilasters above the parapet wall.
(2) When roofline changes are included on a facade that incorporates wall offsets or material
or color changes, roofline changes shall be vertically aligned with the corresponding wall offset
or material or color changes.
(f) Roofs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/418
(1) There are a variety of types of roofs: gable, gambrel, hip, mansard, shed, flat, etc. or a
combination of types. The roof design and construction should be appropriate for the local
climate.
(2) Asymmetric or dynamic roof forms are allowed to provide variety and flexibility in
nonresidential building design, and allow for unique buildings. Asymmetric or dynamic roof
forms shall be permitted on nonresidential buildings as an alternative to flat roofs.
(3) Mechanical equipment shall not be visible from the ground within 1,000 feet from the
building, and shall be screened in accordance with the following: roof-mounted mechanical or
other equipment shall be screened by roofing and/or by parapet walls. Ground-mounted
equipment within view of a roadway or driveway used by the general public shall be screened
by masonry walls. Ground-mounted equipment, not within view of a roadway or driveway used
by the general public, shall be screened by landscaping, at a minimum.
(g) Customer Entrances.
(1) Each side of a building facing a public street shall include at least one customer entrance,
except that no building shall be required to provide entrances on more than two sides of the
structure that face public streets.
(2) Buildings shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances that include no
less than three of the following design features:
i. Canopies/porticos above the entrance;
ii. roof overhangs above the entrance;
iii. entry recesses/projections,
iv. arcades that are physically integrated with the entrance,
v. raised corniced parapets above the entrance,
vi. gabled roof forms or arches above the entrance,
vii. outdoor plaza adjacent to the entrance having seating and a minimum depth of 20
feet,
viii. display windows that are directly adjacent to the entrance,
ix. architectural details, such as tile work and moldings, that are integrated into the
building structure design and are above and/or directly adjacent to the entrance, and
x. planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas or seating areas. (A wing
wall is a wall secondary in scale projecting from a primary wall and not having a roof.)
The Planning Director has the authority to review and enforce the provisions of this section
during the zoning application and/or building permitting processes.
(h) Loading docks and delivery areas.
(1) Loading docks and delivery areas shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
(2) Outside loading docks and delivery areas that are within view of a roadway, driveway, or
residential areas, shall be screened from view by masonry walls or landscaping buffer of not
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/418
less than six (6) feet in height.
(i) Awnings.
(1) Awnings are an appropriate feature in the Valley climate. Awnings may be constructed
and maintained in accordance with this subsection.
(2) An awning may be located over a storefront, a window, or a building entry. An awning
may extend over the framing of a window or the framing of a building entry.
(3) An awning shall not visually dominate the building to which such awning is attached and
shall complement the character and design of the building.
(4) A single awning shall not extend beyond the frame of a window or a building entry. If an
awning is located over a storefront, such awning shall not extend beyond the lesser of: the
outermost frame of a window located within one foot of a building entry or 30 feet.
(5) The bottom of an awning shall not be higher than the top frame of a storefront building
entry or window, a building entry, or a window of the building to which such awning is attached
and shall be no higher than 12 feet from the finished floor as determined by measuring 12 feet
from the finished floor specified in the permitted building plans of the business establishment
using such awning to the top of the awning.
(6) An awning shall be constructed of fabric, metal, or glass. An awning should complement
the overall color scheme of the building facade.
SECTION 11.10: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR CONDOMINIUM OR MULTIFAMILY/APARTMENT
DEVELOPMENT:
(a) For condominium or multifamily/apartment development, the additional standards shall apply:
(1) Dwelling-unit buildings shall be located and oriented to screen all parking areas from view of
adjoining uses, including roadways.
(2) Dwelling-unit buildings shall transition in height from lower to higher from the perimeter to the
interior of the development. The taller buildings in the development shall be located in the interior
part of the development.
(3) Buildings with up to two-story dwelling units may be located around the perimeters of the
development, except that three-story buildings will be allowed around perimeters if they are part of
buildings that include both two and three stories.
(4) Long uninterrupted expanses of building facades are prohibited. Articulation is required
through the use of jogs, projections or retreats in the building walls, windows, balconies, entryways
and bays.
(5) All building entries adjacent to a street shall be pedestrian-scaled and shall include two or more
of the following architectural treatments:
i. distinctive doorways;
ii. distinctive entry canopies or awnings;
iii. projected or recessed entry bays; porches;
iv. changes in paving material, texture, or color;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/418
v. landscaping providing entry focal points;
vi. fountains;
vii. decorative benches;
viii. ornamental glazing,[;]
ix. railings,[;] and
x. balustrades.
(6) Stairs, hallways, and elevators shall be located within buildings and structures and not on the
exterior of buildings and structures. No more than 25 percent of front doors to units shall be located
on the exterior of the buildings.
(7) Garages may be attached, detached, the first floor of a multistory residence or multistory
freestanding structures. If freestanding parking structures are used, such structures shall be located so
as to be easily accessible to the buildings in which the dwelling units they service are located.
(8) The exteriors of freestanding multistory parking structures shall have architecturally-designed
masonry panels.
(9) Garage doors of attached garages shall not comprise more than 60 percent of the total length of
a building's frontage, with no more than six such garage doors in succession on a building.
(10) No more than four detached garages shall be located side-by-side.
(11) Any carport section shall be limited to housing no more than six vehicles, up to a maximum of
120 feet in length, including enclosed storage areas.
(12) At least one garage with square footage sufficient to house a minimum of two seven-foot by
18-foot automobiles in addition to normal yard maintenance equipment shall be provided for each
condominium unit.
(13) The square footage for garages for a multifamily development shall be of adequate square
footage to house a minimum of one seven-foot by 18-foot automobile.
(14) At least 50 percent of the required total number of parking spaces shall be provided within
covered parking such as garages or carports.
SECTION 11.11: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR HOTEL DEVELOPMENT:
The following additional standards shall apply to hotel development:
(a) Long uninterrupted expanses of building facades are prohibited. Articulation is required
through the use of jogs, projections or retreats in the building walls, windows, balconies, entryways
and bays.
(1) All building entries adjacent to a street shall be pedestrian-scaled and shall include two or
more of the following architectural treatments:
i. distinctive doorways;
ii. distinctive entry canopies or awnings;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/418
iii. projected or recessed entry bays; porches;
iv. changes in paving material, texture, or color;
v. landscaping providing entry focal points;
vi. fountains;
vii. decorative benches;
viii. ornamental glazing,[;]
ix. railings,[;] and
x. balustrades.
(2) Stairs, hallways, and elevators shall be located within buildings and structures and not on
the exterior of buildings and structures.
(3) Guestrooms may be accessible only through interior corridors.
(4) Excluding windows and doors, a minimum of 50 percent of the exterior of buildings shall
consist of architectural approved building materials in this zoning district ordinance[.]
(5) If freestanding parking structures are used, such structures shall be located so as to be
easily accessible to the buildings in which the guestrooms they service are located.
(6) The exteriors of freestanding multistory parking structures shall have architecturallydesigned
masonry panels.
(7) Outdoor delivery or service areas within view of any right-of-way or residential area shall
be screened from view by masonry walls.
(8) Outdoor recreational space within view of any right-of-way or residential area shall be
screened from view by a combination of fencing and landscaping. The use of chainlink fencing
materials shall not satisfy the requirements for screening outdoor recreational space.
SECTION 11.12: SIGNS:
(a) Additions to San Juan Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3 Building Regulations, Article 3 [Article 3.05], Signs
specific to the proposed Expressway Corridor District (ECD)
(1) Signs in the Expressway Corridor District shall be in accordance with San Juan Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 3 Building Regulations, Article 3 [Article 3.05], Signs.
(2) Signs shall not obscure the visibility of the windows of commercial structures. No more than
50 percent of window may be used for sign lettering.
(3) For new developments or redevelopment a Sign Master Plan shall be submitted in accordance
with Section 3.05.010, Master Sign Plan.
(4) For new digital billboard signs or conversion from static to digital signs, another sign(s) under
the same ownership of equivalent square footage shall be removed.
SECTION 11.13: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CARWASH FACILITIES:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/418
(a) There shall be a 10,000-linear foot minimum separation between carwash facilities for properties with
frontage along IH2/US Expressway 83. The distance shall be measured by a direct line from the corner of one
property to the corner of another property.
(Ordinance 17-24 adopted 11/14/17)
SECTION 12.00: SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS:
Any person or entity may make application to the City Commission for a special use permit for special use described
below.
SECTION 12.01: APPLICATION FEE:
Said application must be accompanied by an application fee.
SECTION 12.02: SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
(a) The City Commission by an affirmative two-thirds vote may grant a special use permit for the following
special uses in any district as qualified for which they are otherwise prohibited by this Code; and may impose
appropriate conditions and safeguards, including a specified period of time for the permit. The City Commission
shall have great discretion.
(1) Airport, landing field, or landing strip for aircraft;
(2) Amusement park, but not within 300 feet of any “R” District;
(3) Circus or carnival grounds, but not within 300 feet of any “R” District;
(4) Commercial, recreational, or amusement development for temporary, seasonal or other limited
periods but not within 300 feet of any “R” District;
(5) Hospital, clinic or institution;
(6) Office building or a civic, religious or charitable organization, conducting activities primarily
by mail and not handling merchandise or rendering services on site.[;]
(7) Privately operated community building or recreation field;
(8) Any public or government building, including public or denominational schools;
(9) Radio or television broadcasting tower or station;
(10) In accordance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code on-premises consumption of alcoholic
beverages, including beer;
(11) Drive-in theaters;
(12) Neighborhood grocery stores, provided they are located on a corner lot, with total floor area
not to exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, display signs not to exceed the height of
the average roofline of the neighborhood and to be switched on no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and
switched off no later than 11:00 p.m.; or
(13) Planned Unit Development.
(b) The owner shall file with the Planning and Zoning Commission a proposed site plan and detailed
description of the structures to be erected, the other facilities of the project and the land uses involved. In
addition, the applicant shall furnish such other information as the Planning and Zoning Commission may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/418
reasonably require. In acting upon the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may alter setback
requirements, height limits, building size limits, off-street parking regulations, landscaping rules and density and
intensity limits. It may also recommend to the City Commission uses not permitted in the district where the lot is
located, providing such uses are desirable or convenient for users of the lot as developed or the immediate
neighborhood, and provided that such uses are planned so as to assure that they will not materially alter the
existing character of the neighborhood.
(c) A special permit granted by the City Commission under the provisions above shall be considered as an
amendment to the zoning regulation as applicable to such property. In granting such permit the City Commission
may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the applicant before any final public utility connection
may be made with such building or property, and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent
to the granting of the special permit or the change in zoning of said property, but shall be considered a precedent
of such final public utility connections.
(d) Before authorization of any of the above special uses, the request shall be referred to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for study and a written report concerning:
(1) the conformance of the proposed use to the overall objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; and
(2) the character and development of the neighborhood.
SECTION 12.03: HEARINGS:
Public hearings shall be held before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Commission. Notices and
publications of the time and place for which shall conform to the procedure prescribed in Article VIII[.]
SECTION 12.04: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Temporary buildings used only in connection with construction work may be permitted in any district during the period
that the construction work is in progress, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work.
SECTION 12.05: RAILROADS AND UTILITIES:
Existing railroads and utilities including telephone service may continue to be operated and maintained in dwelling and
commercial districts but no new railroad or utility structure other than the usual poles, wires and underground utilities shall
be established in such districts except when so authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustments.
SECTION 12.06: LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
On any lot of record on which there is a conforming structure which is considered “legal nonconforming” due to the
nonconformity of other structures on, or adjacent to this lot, the otherwise conforming structure may be altered or enlarged,
provided such alteration or enlargement does not in itself create a nonconforming use or increase any hazardous condition.
(Ordinance 17-13 adopted 6/27/17)
ARTICLE V - OVERLAY ZONES
SECTION 1.00: DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO THIS SECTION:
(a) Building Line: A separately designated driving lane permitting one-way or two-way traffic in a parking
lot. A line initially established by this zoning regulation, or imposed subsequently by the City Commission,
across the front, side, or rear of any lot or tract of land bordering upon a thoroughfare larger than a residential
street to accomplish the purposes of this section;
(b) Prohibited Erection Area: The area between the street, right-of-way, alleyway, greenbelt or other physical
boundary or thoroughfare (so identified in connection with a “building line”) and a building line on a lot or tract
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/418
established under this section within which the erection, re-erection, reconstruction, or substantial repair of a
structure is prohibited.
(c) Structure: A building or any other structure (including signs, towers, etc.), or a part of a building or other
structure. A structure shall not include a paved or landscaped area.
SECTION 2.00: PERMITS PROHIBITED:
No permit may be granted by the City for the erection or re-erection of a building or structure within the
Prohibited Erection Area of any tract subject to the following exceptions:
(a) The Commission finds that to prohibit the erection under the proposed circumstances would
constitute an unreasonable and arbitrary or capricious determination; and
(b) Proper conditions are imposed (i.e., height, width, area, lighting).
SECTION 3.00: PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION OF BUILDING LINES:
A building line may be established across one or more tract(s) which abut upon a thoroughfare, alley, street (not
including a residential street), greenbelt or other physical boundary, under the following procedures:
(a) The building line shall be recommended by the Planning Director. Such recommendation shall
at a minimum include the rationale with respect to 1) safety; 2) traffic flow; 3) enforcement of other
applicable regulations set out in the Code; 4) open space and community-wide landscaping needs;
and 5) the financial or economic impact on the affected tracts.
(b) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed
building line, notice of which shall be given by published notice and certified mail to the record
owners of affected property.
(c) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall give its recommendation for or against the
adoption of the building line.
SECTION 4.00: ACCESS LANES:
An access lane shall be provided on each tract adjacent to the expressway frontage road or other major
thoroughfare if the following conditions are applicable:
(a) the width of the tract or tracts adjacent to frontage road exceeds 500 feet;
(b) the tract or aggregate of tracts which have access to the frontage road on thoroughfare exceed 4
acres in size; or
(c) the Planning Director has recommended and the Planning and Zoning Commission has found
that the lane shall be designed and constructed to direct two-way traffic among all tracts adjacent to
the frontage road and to convey traffic to other traffic arterials. Access lanes shall be paved; shall
include a reverse curb and gutter on the frontage road side, and shall at the closest point to the
thoroughfare be at a distance of no less than 8 feet from the street right-of-way line.
SECTION 5.00: PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
The preliminary and final plat shall include a separate page dedicated to the design and specifications of the
access lane. No preliminary plat for a commercial or industrial zone shall be approved unless a notation is
included on the plat indicating if an access lane is required.
SECTION 6.00: EXPRESSWAY OVERLAY ZONE:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/418
The Expressway Overlay Zone is generally all property abutting U.S. Expressway 83 and extends two hundred
feet (200') from the Expressway right-of-way. In addition to the particular requirements of the Base Zone
classification(s) applicable to tracts in this zone, tracts in this zone shall conform to the following additional
requirements:
(a) Building Lines. All buildings and structures shall be set back according to a building line of no
less than 60 feet from the front property line;
(b) Access lane. A paved access lane shall be provided more or less reasonably parallel to the
frontage road. Said access lane shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) shall be paved;
(2) shall be set aside by curbs, landscaping or otherwise marked as approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission;
(3) shall be designed and constructed to permit two-way traffic and to allow access to tracts
along the frontage road;
(4) shall be designed and constructed to intersect (at 90 degrees) with a public street;
(5) shall be provided with directional signs and traffic-control signs or devices;[.]
SECTION 7.00: FRONTAGE ROAD ACCESS:
No separate direct access from a frontage road shall be permitted to any property whose frontage on the frontage
road is less than three hundred feet (300'). Unless it would be unreasonable to impose this requirement, a public
street more or less perpendicular to the frontage road and Access Lanes shall be required in all cases to provide
access to properties along the frontage road.
SECTION 8.00: EXCEPTIONS:
A request for an exception from any requirement of the Overlay Zone shall be submitted as soon as practicable
to the City Commission which shall have the authority to consider the exception.
SECTION 9.00: MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN:
Upon submission of a preliminary plat for the development of one or more tracts within the Expressway Overlay
Zone, the Planning Director shall recommend modifications and/or amendments to the Major Thoroughfare Plan
of particular impact, if any, to the development of the tract or tracts.
The following roadway segments are part of the city's thoroughfare plan:
Expressway Corridors - 350' of right-of-way
* US Expressway 83/lnterstate 2 from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Dicker Road from San Juan Road to Cesar Chavez Road (toll road)
* San Juan Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Military Highway (toll road)
High-Speed Principal Arterials - 150' of right-of-way
* Veteran's Boulevard from Juan Balli Road to US 281 (Military Highway)
* US 281 (Military Highway) from Stewart Road to Cesar Chavez Road
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/418
Principal Arterials - 120' of right-of-way
* Raul Longoria Road/Nebraska Avenue from Owassa Road to US Business 83
* Stewart Road from Ridge Road to US 281 (Military Highway)
* Owassa Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Nolana Avenue from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* FM 495 from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Dicker Road from Veteran's Boulevard to 3,875 East of Stewart Road
Minor Arterials - 100' of right-of-way
* US Business 83 from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Ridge Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Hall Acres Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Anaya Road from San Juan Street to Cesar Chavez Road
* Veteran's Boulevard from Owassa to Juan Balli Roads
* Nebraska Avenue from US Business 83 to Hall Acres Road
* Stewart Road from US Expressway 83/Interstate 2 to Ridge Road
* Cesar Chavez Road from Owassa to Juan Balli Roads
Collector - 80' of right-of-way
* Minnesota Avenue from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Eldora Avenue from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Sioux Avenue from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Sgt. Leonel Trevino Avenue from Raul Longoria to Cesar Chavez Roads
* Carroll Road from Stewart to Cesar Chavez Roads
* First/Second Street from Veteran's Boulevard to Stewart Road
* 4th Street from San Antonio to Wyoming Avenues
* 6th Street from Standard to Nebraska Avenues
* 7th Street from Standard to Kansas Avenues
* Sam Houston Boulevard from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Moore Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Juan Balli Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/418
* Thomas Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Las Milpas Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Highline Road from Veteran's Boulevard to Cesar Chavez Road
* Oblate Avenue from Minnesota Road to First Street
* Standard Avenue from First Street to Sam Houston Boulevard
* Lincoln Avenue from First to 5th Streets
* Wyoming Avenue from US Expressway 83/Interstate 2 to Sam Houston Boulevard
* Cesar Chavez Road from Juan Balli Road to US 281(Military Highway)
* Alameda Avenue from Veteran's Boulevard to Oblate Avenue
* Retama Street from Owassa Road to US Expressway 83/Interstate 2
SECTION 10.00: PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT COMPLIANCE:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall require that all preliminary plats submitted for approval under the
City's subdivision regulation shall include thereon a legend detailing the compliance with the additional
requirements of the applicable Overlay Zone. In particular, it shall require:
(a) that the Building Lines and the Access Lanes be clearly designated in the preliminary and final
plats; and
(b) no plat shall ever be approved for recording unless it shall so comply with these requirements.
SECTION 11.00: ADDITIONAL LANDSCAPING & DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the landscaping requirements of the landscaping regulations, tracts in the Expressway Overlay
Zone shall comply with the following landscaping and storm drainage requirements:
(a) Trees with a trunk diameter of no less than 3" shall be planted (or an escrow arrangement made
with the regard thereto) prior to approval of the final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
(b) Include, to the extent reasonably possible, for retention of storm drainage facility on the tract
by use of swales or landscaped temporary ponds.
SECTION 12.00: DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS:
The plat shall include all proposed drainage improvements conforming to the master drainage plan for the
Expressway Overlay Zone and shall provide easements granted to the City.
SECTION 13.00: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Off-street parking shall be designed to allow:
(a) conformity with a plan to allow parking to and access to all tracts in the zone;
(b) consistent with the design of the Access Lane;
(c) zone-wide landscaping for all tracts;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/418
(d) access to garbage truck, fire trucks and emergency vehicles; and
(e) fire lanes.
ARTICLE VI - AREA AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 1.00: TABLE OF REQUIREMENTS:
The following table shall govern the area and height requirements of all lots and structures.
DISTRICT TYPE OF USE MAXIMUM
STORIES
HEIGHT
FEET
MINIMUM WIDTH OF
LOT
R-S Single-Family Dwelling -
corner lot
2-1/2 35 ft. 60 ft.
65 ft.
R-MH Manufactured Homes -
corner
N/A N/A 50 ft.
55 ft.
R-MF Multifamily 3 45 150 ft.
Expressway & High Speed
Arterial
200 ft.
C Commercial 10 125 150 ft.
Direct Access
100 ft.
Not direct access
I1, I2 & IN Industrial and Institutional 8 100 200 ft.
Direct access
150 ft.
Not direct access

Zone Standards
DISTRICT
LOT DIMENSIONS AREA PER FAMILY MINIMUM YARD
DEPTH SQ. FT. FRONT SIDE REAR
R-S 100 ft. 6,000 20 ft. (7)* 6 ft. (8)* (9)*
R-MF Duplex, Triplex, Fourplex
and Multiple
150 ft. 22,500 20 ft. (7)* 6 ft. (8)* (9)*
R-MH 125 ft. 6,250 
Expressway & High speed
arterials
400 ft. 4,000
C1, C2, C3 200 ft. 20,000 & 30,000 None 4 2 3
I1, I2 & IN 400 ft. 60,000 & 80,000 None 4 2 3
SECTION 2.00: SPECIAL RULES FOR CERTAIN USES:
The following rules shall apply with respect to the specific identified use:
(a) Multifamily. A building may be erected to a maximum height of eight stories or 100 feet if set
back from all required yard lines a minimum distance of one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of
additional height above 45 feet.
(b) Commercial & Industrial:
(1) No side yard shall be required except that a side yard of not less than 6 feet in width shall
be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district.
(2) No rear yard shall be required except that a rear yard of not less than 15 feet in depth shall
be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting upon a residential district.
(3) Front yard setback shall be as designated by the minimum setbacks of the Chapter.
(4) A building may exceed ten stories or 125 feet if set back one (1) foot for every two (2)
feet of height above 125 feet but in no case shall the height of a building exceed the total of the
street width on which it faces plus the depth of the front yard.
(c) Industrial: Whenever a building in any of the Industrial Districts adjoins or abuts a residential
district, such building shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet in height unless it is set back one (1)
foot from the required side and rear yard lines for each one (1) foot of additional height above 45
feet.
(d) Single-Family and Multifamily:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/418
(1) If a dwelling abuts a designated collector street or larger thoroughfare, the front yard
dimension shall increase to a minimum of 30 feet; if a dwelling abuts a designated arterial, the
front yard dimension shall increase as provided in the minimum setbacks of the Code;
(2) Minimum side yard requirements may be 3 feet on each side on a lot of record with an
average lot width of less than 50 feet; and
SECTION 3.00: HEIGHT AND AREA EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
(a) The height regulations prescribed shall not apply to:
(1) television, radio and cell towers;
(2) church spires;
(3) belfries,
(4) monuments,
(5) tanks,
(6) water; and
(7) fire towers;
(8) stage towers; or
(9) scenery lofts,
(10) cooling towers,
(11) ornamental towers;
(12) spires;
(13) chimneys;
(14) elevator bulkheads;
(15) smokestacks;
(16) conveyors; and
(17) flagpoles.
(b) Where permitted: The following buildings may be erected to a height not to exceed 60 feet and churches
and temples may be erected to a height not to exceed 75 feet when the required side and rear yards are each
increased by one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in
which the building is located:
(1) public hospitals;
(2) public service buildings;
(3) public or semipublic institutions; or
(4) public or semipublic schools -
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/418
SECTION 3.01: REDUCTION OF LOT SIZE BY GOVERNMENTAL ACTION:
Where the owner of a legally platted lot or his successor in title has his/her lot:
(a) reduced in size as a result of governmental action (such as condemnation); and
(b) does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this
Chapter.
such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence or other nonresidential uses permitted in the
district in which the lot is located, provided that in those cases:
(1) where the lot area or mean lot width is reduced by governmental action not more than twenty
(20) percent below the minimum specified in this Chapter, the Chief Building Official shall issue a
building permit or certificate of occupancy;
(2) where a vacant lot area or mean lot width is reduced by governmental action by more than
twenty (20) percent, the Board of Adjustments is authorized to approve as a building site by variance
such dimensions as shall conform as closely as possible to the required dimensions of this Chapter
provided that the combined area of the main building and its accessory buildings shall not cover more
than forty (40) percent of the lot area remaining after governmental action;
(3) where a structure is located on a legally platted lot and the existing yards are reduced by
governmental action below the dimensional requirements specified in this Chapter, the Chief
Building Official shall issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy for alterations to and use of
the existing structure if said structure and lot conformed to the required dimensional requirements
prior to the lot reduction by governmental action.
SECTION 3.02: FRONT YARD: MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
(a) No building shall project beyond the average front yard or the front yard setback so established where 50%
or more of the frontage of one side of the street between two streets intersecting such street is improved with
buildings that have a front yard which is greater or less than the required front yard in the district; provided, that
a front yard depth shall not be required to exceed 50 percent in excess of the front yard otherwise required in the
district in which the lot is located;
(b) The required front yard shall be provided on both streets on lots having double frontage;
(c) No fence, structure, or planting higher than three and one-half feet above the established street grades shall
be maintained within 20 feet of any street intersection in a residential district; the subdivision plat shall so
indicate for corner lots.
(d) Palm trees or similar small trunk trees or vegetation may occupy this area provided that the foliage is a
minimum of 8 feet above street grade;
(e) An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance of not
more than 10 feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies;
(f) Filling station pumps and pump islands may be located within a required yard provided they are not less
than 12 feet from any property line and not less than 50 feet from the boundary of any residential district;
(g) Off-street parking facilities may be located within the required front yard of any “C” or “I” district but
shall not be nearer than fifty (50) feet to any “R” district. On existing lots of record in all districts except “I,”
with an existing single-family residence, off-street parking shall be allowed in the required front yard for at least
one passenger car. No posts, canopies or structures shall be allowed in the required front yard;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/418
(h) A 20-foot corner clip is required on all corner lots.
SECTION 3.03: SIDE YARDS: MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
(a) On a corner lot, the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required front yard
street; provided that the available width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than 38 feet; at the time of
submission of any original or amended subdivision plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval,
the said Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and authority to accept and approve any
building setback lines projected on said plat or plats and recommend their acceptance and approval by the City
Commission of the City, even though said building setback lines may not be in compliance with the
requirements set out;
(b) No accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street;
(c) Where dwelling units are erected above commercial establishments, no side yard is required except when
required for the commercial establishment on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district;
(d) A canopy may project into a required side yard provided every part of such canopy:
(1) is unenclosed; and
(2) less than five feet from any side lot line.
(e) For the purpose of side yard dwelling regulations, a two-family dwelling or multiple dwelling shall be
considered as one building occupying one lot.
(f) The required side yard may be reduced to 10 percent of the width of the lot, provided, that no side yard
shall be less than three feet where a lot of record is less than 50 feet in width.
SECTION 3.04: REAR YARDS: MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
(a) Any accessory building not exceeding 20 feet in height may not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear
yard, and unenclosed parking spaces may not occupy more than 90 percent of the area of a required rear yard.
(b) The ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features may extend to a
distance not to exceed 24 inches into a required yard.
(c) Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and
ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard may be permitted by the Chief Building Official for a
distance not to exceed five feet when these are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
SECTION 3.05: LOT AREA PER FAMILY:
Where a lot of record of this Chapter has less area or width than required in the District in which it is located,
and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, said lot may be used for a onefamily
dwelling or for any non-dwelling use permitted in the District in which it is located.
ARTICLE VII - NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION 1.00: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
(a) Any nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued for definite periods of time, subject to such
regulations as the Zoning Board of Adjustment may require for:
(1) immediate preservation of the adjoining property; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/418
(2) the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use.
(b) If a continuous operation is not carried on in such nonconforming use during a continuous period of one
(1) year, the building, other structure or tract of land where the nonconforming use previously existed shall
thereafter:
(1) be occupied; and
(2) used only for a conforming use.
(c) Intent to resume active operation shall not effect the foregoing.
The general public, the City Commission, and the Planning and Zoning Commission are directed to take note
that nonconformance in the use and development of land and buildings are to be avoided or eliminated where
now existing, wherever and whenever possible, except:
(1) When necessary to preserve property rights established prior to the date these regulations
become effective as to the property in question, and
(2) When necessary to promote the general welfare and to protect the character of the surrounding
property.
SECTION 2.00: CHANGE OF USE:
A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use.
SECTION 3.00: APPROVAL:
A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other type of nonconforming use without prior approval of the
Zoning Board of Adjustments which may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another,
provided the use is:
(a) within the same or higher classification as the original nonconforming use;
(b) that such nonconforming use and occupancy will not tend to prolong and continue
nonconforming use; and
(c) the nonconforming use shall not be changed thereafter to a lower classification use.
(d) remodeling permits shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the value of the building as valued by
the Hidalgo County Appraisal District or from a report from an appraisal company licensed in the
State of Texas.
Such prior lower classification use shall be considered abandoned.
SECTION 4.00: DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other
cause.
SECTION 5.00: PARTIAL DESTRUCTION:
In case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the value of a structure,
the Chief Building Official shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If the damage is greater than fifty percent
(50%) and less than total destruction, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a permit for repair after a
public hearing and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/418
of public welfare and the character of the areas surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the purposes
of this Code.
SECTION 6.00: ENLARGEMENT:
A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended except upon authorization of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
SECTION 7.00: NORMAL MAINTENANCE:
Normal maintenance of a building or a structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including
necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations not extending the nonconforming use.
SECTION 8.00: STRUCTURAL CHANGES:
No structural alterations shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use except
that required by law.
ARTICLE VIII - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
A conditional use permit is required for all conditional uses as set forth in the conditional use section of each use
district. At no time may a structure or property be adapted to a conditional use without first obtaining a
conditional use permit.
SECTION 1.00: APPROVAL, PROCEDURE, RESPONSIBILITY AND APPEALS:
The City's Planning Director shall have the responsibility for processing all use permit applications required for
conditional uses and presenting them to the Planning and Zoning Commission for processing as described
below.
SECTION 2.00: PROCEDURE:
The following procedures shall be complied with prior to the approval or denial of any use permit:
(a) Notice to all owners of real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property for which
application has been made shall be mailed, but in no case shall this notification occur less than ten
(10) working days prior to consideration at a meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission to
consider such application.
(b) Application concerning use permits for those uses which are conditional shall be automatically
referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a public hearing. The planning director shall
investigate, notify the adjacent property owners and provide necessary professional advice. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend denial of an application for a use permit after a
public hearing if the proposed use fails to meet one of the criteria set forth in requirements for
approval.
SECTION 3.00: APPLICATION, FILING PROCEDURES AND FEES:
The property owner or certified agent shall:
(a) make application on a form prescribed by the City; and
(b) such application shall provide drawings as set forth in “Site Plans Required,” Section 4.00,
subsections (b)(1) through (b)(3).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/418
Obtaining a use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with requirements of the building code or
other regulations. The fee for a use permit shall be set by the City Commission. Payment of such fees shall not
be refundable in whole or in part.
SECTION 4.00: SITE PLANS REQUIRED:
(a) Recording: The applicant shall file with the Planning Director one copy of the site plan.
(b) Contents: The site plan shall contain drawings to scale to indicate as needed:
(1) The location of all structures on the subject property and on adjoining property;
(2) Landscaping and/or fencing of yards and setback areas and proposed changes;
(3) Design of ingress and egress;
(4) Off-street parking and loading facilities;
(5) Height of all structures;
(6) Proposed uses; and
(7) The location and types of all signs, including lighting and heights.
SECTION 5.00: REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL:
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of a conditional use subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards when the commission finds:
(a) That the proposed use meets all the minimum standards established in this Code; and
(b) That the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the
surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, nor be substantially or permanently injurious to
neighboring property.
SECTION 6.00: DEVELOPMENT, REVOCATION AND/OR CANCELLATION:
(a) The Chief Building Official shall ensure compliance with this Code and the permit. He shall:
(1) Make inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the permit,
and initiate appropriate action if necessary;
(2) Investigate thoroughly any complaints of noncompliance concerning a permitted special use,
and keep a record of all complaints, indicating any action taken.
(b) Upon determination of noncompliance with the provisions of the conditional use permit, the building
inspector shall take action as follows:
(1) Give written notice to the permit holder of the nature of the violation, the necessary action to
remedy the violation, and the time period, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days
after the date of notification, within which to comply;
(2) Notify the Planning and Zoning Commission of the noncompliance if the violations have not
been corrected within the prescribed time period;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/418
(c) The Planning and Zoning Commission, after due hearing, may revoke any special use permit that has been
reported in violation by the building inspector. Continued use without a permit will be a violation of the zoning
regulation and subject to the same penalties provided.
(d) If a use permit has not been used within six (6) months after the date granted, the permit is automatically
canceled;[.]
SECTION 7.00: PERIOD OF CONDITIONAL USE AND RENEWAL:
A conditional use permit shall have a time limit of not more than one year unless otherwise approved by the City
Commission. If the conditional use permit does have a time limitation attached, the expiration date shall be set
forth. Any permittee wishing a renewal of such permit for successive time periods shall make application for
renewal not less than twenty (20) days before permit expiration. As much as practicable, conditional use permits
shall be renewed as a matter of course such that the renewal period falls on or before 30 days before February
1st of every year to allow the planning staff and the Planning and Zoning Committee to consider renewals.
SECTION 8.00: REQUIREMENTS OF CONDITIONAL USE:
(a) Home occupations. Must meet applicable conditions including but not limited to:
(1) The area used in conducting the home occupation will be clearly secondary to the residential
use;
(2) Reserved[;]
(3) There shall be no exterior display or alterations indicating that the building is being used for
any purpose other than that of a dwelling;
(4) There shall be no more than one additional unrelated employee other than immediate members
of the family residing on the premises;
(5) There shall be no outside storage of materials or products;
(6) The permitted use shall not create frequent or heavy traffic, greater than ten (10) percent of the
average load per hour as determined by the Planning Director or other designated official of the City;
(7) No retail sales shall be permitted (items can be delivered);
(8) No additions to the residence, accessory buildings or other appurtenances specifically to
accommodate the business shall be permitted;
(9) The business must take place in the primary residential structure on the property rather than in
a detached garage or separate accessory building;
(10) The activity must take place at the location for which the permit was issued.
(11) The business shall obtain a Sales Tax Permit from the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts
for all retail sales as well as taxable services.
(12) No signage of any kind shall be allowed advertising the business.
(b) Manufactured homes:
(1) An owner-occupied home is permitted; and
(2) For residential purposes only;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/418
(3) The land on which it is located must be owned by the occupant of the manufactured home.
(4) A manufactured home for security or office purposes is permitted if:
(A) Accessory to an otherwise permitted use;
(B) Provided that there is only one per premises; and
(C) It must be related to an existing ongoing business located on that site.
(D) The home must be located in such a manner as to have access to a public right-of-way
within two hundred (200) feet.
(E) The home must be connected to an approved water distribution and sewage disposal
system.
(F) The home must comply with all applicable provisions of the manufactured and mobile
home regulations.
(G) There must be a provision for garbage and trash collection and disposal.
(c) Portable buildings:
(1) The home or building must be located in such a manner as to have access to public right-ofway
within two hundred (200) feet;
(2) Portable buildings, if approved for occupancy must have an approved water distribution and
sewage disposal system available for its use;
(3) There must be a provision for garbage and trash collection and disposal.
(d) Bars, cocktail, lounges, taverns, cantina, saloons, dance hall, discotheques, discos, nightclubs or social
event centers:
(1) The property line of the lot of any of the above-mentioned businesses, especially those
businesses having late hours (after 10:00 p.m.), must be at a minimum three hundred (300) feet from
the nearest residence, church, school or publicly owned property, or must provide sufficient buffering
and sound insulation of the building such that the business is not visible and cannot be heard from the
residential area, and must be designed to prevent disruption of the character of adjacent residential
areas;
(2) The business must be as close as possible to a major arterial, and shall not allow the traffic it
generates onto residential streets, or allow it to exit into and disrupt residential areas;
(3) The businesses must provide parking in accordance with the City off-street parking regulations
as a minimum, and make provisions to prevent use of adjacent streets for parking, especially those in
adjacent residential areas, by providing additional on-site parking;
(4) The businesses must do everything possible to prevent the unauthorized parking of its patrons
on adjacent business or residential properties including, when necessary, the installation of fences and
hedges, and the reorientation of entrances;
(5) The businesses should do everything possible and be designed to discourage criminal activities
and vandalism, both on site and on adjacent properties. Included would be provision of sufficient
lighting and perimeter fencing, elimination of dark areas, and the orientation of the building such that
it provides maximum visibility of as much as possible of the site from a public street;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/418
(6) The businesses must make provisions to keep litter to a minimum, and to keep it from blowing
onto adjacent streets and properties; and
(7) The businesses shall restrict the number of persons within the building to those allowed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission at the time of permit issuance, after having taken into account the
recommendations of the fire marshal, chief building official and director of planning. This number
cannot exceed the number provided for in existing City regulations.
(e) Guesthouses or maids: Applicable conditions including but not limited to:
(1) Only one allowed per lot;
(2) Must meet setback requirements;
(3) Must be on same utilities as primary residence on lot;
(4) Lot must be a minimum of eight thousand (8,000) square feet;
(5) There can be no separate driveway or garage for the guesthouse;
(6) It must not be rented out; and
(7) If money is ever paid for rent or share of utilities, etc., permit will be revoked.
(f) Parking facilities for nonresidential uses - Applicable conditions including but not limited to:
(1) Sides adjacent to residentially zoned property are screened by six-foot opaque fence; and
(2) The paved area is landscaped in compliance with the off-street parking and loading regulation
and landscaping regulation.
[(g) Reserved.]
(h) Day-care facilities - Applicable requirements including but not limited to:
(1) Must meet requirements of the Texas Department of Human Resources;
(2) Must have fenced-in area for outside play of children;
(3) Must have off-street, paved area adjacent to street for pickup and delivery of children;
(4) Area used for day-care facilities should be clearly secondary to residential use of structure;
(5) Person who applies for permit must reside at location for which permit is applied;
(6) There shall be no more than two (2) day-care facilities within six hundred (600) feet of each
other as measured over the shortest distance of street right-of-way between the facilities;
(7) No more than one day-care facility shall be permitted on a dead-end street or cul-de-sac. That
day-care facility shall care for no more children than are permitted in a registered family home by the
state department of human resources;
(8) No day-care facilities shall be permitted on a half-street or on a street which has a half-street as
a means of access;
(9) Day-care facilities which care for more than twelve children shall not be permitted in an R-l
district;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/418
(10) No signs are permitted. A one-square-foot nameplate bearing the person's name and
occupation may be displayed if attached flat against the wall of the residence;
(11) No more than one additional employee that does not reside on the premises is permitted; and
(12) If the person operating the day-care facility is not the owner of the property, then the
application must be signed by the owner or a letter of authorization from the owner must be
submitted.
(13) Subject property must be fronting an improved street meeting the City's minimum
requirements.
(i) Portable and/or temporary food concession or snow cone stands - Applicable conditions for portable and/or
temporary food concession stands shall include but are not limited to:
(1) Cannot be located in a residentially zoned area;
(2) Stand must be inspected by the building inspections department and meet applicable building
and fire codes;
(3) Must have paved off-street parking available over and above what is required for the business
to which it is adjacent;
(4) If it is a portable building or trailer it must be anchored to the ground properly;
(5) Must meet setback requirements of zoning district in which it is located; and
(6) Water and sewage disposal facilities must be available and may be required;
(7) Health Department permit.
(j) Amusement parks, circus or carnival grounds, commercial, recreational or amusement developments, or
tents or other structures - Applicable conditions include but are not limited to: May not be located within three
hundred (300) feet of any residentially used property.
(k) Existing railroads and private utilities, including a telephone service - May continue to be operated and
maintained in residential and commercial districts but not new railroad or utility structure other than the usual
poles, wires and underground utilities shall be established in such district without a special use permit.
(l) No form of pollution shall emanate beyond the immediate property line of the permitted use.
(m) The Planning and Zoning Commission may impose additional reasonable restrictions or conditions to
carry out the spirit and intent of this section and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. These
requirements may include, but are not limited to:
(1) increased open space;
(2) loading and parking requirements;
(3) suitable landscaping; and
(4) additional improvements such as curbing and sidewalks.
ARTICLE IX - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
SECTION 1.00: LOCATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/418
A planned unit development may be located in any district upon the granting of a permit in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter 2.
SECTION 2.00: MINIMUM SITE AREA:
The minimum site area for a planned unit development shall be five (5) acres.
SECTION 3.00: PERMIT PROCEDURE FOR PUD:
The regulations prescribed shall regulate the procedure for making application for a permit for a planned unit
development, the public hearing, the staff investigation and technical report, the action by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the Planning Director, the appeal to or review by the City Commission, and the lapse or
revocation of a permit, and shall regulate new applications and permits to run with the land, subject to the
following prerequisites.
SECTION 4.00: PRELIMINARY AND FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
The following requirements and procedures shall be observed in the preparation and filing of the preliminary
and final development plans:
(a) Proof of ownership or control. Before a preliminary development plan shall be approved for
any improvement in any district, the owner(s) of:
(1) all the land included in said area of all structures existing thereon, and
(2) all encumbrances of both said land area and structures shall present sufficient evidence to
establish that the applicants are in fact all the owners or have control of all outstanding interests
of the land and structure thereon.
(b) Opinion letter - An opinion letter may be submitted by counsel to the applications setting forth
the following:
(1) title to the properties and existing and proposed encumbrances, and
(2) legal ownership of all development.
(c) Preliminary development plan, tabulation of average population density:
The application shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan of the entire planned
unit development, drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one inch, and showing the
following: tabulation of the average population density per net acre and per gross acre in the
area or areas proposed to be devoted to residential use.
SECTION 5.00: FILING FEE:
The preliminary development plan shall be accompanied by:
(a) Application on a form prescribed for this purpose by the City; and
(b) Payment of a fee, in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Upon, but not before, the approval, registration and recording of the development plan as set forth, the
applicant(s) for said plan shall be entitled to apply for such permits and certificates as are necessary to proceed
with the accomplishment of the plan.
SECTION 6.00: GRANTING OF PERMIT:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/418
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a permit for a planned unit development, if, on the basis of the
application and the evidence submitted, the Planning and Zoning Commission makes the following findings:
(a) That the proposed location of the planned unit development is in accordance with the objectives
of:
(1) the comprehensive general plan;
(2) the zoning regulation;
(3) the subdivision regulation; and
(4) the major purposes of the district in which the site is located.
(b) That the standards of the following:
(1) population density;
(2) site area and dimensions;
(3) site coverage;
(4) yard spaces;
(5) heights of structures;
(6) distances between structures;
(7) usable open space,
(8) off-street parking; and
(9) off-street loading facilities -
will be that the development will not generate more traffic than the streets in the vicinity can
carry without congestion and will not overload utilities;
(c) That the combination of different dwelling types and/or the variety of land uses in the development will
complement each other and will harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity.
SECTION 7.00: REVERSAL OR MODIFICATION OF DECISION:
If the City Commission:
(a) reverses a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission; or
(b) modifies a decision of the planning commission granting a permit for a PUD -
the findings and conditions shall be set forth as in Section 6.00 above.
SECTION 8.00: CONTENTS OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The Final Development Plan shall be certified by the applicant and shall show the following additional existing
and proposed items drawn to scale:
(a) The title page of each application and set of plans shall be signed by the applicant's architect,
planner, landscape architect, engineer and/or land surveyor. In addition to the signatures or the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/418
engineer and planner, the applicant's submittal shall contain the signatures of at least two (2)
professionals involved in the design and construction of the environment;
(b) The boundaries of the area covered by the plan, all public and private rights-of-way and
easements bounding and/or intersecting the district(s) which are proposed to be continued, created,
relocated and/or abandoned;
(c) The proposed finished grade of area, shown to contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet;
(d) A description of the proposed lot(s) and the boundaries thereof;
(e) The location of each existing and each proposed structure in the development, the use or uses to
be contained therein, the number of stories, the gross floor area, and the location of entrances and
loading points;
(f) All curb cuts, driving lanes, parking areas, loading areas, public transportation areas, and
illumination facilities for same;
(g) All pedestrian walks, malls, and open areas for use by tenants or visitors;
(h) The location and height of each wall, fence and screen planting;
(i) The location, size, height, and orientation of each sign other than signs that are flat on building
facades and that do not directly face property in a residential district;
(j) The types of surfacing, such as paving, turfing, or gravel to be used at the various locations;
(k) The location, types, and sizes of proposed drainage facilities;
(l) The location of fire hydrants; and
(m) The location of water and sewage facilities.
SECTION 9.00: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW:
Each development plan shall be submitted to the Planning Director and shall be reviewed in accordance with the
following schedules:
(a) The applicant shall file with the planning director a reasonable number of copies (not less than
six (6)) of his development plans as required;
(b) In the review of a preliminary development plan by the Planning Director, the Planning
Director shall recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission whether the said preliminary plan
shall be approved subject to compliance with modifications or conditions;
(c) After approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant may combine his preliminary development
plan and final development plan so as to make them one and the same. The applicant shall indicate on
said plan all data required of the preliminary and final development plan procedures.
SECTION 10.00: PHASE DEVELOPMENT OF PUD DISTRICT:
The preliminary and final development plans shall be divided into sections of proposed development so that in
the event of failure to commence timely and bona fide construction in any section of an approved final
development plan, there will be:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/418
(a) Definitely established lines showing the reduced PUD district after the rezoning of the unused
portion of the site area;
(b) Minimum of damage to the unused portion of the site from the standpoint of its suitability for
use following rezoning.
SECTION 11.00: RECORDING:
After completing its review of a development plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall return such plan
and all pertinent data, together with a written list of recommendations to the building official. All approved
development plans shall be registered and recorded as set forth:
(a) Upon approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall record one of the
approved plans with the building official. Before recording said plan, said plan shall be reviewed for
compliance with any modifications or conditions of the approving agent, dated, and approved for
recording by the planning director and building official.
(b) The planning director shall enter the date of receipt on each copy of the plan and shall within
fourteen (14) days thereof review the plan for compliance with the preliminary development plan and
subsections above. If such plan is found to be complete, it shall be transmitted with his comments and
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further review, comment and action.
No final development plan hereunder shall be approved unless it is in full compliance with the
approved preliminary development plan. The action of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
completed and due notice thereof, including a written statement of the reasons for disapproval or
required modifications thereto, given to the applicant within ten (10) days of such decision by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(c) Failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within the time limits established herein
shall not be construed as approval or disapproval of such plan.
SECTION 12.00: PUD DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES:
All development plans shall make due provisions for:
(a) Adequate design of grades, paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle
stormwaters and prevent erosion, minimize flooding and formation of dust;
(b) Adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways,
driveways, off-street parking and loading spaces, and facilities for waste disposal and illumination;
(c) Adequate and proper locations of pedestrian walks, malls and public transportation loading
places from general vehicular circulation facilities;
(d) Arrangement of building and vehicular circulation open spaces so that pedestrians moving
between buildings are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic;
(e) Proper arrangement of sign and lighting device with respect to traffic-control devices and
adjacent residential districts;
(f) Fences, walls, or yearround screen planting where necessary to shield adjacent residential
districts from parking illumination, headlights, fumes, heat, blowing papers and dust, and to increase
the visual privacy and residential neighborhood character;
(g) The average dwelling unit's density per net acre in that portion of a planned unit devoted to
residential use can exceed the net dwelling unit density proposed in the approved general plan
providing the gross density of the entire PUD does not exceed the gross average density of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/418
planning area in which it is located. In calculating population density per net acre, all streets shall be
excluded.
SECTION 13.00: EFFECTS OF RECORDING DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
All final development plans registered and recorded shall be binding upon the applicant. Their successors and
assignees shall limit and control the issuance and validity of all permits and shall restrict and limit the
construction, location, use, and operation of all land and structures included within such plans to all conditions
and limitations set forth in such plans.
SECTION 14.00: AMENDMENTS AND APPEALS:
Development and site plans which are disapproved may be filed with the reviewing agents who disapproved the
plan and an amendment to such plan. The amended plan shall be limited exclusively to changes made necessary
to accomplish compliance and the grounds for disapproval stated by the reviewing agent. The amendment or
amended plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the same time limits and procedures as provided for original
submission.
SECTION 15.00: COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
(a) The plans must be submitted in a form which satisfies the requirements of the subdivision regulations for
the preliminary and final plans.
(b) In any planned development for which any provisions of Chapter 2 of this Code and the City's subdivision
regulations are in conflict, the Planning and Zoning Commission, with advice and recommendations from the
City planner, shall make the decisions as to which provisions shall prevail.
SECTION 16.00: AMENDMENT OF ZONING MAP:
Upon final approval of the PUD, the Planning Director shall mark the official zoning map accordingly.
SECTION 17.00: PROCEDURE FOR ZONING CHANGES:
(Reserved)
SECTION 18.00: BEFORE THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
(a) Filing. All petitions, applications, recommendations, or proposals for changes in the zoning district
classification of property or in the textual provision of this Code shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(b) Filing Fees.
(1) Applications:
(A) Applications for a change of zoning district boundaries; or
(B) any change of the zoning regulation or classification -
shall be accompanied by a filing fee prior to consideration of the application by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
(c) Prerequisites.
(1) No application for the rezoning of any property situated within the City shall be received, filed
with the Zoning Commission, or considered, unless -
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/418
(A) the person(s) making such application have permission in writing; and
(B) signed by the owner(s) of record of the property proposed to be considered for rezoning
for the filing of such an application.
Such written permission must accompany any such application for rezoning.
The above notwithstanding, the City may initiate zoning change proceedings on any property
within the City at any time.
(2) No application for the zoning of any lot(s) or block of land situated in the City shall be received
or filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission and no hearing had, if within six (6) months prior
an application was received, filed and withdrawn before a full, fair and complete and final hearing
was held on the rezoning of such lot, lots or block of land before the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(d) Exemptions: If new relevant and substantial evidence, which could not have been secured at the time is
produced by the applicant, under a sworn affidavit to that effect; then in that event, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall have the right to hear and consider such application.
(e) It is further provided that no application for the rezoning of any lot(s) or block of land situated in the City
shall be received or filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City and no hearing had thereon, if
within one (1) year prior thereto the City Commission, after consideration and hearing, has denied an application
for rezoning of the same property.
(f) Recommendations. A public hearing shall be held on all proposed changes before submitting its
recommendation to the City Commission.
(g) Public hearings. The Director of Planning shall provide notice of all public hearings on proposed changes
in zoning classification to the owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property for
which the change in classification is proposed. Such notice shall be served by depositing the notice, properly
addressed and postage paid, in a City post office not less than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled date of the
public hearing to all owners who have rendered their property for City taxes on the last approved City tax roll.
Notice of such hearings shall also be published at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing in an official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in San Juan, Texas.
(h) Postponement of hearing. Should an applicant request that a zoning hearing be postponed after notice
thereof has been given, the hearing will not be rescheduled until the applicant pays the postponement request
fee. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time.
SECTION 19.00: CITY COMMISSION CONSIDERATION:
(a) Public hearing. After the final recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission is submitted to
the City Commission as provided in subsection (a) above section 18.00 the Commission shall consider a zoning
change after a public hearing at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
(b) Publication. Before the fifteenth (15th) day prior to the date of the hearing, notice of the time and place of
the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
(c) Passage when protested. An affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of all members of the City
Commission is required to approve a proposed change to a regulation or boundary if the change is protested. The
protest must be written and signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of the lots or land
immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending two hundred (200) feet.
(d) Computing the Percentage. In computing the percentage of land area, the area of streets and alleys shall be
included in the computation to the middle of the street or alley.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/418
SECTION 20.00: CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL AND PLANNING DIRECTOR:
The Chief Building Official and Planning Director shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
SECTION 21.00: RIGHT TO ENTER:
The Chief Building Official, Planning Director or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon
any premises at any reasonable time prior to the completion of the buildings for the purpose of making
inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out their duties in the enforcement of this Chapter.
SECTION 22.00: STOP-WORK ORDERS:
If any building work is being constructed contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Chief Building Official
may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the owner or contractor causing such work to be
done, and such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the Chief Building Official to
proceed with work.
SECTION 23.00: PLANS:
(a) All applications for building permits shall include the following:
(1) accompanied by accurate site plans drawn to scale;
(2) be submitted in duplicate;
(3) be drawn to scale showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
(4) include all setback lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or
altered;
(5) include the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then
existing and the lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered;
(6) include the existing and intended use of each building or part of building;
(7) contain plans for compliance with drainage, landscaping, garbage disposal location, the offstreet
parking requirements of all structures;
(8) list the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate;
(9) and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as necessary to provide
for the enforcement of this Code. One copy of such site plans will be returned to the owner when
such site plans drawn to scale have been approved.
(b) Inspection Period. An inspection period of as much as one week shall be allowed for inspection of plans
before a permit shall be issued.
SECTION 23.01: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
(a) All applications shall identify:
(1) the estimated cost of construction;
(2) the time period over which the construction will be completed; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/418
(b) Survey. All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot and the floor plan
to be built shall be based on an actual survey and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is
started.
SECTION 24.00: EXISTING PERMITS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS:
This Code is not intended to abrogate or annul:
(a) permits issued before the effective date of this Code; or
(b) any easement, covenant or any other private agreement.
SECTION 25.00: PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION:
No presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use falls within a District where the
actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an
illegal use, as the case may be.
SECTION 26.00: COMPLETION OF EXISTING BUILDING:
Nothing in these regulations nor in any amendments which change district boundaries shall prelude use of a
building which shall be completed in its entirety within two (2) years from the date of the passage of this Code,
provided:
(a) such building either was actually under construction at the time the passage of this Code; or
(b) was authorized by building permit before the passage of this Code, and further provided
construction shall have begun within ninety (90) days from passage of this Code.
Commitments with reference to construction of public utility buildings necessary for proposed expansion of the
City made prior to the passage of this Code shall be observed.
SECTION 27.00: UNPLATTED PROPERTY:
No plat(s) or subdivision(s) within the City shall be approved until the area covered by the proposed plat has
been permanently zoned by the City Commission of the City.
SECTION 28.00: PROPOSED ANNEXATION:
In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission holds a hearing on proposed annexation, it may, at its
discretion, hold a joint hearing upon the permanent zoning that is proposed to be given to the area or tract to be
annexed, and make recommendation on both matters to the City Commission, so that the City Commission can,
if it desires, act on the matter of permanent zoning and annexation at the same time.
SECTION 29.00: ZONING ANNEXED AREAS:
All territory hereafter annexed to the City shall be, by virtue of such annexation, temporarily and automatically
classified as “R-S” only until permanently zoned by the City Commission of the City. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall recommend to the City Commission a permanent zoning. The procedure is the same as
provided by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations.
ARTICLE X - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT*
SECTION 1.00: ORGANIZATION AND CREATION:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/418
(a) A Zoning Board of Adjustment (the “Board”) is hereby created. The Board shall consist of five regular
members and four alternate members who shall be appointed by the City Commission, for a term of two years.
Members may be removed for cause by the City Commission upon written charges and after public hearing. Said
four alternate members shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by
the Mayor or City Manager. All cases heard by the Board will always be heard by a minimum numbers of four
members.
(b) Vacancies. The City Commission shall fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any member by
appointment.
(c) Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members of the Board.
SECTION 2.00: PROCEDURE AND APPEALS:
The procedure before the Board shall be governed by the Texas Local Government Code sections 211.008–
211.011.
The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass, or to effect any variation.
SECTION 2.01: POWERS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Chief Building Official or the Director of Planning in the
enforcement of this Chapter;
(b) In hearing and deciding appeals the Board shall have the power to grant an exception in the
following instances:
(1) Permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract
held in a single ownership;
(2) Interpret this Chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this Chapter,
as shown upon the maps fixing the several districts, accompanying and made a part of this
Chapter, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown
on the maps;
(3) Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged by
explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of
its fair market value;
(4) Waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts whenever the
character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or
loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the
use of the lot, as contrasted with granting an advantage or a convenience;
(5) Permit land within three hundred (300) feet of a multiple dwelling to be improved for the
parking spaces required in connection with a multiple dwelling, but only when there is positive
assurance that such land will he used for such purpose during the existence of the multiple
dwelling;
(6) To determine whether an industry should be permitted within the “C” Commercial
District and the “I” Industrial District because of the methods by which it would be operated
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/418
and because of its effect upon uses within surrounding zoning districts;
(7) If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of structure, or structure and
premises in combination, may, as a special exception, be changed to another nonconforming
use, provided the Board shall find that the proposed nonconforming use is not more
nonconforming in the district as the previously existing nonconforming use;
(8) In permitting such exceptions, the Board may require any conditions and safeguards as it
shall deem appropriate to see that the purpose and intent of this Code is met, and the violation
of any such conditions or safeguards shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
SECTION 2.02: THE BOARD SHALL HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO GRANT THE FOLLOWING
VARIATIONS:
(a) Permit a variation in the yard requirement of any District where there are unusual and practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of lot, topographical of
other conditions, provided such variations will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare.
(b) Authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of terms of this
Chapter relating to the use, construction or alterations of buildings or structures on the use of land will impose
upon him unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship. The Board must be satisfied that a granting of
such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant but will alleviate some demonstrable and
unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from the comprehensive plan while protecting
the surrounding property.
(c) In considering all appeals and all proposed exceptions or variations to this Chapter the Board shall first
determine that:
(1) it will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property; or
(2) unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets; or
(3) increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety; or
(4) unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area; or
(5) in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the
inhabitants of the City.
(d) To determine hardship, the Board shall determine:
(1) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used only for a purpose allowed in
that zone.
(2) That the plight of the owner is unique and not shared in general by others in the neighborhood
also as a result of this Chapter and thus perhaps require rezoning; and
(3) That the use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality.
SECTION 2.03: FEE:
A fee as determined by the City Commission shall be paid to the City of San Juan at the time the notice of
appeal is filed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/418
SECTION 2.04: IN EXERCISING THE ABOVE-MENTIONED POWERS, THE ZONING BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT MAY:
(a) Reverse;
(b) Affirm, wholly or partly; or
(c) Modify -
the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirements, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken.
SECTION 2.05: VOTING REQUIREMENTS:
The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it
is required to pass under this Chapter or to effect any variation in such chapter.
SECTION 2.06: ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
The Board, with the concurrence and approval of the City Commission, shall determine and set forth a fee
schedule for the purpose of recovering the administrative costs of processing requests and the public hearings.
Such fee shall be paid by the applicant and shall not be designed for restricting an applicant's ability to seek a
hearing and/or to generate revenue for other than recovery of actual administrative cost incurred by the City.
ARTICLE XI - AMENDMENTS
SECTION 1.00: GENERAL POLICY:
The City Commission may from time to time amend, supplement or change the boundaries of the districts or the
regulations established.
SECTION 1.01: RESERVED.
SECTION 1.02: AMENDMENT PROCEDURES GENERALLY:
Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change:
(a) The proposed revision shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
recommendation and report.
(b) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review a preliminary report and hold public
hearings before submitting its final recommendation.
(c) Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in classifications shall be sent to:
(1) Owner(s) rendering the property for City's taxes;
(2) Owner(s) affected by such proposed changes of classifications;
(3) Owner(s) of property for City taxes, located within two hundred (200) feet of any
property affected thereby within not less than ten (10) days before any such hearing held. Such
notice may be served by U.S. Mail, properly addressed and postage paid based on the latest
certified tax roll.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/418
SECTION 1.03: ANNEXATION:
Where property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property proposed to be zoned or rezoned is located
in territory which was annexed to the City after the final date of making the renditions which are included on the
last approved City tax roll, notice to such owners shall be given by publication.
SECTION 1.04: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
After receipt of the final recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, a public hearing shall be
held by the City Commission before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change.
SECTION 1.05: NOTICE:
Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of
San Juan, Texas stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be less than fifteen days nor
more than 20 days from the date of publication.
SECTION 1.06: RULINGS:
In all cases where the City Commission deems it feasible and practical so to do, public hearings to be held
before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Commission, respectively, [or] may be held jointly
before said Commissions, after published notice, provided that the City Commission shall not take final action
until it has received the final recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
SECTION 1.07: VOTING PROCEDURES:
Unless such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, such amendment, supplement or change shall not become effective except by concurrence of four
members of the City Commission at each reading of the regulation incorporating such proposed amendment,
supplement or change and no vote shall be taken unless the full membership of the City Commission is present.
SECTION 1.08: PROTESTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DENIAL:
(a) In case of a written protest against any change in zoning, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more
either of the area immediately adjoining of the lots or land included in such proposed change such amendment
shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Commission.
(b) A vote of three-fourths of all of the members of the City Commission is required to overrule a
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission that the proposed amendment, supplement or change
to be denied.
SECTION 1.09: FILING FEE:
No notices of any application for change of zoning district boundaries or for any change in zoning regulation or
classifications shall be issued and no hearings shall be had before either the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the City Commission until a filing fee accompanying such application is paid.
SECTION 1.10: LIMITATION ON RESUBMISSION OF PETITION:
No amendment, supplement, change or repeal of any section of this Chapter which has been legally rejected by
the City Commission shall be again considered either by the City Commission or the Planning and Zoning
Commission on an appeal or petition by an appellant or application within one year from the date of the original
action.
SECTION 1.11: APPLICATION FOR ZONING CHANGE:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/418
(a) Applications for a zoning change shall be made on Application forms provided by the City of San Juan,
Texas,
(b) No zoning change applications shall be considered on any parcel more than once in any six-month period
of time unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
ARTICLE XII - PROHIBITIONS, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
SECTION 1.00: PROHIBITIONS:
(RESERVED)
SECTION 2.00: LIMITATIONS ON ALL LAND AND STRUCTURES:
No land shall be used or occupied, and no structures shall be designed, erected, altered, used or occupied except
in conformity with all regulations established and upon performance of all conditions set forth.
SECTION 3.00: LIMITS ON SALES & RENTALS ON LAND & STRUCTURES:
No person, firm, corporation, officer, or employee (either as owner or as participating principal, agent, servant or
employee of such owner) shall sell, rent or lease or offer or attempt to sell, rent or lease any land or structure
upon the representation that such land or structure may be used or occupied in a manner or for a use prohibited
by this Chapter.
SECTION 4.00: PROHIBITION OF MORE THAN ONE BUILDING PER LOT:
Every building shall be located on a lot except as permitted in the planned unit development district.
SECTION 5.00: R-S DISTRICT:
In the R-S district, no more than one principal building may be erected on a lot unless otherwise permitted in this
Chapter.
SECTION 6.00: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
No building or structure shall be erected, added to, or structurally altered until a permit has been issued by a
Building Inspector. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance with the requirements of this
Chapter, and further, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building where said
construction, addition, or alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter
unless upon written order of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
SECTION 7.00: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
(a) Requirement. All uses, including nonconforming uses, shall obtain a certificate of occupancy from the
Chief Building Official.
[(b) Reserved.]
(c) Records. The Chief Building Official shall maintain a record of all certificates of occupancy and copies
shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property affected.
SECTION 8.00: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
The administrative official for the purposes of this Chapter shall be the City Manager and his assistants,
deputies, and department heads insofar as they may be charged by the City Manager and the provisions of this
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/418
Chapter with duties and responsibilities with reference thereto. Without limitation, the Directors of Planning,
Public Works, and Building Inspections shall ordinarily administer and enforce the provisions or this Chapter.
(Ordinance 15-10 adopted 8/11/15)
CHAPTER 3 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE I - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.00: JURISDICTION
These regulations apply to all land within the City and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as that
jurisdiction is determined under Chapter 42, Texas Local Government Code and Chapter 212, Texas Local
Government Code.
SECTION 2.00: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or those imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
SECTION 3.00: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this chapter shall, for any reason, be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalid section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase is hereby declared to be severable;
and any such invalid or unconstitutional section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase shall in no way affect the
remainder of this chapter; and it is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the remainder
of this chapter would have been passed notwithstanding the invalidity or unconstitutionality of any section,
clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase thereof.
SECTION 4.00: FEES.
Fees will be charged for reviewing:
(a) preliminary plats;
(b) final subdivision plats; and
(c) inspection of the construction work as it progresses.
The fee shall cover the costs for plan and plat review, on-site inspections and preparation of documents and
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Commission. These fees are not for the
approval of a subdivision plat and are not refundable if the plat is not approved by the City approval authority.
The City Commission shall annually adopt these fees by adoption of a resolution.
ARTICLE II - GENERAL PROHIBITIONS
(a) No plat or subdivision of land within the City and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be approved
by the City Commission unless it conforms to the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
(b) No subdivision shall be provided the following services:
(1) water;
(2) sewer services;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/418
(3) electrical services;
(4) natural gas services; or
(5) building permits (the term “building” permits includes electrical, plumbing, mechanical
permits, etc.)
for the construction of any new building or any improvement to an existing building unless:
(A) it is located in a subdivision for which a plat has been approved by the City Commission; or
(B) an exemption has been granted pursuant to Article III; or
(C) a waiver granted pursuant to Article III, duly acknowledged by the owner as provided and filed
and recorded with the County Clerk.
(c) The City shall not sell or supply any water or sewer service within a subdivision for which:
(1) a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, or
(2) in which the standards have not been complied with in full.
(d) When directed by the City Commission, the City Attorney shall institute appropriate action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation.
(e) Every utility operating within the City's corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdiction shall require
that every request for utility service shall be by written request or application which shall contain the legal
description of the property for which utility service is being requested.
(f) On the written request or application by an owner or possessor of land applying for utility service from a
utility, the utility shall make the following determinations regarding the owner's or possessor's land;
(1) whether the land [is] within the City or the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction;
(2) if the property is so located, whether the City has issued a certificate stating that the plat or
subdivision plat for property has been reviewed and certified as conforming to the City's platting and
subdivision regulations requirements.
(g) The utility's duty under this section (e)and (f) shall be satisfied upon the receipt from the City of a
Certificate showing the following: The plat for this property has been certified as conforming to the City's
planning and subdivision regulation requirements.
(h) A utility shall refuse to serve a customer at a property for which the City has not previously issued a
certificate stating that the plat for the property has been reviewed and approved by the City.
(i) No person shall apply for or receive a service from a utility without having filed with the utility a
certificate as required under (g) herein and Section 8.00(a).
(j) It shall be a violation of these regulations for a utility to serve or connect any land with water, sewer,
electricity or gas unless the City has previously issued a certificate stating that the plat for the property has been
reviewed and approved by the City.
ARTICLE III
PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/418
SECTION 1.00: SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
(a) Plat Required for all Subdivisions
(1) The owner of a tract of land located:
(A) within the City's corporate limits; or
(B) in its extraterritorial jurisdiction -
who divides the tract in two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including
an addition to a City, or to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, and to lay out streets,
alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or
for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys,
squares, parks, or other parts must have a plat of the subdivision prepared. A division of a
tract under this subsection includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a
metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using
a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, including a lease purchase
agreement or by using any other method.
(2) To be recorded, the plat must:
(A) describe the subdivision by metes and bounds;
(B) locate the subdivision with respect to a corner of the survey or tract or an original corner
of the original survey of which it is a part; and
(C) state the dimensions of the subdivision and of each street, alley, square, park, or other
part of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for use of purchasers or owners of lots
fronting on or adjacent to the street, alley, square, park, or other part.
(3) The owner or proprietor of the tract or the owner's or proprietor's agent must acknowledge the
plat in the manner required for the acknowledgment of deeds.
(4) The plat must be filed and recorded with the Hidalgo County Clerk after approval by:
(A) the City's Planning and Zoning Commission;
(B) the City Commission;
(C) Hidalgo County Irrigation District #2; and
(D) Hidalgo County Drainage District #1.
(5) The plat is subject to the filing and recording provisions of Section 12.002, Texas Property
Code, unless an exemption or waiver has been properly granted as provided below.
(b) Exemptions and Waivers
(1) Delegation of Approval Responsibility for Minor Plats
The City hereby delegates to the City Manager the authority to approve a minor plat
consisting of no more than 1-1/2 acre involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing
street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of City water and
sewer services, as long as the street and available services otherwise meet the minimum
standards of this Chapter and the City Engineer has so certified in writing. The City
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/418
Manager may, for any reason, elect to present the plat for approval to the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the City Commission. Unless the City Manager approves the plat
with or without conditions within 10 days of receipt, he shall refer any plat, which he
refuses to approve to the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Commission, or both,
for consideration no more than 30 days from the date of receipt.
(2) Waiver of Provisions By City Commission
Upon appeal from a recommendation of rejection of a subdivision by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the City Commission may waive any requirement of this Chapter
upon the satisfaction of the following conditions:
(A) The developer shall provide sufficient right-of-way for:
(i) future roads;
(ii) drainage; and
(iii) utilities consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, including specifically the Major
Thoroughfare Plan, the Utilities Plan and the Master Drainage Plan.
(B) The width-to-length ratio of any lots to be developed for single-family residential
purposes shall not exceed 2 to 1.
(C) If the property is within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction; the developer shall request
voluntary annexation as a condition to approval of the plat.
(c) Informal Conference
Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the Preliminary Plat, the subdivider may, at the
subdivider's discretion, confer with the Planning Director, or designated staff person on an informal basis to
discuss:
(1) the proposed plat;
(2) its conformity with these regulations; and
(3) its relationship to surrounding properties and public improvements.
(d) Procedure for Conditional Approval of Preliminary Plat:
(1) All persons desiring to subdivide a tract of land may, at their discretion, first prepare and
submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission a Preliminary Plat. Should the subdivider choose to
submit a Preliminary Plat then the following supplementary material must be provided:
(A) Six copies of the Preliminary Plat, measuring 24" x 36" and one copy measuring 8-1/2" x
11", supplementary material shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission with a
written and dated application for conditional approval at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
meeting at which it is to be considered.
(B) The preliminary plat shall contain the requirements listed in Section 2.00.
(2) The City Secretary shall notify the subdivider and adjacent property owners by registered or
certified mail of the time and place of the meeting at which preliminary approval will be considered
and not less than five days before the date fixed for the hearing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/418
(3) The Planning Director or duly authorized staff person shall prepare, or cause to be prepared,
comments regarding conformity or nonconformity of the Preliminary Plat with the requirements of
this Chapter. At a minimum, the following persons shall be required to provide their written
comments:
(A) Planning Director;
(B) City Engineer;
(C) Water and Sewer Utilities Director(s);
(D) Fire Chief or Fire Marshall;
(E) Building Inspector; and
(F) Director of Solid Waste Collection.
(4) The Planning Director shall recommend conditional approval of the Preliminary Plat if the plat
satisfies the following requirements:
(A) the size and dimensions of the proposed lots, blocks, streets, alleys, easements and rightsof-
way satisfy the City's minimum standards;
(B) the tract of land to be subdivided is not in a flood-prone zone, or if in a flood-prone zone:
(i) the plat has been approved by FEMA; or
(ii) conditions recommended by FEMA to avoid flooding will be complied with by the
developer;
(C) the subdivider proposes to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, specifically,
each lot shall be provided with City water and sewer facilities; the streets will drain into the
City's storm sewer system; and dedications of land and improvements in conformity with the
Major Thoroughfare Plan have been provided for. Otherwise, the Planning Director shall
recommend disapproval and cite his reasons.
(5) Upon review and consideration of a Preliminary Plat and all necessary information required of
a developer as well as consideration of the Planning Director's recommendation, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall render a decision thereon within fifteen (15) days. Such decision may
consist of:
(A) approval;
(B) disapproval; or
(C) conditional approval of the Preliminary Plat. Conditional approval shall be considered to
be the approval of a proposed plat as submitted subject to conformity with prescribed
conditions, but shall be deemed to be a disapproval of such plat or replat until such conditions
are complied with. All objections made to the Preliminary Plat, or conditions imposed, shall be
furnished to the subdivider in writing and be made a part of the official minutes of the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Disapproval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be considered disapproval pursuant to Texas Local Government Code §
212.009.
(6) When a Preliminary Plat has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
subdivider shall file with the Planning and Zoning Commission a Final Plat. The Final Plat shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/418
responsive to the comments and or conditions by the Planning and Zoning Commission. When a
Preliminary Plat has been approved and the subdivider has failed to file a Final plat of the subdivision
or a section thereof within a period of six months, the approval of the Preliminary Plat shall
automatically become void. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall give its final comments,
conditions and recommendations on the Final Plat no later than 15 days from the date of submission
of the Final Plat.
(7) The action of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be noted on two (2) copies of the
Final Plat, referenced and attached to any conditions imposed thereon. One copy shall be returned to
the subdivider and the other retained by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(e) Procedure for Approval of Final Flat Before City Commission:
(1) Application for approval of the Final Plat shall be submitted in writing to the City Commission
no later than 5 days after approval or disapproval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and no
earlier than ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The application for the
Final Plat shall expire on the 45th day after the application has been filed if:
(A) The applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with
the City's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the plat application;
(B) The City provides to the applicant not later than the 10th business day after the date the
application is filed, written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other
information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not
provided; and
(C) The Applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the
time provided in the notice.
(2) Ten copies of the Final Plat, measuring 24" x 36", one digital copy, and other required exhibits
required for approval shall be prepared as specified in Section 2.01 [2.00].
(3) The City Commission shall act upon the Final Plat as approved or conditionally approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days of such action by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The City Commission shall approve the plat with conditions or disapprove the
plat, but shall never table discussion of the plat.
SECTION 2.00: PLATS AND DATA.
(a) Preliminary Plats and Data For Conditional Approval:
The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn on a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1":100') or larger and may show
the following:
(1) The title of the subdivision, north point, direction of prevailing breeze, scale and date of
application;
(2) The name of the owners and the engineer or surveyor;
(3) Vicinity sketch or key map at a scale of not more one inch to four hundred feet (1":100') [sic],
which shall show all existing subdivisions, streets, and tracts of adjacent acreage;
(4) The outline of the tract in the plat proposed for subdivision with principal dimensions;
(5) The location and name of existing streets, any blocks, lots, alleys, easements, building lines and
watercourses or other natural features in area affected, with principal dimensions, and all significant
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/418
information, including ownership in regard to the property immediately adjacent with bounding
streets on all sides for a distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet;
(6) The proposed plan of the subdivision, showing all:
(A) streets;
(B) blocks;
(C) lots;
(D) alleys;
(E) easements;
(F) building lines;
(G) parks, etc., with principal dimensions. The Preliminary Plat shall cover the entire tract
intended to be developed, at any time, even though it is intended by the developers to file plats
and install improvements for parts of said tract by sections or units.
(7) The proposed names of proposed streets. Such names shall conform to the existing street
naming scheme and shall not duplicate or conflict with the recognized name of any other street
located in the area subject to these regulations;
(8) Typical cross-section of proposed street improvements;
(9) The location, type, and size of existing sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water and gas mains and
other public utilities;
(10) Proposed plan for stormwater drainage sufficiently detailed to indicate the location of
drainage ditches or structures and the direction of flow and the additional stormwater to drain from
the subdivision;
(11) Any zoning districts affecting the area being platted;
(12) Watercourses;
(13) All trees over eight (8") inches in diameter;
(14) Contours of not more than five-foot (5') intervals;
(15) A letter stipulating any proposed protective and/or restrictive covenants, conditions and
limitations whereby the subdivision proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision; and
(16) Street signs, traffic-control devices and street lighting plan.
(17) A detailed study of improvements proposed to all existing relevant lift stations, or of proposed
new lift stations and relevant force mains.
(b) Data to be provided by Applicant's Engineer.
The applicant's engineer shall submit the following:
(1) Using acceptable engineering standards, the increased flow demand to be created upon 25
percent, 50 percent, 75 percent and full development of the subdivision;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/418
(2) The impact of the increased flow demand on all relevant lift stations between the subdivision
and the treatment plant (at a minimum provide the existing capacity of the relevant station, condition
of equipment and recommended repairs, modifications or improvements);
(3) The existing treatment capacity of the sewer treatment plant and additional capacity required, if
any, to treat the additional development at 25 percent, 50 percent, 75 percent and 100 percent of
development of the subdivision.
(4) A rationale for the use of a new lift station and force main as opposed to gravity flow to an
existing lift station. In this connection, the applicant's engineer shall provide the estimated cost of 1)
increasing the capacity of, and modernizing, an existing lift station to conform to the City's Texas
Natural Resource Conservation Commission Permit No. 11512-01 and the Texas Natural Resource
Conservation Commission rules set out at Design Criteria for Sewerage System, 30 T.A.C. § 317.1
(2)(A), et seq., and 2) a gravity flow design that will allow future developments to connect gravity
lines.
(c) Master Development Plan
(1) If a preliminary plan is part of an applicant's plan for a larger development, the applicant shall
file a master development plan with the director when the first application for preliminary plan
approval is filed.
(2) A master development plan may be in schematic form, must include the applicant's entire
development, and must provide for the safe, healthful, and orderly extension of roads, utilities,
drainage, and other public facilities.
(d) Plats and Data For Final Approval
The Final Plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1":100') or larger, on a reproducible
original. In addition to the items listed at Section 2.00(a), the Final Plat shall show the following:
(1) The title or name by which the subdivision is to be identified, north point, the scale of the map,
and the name of the registered professional engineer or state-licensed land surveyor responsible;
(2) A definite legal description and identification of the tract being subdivided. The description
shall be sufficient for the requirements of the title examination. The plat shall be a descriptive
diagram drawn to scale, and shall show by reference, that the subdivision, plat, or grant, or of which
the instant subdivision is divided, or so much thereof as is owned by the subdivider;
(3) The boundaries with proper dimensions, of the subdivided property, the location or designation
of all streets, alleys, parks, and other areas intended to be dedicated or deeded to public use. The
boundaries shall be indicated by a heavy line equivalent to a No. 5 Payzant pen and shall be tied by
dimensions to the established centerline of all existing boundary streets;
(4) The location of all adjacent streets and alleys, with their names, and the names of adjoining
subdivisions with exact location and designation by number of lots and blocks;
(5) All lot, block and street boundary lines, with blocks and lots numbered or lettered
consecutively, building lines and easements shall be shown and shall be defined by dimension. The
actual width of all streets shall be shown, measured at right angles or radially, where curved. All
principal lines shall have the bearing given and any deviation from the norm indicated;
(6) Accurate dimensions, both linear and angular, of all items on plat; the boundary survey on the
site close within one (1) in ten thousand (10,000) and the plat for record shall so show. The linear
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. The angular dimensions may be shown
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/418
by bearings. Curved boundaries shall be defined by actual length of a radius and not by degree of
curve;
(7) The description and location of all lot and block corners and permanent survey reference
monuments shall be shown;
(8) A certificate of ownership in fee of all land embraced in the subdivision, and of the authenticity
of the plat and dedication, signed and acknowledged by all owners of any interest in said land. The
acknowledgment shall be in the form required in the conveyance of real estate. Approval and
acceptance of all lienholders shall be included;
(9) A certificate by a registered professional engineer in charge, duly authenticated, that the plat is
true and correct and in accordance with the determination of surveys actually made on the ground. If
the engineer who prepared the plat did not make the original boundary survey, this fact should be
noted in the certificate. Also the certificate should show whether or not the tract is within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, measured in a straight line from the nearest points in the City
limits, unless the information is shown in a suitable manner elsewhere on the face of the plat. The
final plat shall include the following:
Certification of Surveyor and Engineer:
I, ____________, a (Registered Professional Engineer/Registered Public Surveyor), do
hereby certify the foregoing plat to be a true and correct representation of the subdivision
of the lands hereon described as surveyed on the ground and subdivision under my
direction, that the water and sewer service facilities described by the plat or on the
document attached to the plat are in compliance with the model rules adopted under
Section 16.343, Texas Water Code.
(SEAL)
(10) In addition to other required certificates the following forms shall be printed on the plat:
Approval by Planning and Zoning Commission:
I, ____________, Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission, hereby certify that
the subdivision plat conforms to requirements of the Subdivision Regulation of the City.
Chairman, Planning & Zoning Commission
APPROVED:
Date
Approval by City Commission
Approved and Accepted by the City Commission of the City, Texas, on this the day of
____________, 200__
Mayor
ATTEST:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/418
City Secretary
Approval by Hidalgo County Irrigation District #2
This plat is hereby approved by the Hidalgo County Irrigation District #2 on this, the
______ day of ____________, 200__.
No improvements of any kind (including without limitation, trees, fences and buildings)
shall be placed upon Hidalgo County Irrigation District #2 rights-of-way or easements.
President - HCID #2
Secretary - HCID #2
Date
Approval by Hidalgo County Drainage District #1
Hidalgo County Drainage District #1 hereby certifies that the drainage plans for this
subdivision comply with the minimum standards of the district adopted under Texas Water
Code Sec. 49.211 (c). The District has not reviewed and does not certify that the drainage
structures described are appropriate for the specific subdivision, based on generally
accepted engineering. It is the responsibility of the developer of the subdivision and its
engineer to make these determinations.
By:
Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1
(11) To obtain final approval, a current “as-built” set of plans and specifications, detailing all
improvements shall be submitted. The plans and specifications shall be sealed by a Professional
Engineer registered in the State of Texas, and must have a current date and signature.
(a) Both the 100-year and 25-year floodplain elevations shall be provided:
(e) Processing of the Final Plat
The final plat may be considered officially approved when all fees and expenses are paid and all requisites of the
subdivision have been met.
SECTION 3.00: DESIGN STANDARDS.
The subdivider shall submit a separate design (plan and profile) for each of the following major separate
improvements: 1) water; 2) sewer; 3) street; and 4) sidewalks and storm drainage.
The designs shall comply with Major Construction Specifications provided by the City and the following
requirements:
(a) Water System Standards.
(1) No City-owned water system or private utility providing water within the corporate limits
of the City or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall provide water to any new subdivision,
location, or customer unless the following requirements are met:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/418
(A) A certificate has been issued by the City as required by Article II subsections (f)
and (g) herein;
(B) The location shall be provided water from a water line no smaller than eight (8")
inches in diameter at a distance no less than 500 feet;
(C) The residual pressure of the system within a radius of 750 feet of the location shall
be 20 p.s.i. after a 750 gpm fire flow demand (the Residual Pressure).
(D) The design of the distribution system shall be such that a customer location shall be
served from two separate water supply sources. This systematic redundancy will help
ensure that all customers continue to receive water services in the event of a failure
involving one water supply source.
(E) A fire flow certificate has been issued in conformance with Article IV herein.
(2) The design complies with Texas Administrative Code, Title 30 Environmental Quality,
Chapter 290, Water Hygiene.
(3) If the system is City-owned, the Director of Utilities shall certify that the Residual
Pressure of the system within a proposed subdivision requesting service will in all likelihood
meet the minimum requirements set out herein.
(4) If the system is owned by a private utility which is certificated to provide service by the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, the President of the Corporation, the Manager, or
an Engineer, shall certify that the Residual Pressure of the system at a location or within the
proposed subdivision requesting service will in all likelihood meet the minimum requirements
set out herein.
(b) Sewerage System Standards
(1) On-site sewage disposal systems may be permitted in the urban designated extraterritorial
jurisdiction or in the city limits, upon approval of the City, in a subdivision with lots, or on
individual tracts, meeting the following criteria:
(2) For economic hardship caused by distance from existing facilities, and where the
applicant is able to demonstrate that compliance with the subdivision requirements has not been
circumvented by piecemeal metes and bounds conveyances;
(3) On lots which have at least 100 feet of frontage along an existing dedicated public rightof-
way;
(4) On lots where a septic tank/drainfield has been constructed to county standards; and
(5) On lots where the owner of the property executes and delivers a contractual agreement for
the extension of sewer utility lines.
(c) Streets.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform
to the requirements of the Major Thoroughfare Plan and shall be considered in their relation to
the classification of thoroughfares, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety and
in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
(2) Where such is not shown in the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/418
(A) Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing arterial streets in
surrounding areas; or
(B) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the Planning and
Zoning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions
make continuance of or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
(3) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen
planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear
service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and for affording separation of through traffic and local traffic.
(4) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or the limited access
highway right-of-way, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require a street
approximately parallel on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in appropriate districts, [or] for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate district. Such distances shall also be
determined with due regard for requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(5) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited, with the exception of
landscape strip areas required by this chapter.
(6) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet
shall be prohibited.
(7) A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves
on arterial and collector streets.
(8) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten
(10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight
distance of not less than fifty (50) feet for residential and collector streets and of such greater
radius as the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine for other special cases.
(9) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street
shall intersect another street at less than sixty (60) degrees.
(10) All corner lots at street intersections shall contain corner clips of twenty (20) feet. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded
corners as required in the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
(11) Half-streets shall be prohibited.
(12) No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of
existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(13) All residential streets or roadways shall be constructed with a prepared subgrade, a
flexible base course and a surface of hot-mix asphaltic concrete. The prepared subgrade shall
consist of six (6") inches of soil compacted to at least 98 percent of the maximum dry density as
determined by ASTM D698. The moisture content of the subgrade shall be maintained within
the range of optimum to three (3) percentage points above optimum until permanently covered.
If the plasticity index (PI) of the existing subgrade is in excess of 20, the subgrade shall be
treated with lime to reduce the (PI) to less than 20.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/418
The flexible base course shall consist of eight (8") inches of material conforming to
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) 2004 Standard Specifications for
Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges, Item 247,
Flexible Base, Types A, B, or C, Grades 1 through 3. The flexible base course shall
be compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of the maximum dry density as
determined by ASTM D1557. The moisture content of the base course should be
maintained within the range of three (3) percentage points below the optimum
moisture content to three (3) percentage points above the optimum moisture content
until permanently covered.
The surface of hot-mix asphaltic concrete shall have a thickness of one and one half
inches (1-1/2"). The asphaltic concrete surface course shall conform to TxDOT 2004
Standard Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and
Bridges, Item 340, Dense-Graded Hot-Mix Asphalt (Method), Type D. The asphaltic
concrete shall be compacted to a minimum of 92 percent of the maximum
theoretical specific gravity (Rice) of the mixture determined according to Test
Method Tex-227-F.
For other types of street or roadways, such as Secondary Arterial, or Primary
Arterial, the subgrade preparation, base thickness, and pavement design shall be
directed by the City Engineer.
(14) Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of
streets in the subdivision shall make provisions for the proper projection of streets into such
unsubdivided areas.
(15) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as short stubs to permit
future expansion.
(16) Cul-de-sac. In general, a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 600 feet in length, and shall have a
turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter (right-of-way) with a pavement diameter of 80
feet in residential areas, and shall have a turnaround not less than 200 feet in diameter (right-ofway)
with pavement diameter of 180 feet in commercial and industrial areas.
(17) Pavement widths and right-of-ways.
i. Major and secondary thoroughfares shall have right-of-way widths and pavement
widths as shown in typical street cross-sections of the major street plan.
ii. Collector streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 80 feet and a pavement
width as specified by the city.
iii. Residential streets in a subdivision containing more than one access point to a
higher classified roadway shall have a right-of-way width of at least 50 feet and a
minimum paved width of 32 feet from back to back of curb. Residential streets in
subdivisions containing only one access point to a higher classified roadway shall have a
right-of-way width of at least 50 feet with an additional 5-foot utility easement adjoining
the right-of-way line and a minimum paved width of 34 feet from back of curb to back of
curb.
iv. Pavement widths and right-of-ways of streets forming part of the boundary of the
subdivision (adjacent) shall be as follows:
a. Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half-street that
does not conform to such subsection (17) of this section, the subdivider shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/418
dedicate right-of-way width sufficient to make the full right-of-way to width to
conform to such subsection, and there shall be paved so much of such right-of-way
as to make the full pavement width comply with such subsection. Before any
pavement is laid to widen existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut
back two feet to assure an adequate subbase and pavement joint.
(18) Curbs. Curbs and gutters shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior
streets, and on all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision.
(d) Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be installed at the expense of the developer/homeowner in the manner
described herein:
(1) On all residential streets by the homeowner during the construction of the dwelling unit;
(2) On all collectors and secondary arterials by the developer in accordance with the Major
Thoroughfare Plan and shall be at least five (5) feet in width;
(3) Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of residential streets which serve as
collectors of traffic from minor streets, such as approaches to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers and other focal points of the community, or in areas where densities exceed three (3)
families per net acre;
(4) Sidewalk design shall conform to the existing design in the immediate vicinity;
(5) All sidewalks shall be not less than four (4) feet in width, and four (4) inches in depth,
and of concrete, stone, or masonry construction (a greater width may be required in
multifamily, commercial, and industrial areas);
(6) Sidewalks be as nearly parallel to the street as possible;
(7) Sidewalks shall be placed so that they are at least three (3) feet from the curb or in line
with existing sidewalks in the area;
(8) Additional sidewalks may be required as deemed necessary and in the interest of the City,
by the Planning and Zoning Commission in commercial, industrial, public and multifamily
areas; and such additional sidewalks as the developer may desire shall be permitted.
(e) Alleys.
(1) Except as provided, it shall be the policy of the City to prevent the inclusion of utility
easements in single-family residentially zoned areas by the public and by the City as public
alleys.
(2) Paved alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts, except that the
Planning and Zoning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured
provision is made for services access, such as off-street parking and garbage disposal consistent
with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(3) The minimum width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet and shall be generally parallel to
streets.
(4) Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary,
property lines at these intersections shall be rounded with a reverse radii of ten (10) feet to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/418
permit safe vehicular movement, specifically for garbage collection vehicles, and other
commercial and industrial vehicles.
(5) If the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that alleys in a residential subdivision
require paving, such alleys shall be paved in accordance with the specifications found in
Section 4.00 Required Improvements.
(6) In all subdivisions after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is
derived, alleys shall be provided at the rear of all lots intended to be used for business purposes,
unless otherwise provided. Alleys may be required to serve property to be used for residential
purposes. Alleys shall be paved according to the city's standard and specifications by the
developer. The right-of-way for all alleys shall be dedicated to the public, or conveyed in fee to
the city, unless otherwise approved.
(7) Alleys serving residential lots which abut major or minor arterials or major collectors, the
residences on such lots:
a. In residential subdivisions which have lots abutting major or minor arterials or major
collectors, the residences on such lots:
i. Shall not face the major or minor arterial or major collector, unless:
1. there shall be provided, in addition to any front setback, a 20-foot planting
area between such lot and the major or minor arterial or major collector;
2. If rear garbage pickup and/or rear access are not available to such lot, there
shall be placed a service street, in addition to the planting area, between the front
lot line of such lot, and such planting area. Such service street shall also be at least
20 feet wide, and built to city plans and specifications by the developer.
ii. If not facing the major or minor arterial or major collector, still plan to have
rear access and/or rear garbage pickup, shall have an alley between the rear lot line
of such lots and the right-of-way line of the major or minor arterial or major
collector. There shall also be constructed a buffer between such alley and such rightof-
way line.
(f) Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities
where necessary and shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide;
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage line, channel or stream, there
shall be provided a storm drainage easement or drainage right-of-way of substantially the same
width as the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
(3) A fifteen (15) foot utility easement shall be provided along the perimeter of all
subdivisions and shall be adjacent to the right-of-way line.
(g) Blocks.
The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard to:
(a) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/418
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
(c) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic including
future traffic needs as envisioned in the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
(d) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(e) Specific attention shall be given by Planning Staff and the Planning and Zoning
Commission to length, width and shape of existing areas of the City.
(f) A block may not exceed 800 feet in length, except as provided in this section.
(h) Lots.
(1) Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
(A) Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial
purposes shall be adequate to provide for:
(i) building lines and setbacks;
(ii) off-street services such as garbage collection, parking and loading; and
(iii) off-street parking facilities required by the type of use and development
proposed,
(B) Residential lots outside the City limits shall conform to the lot size requirements of
the Zoning Regulation.
(2) [sic] Corner lots shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setbacks from
both streets. At a minimum, corner lots shall conform to the requirements as set forth in
the City's Zoning Ordinance.
(C) Residential lots shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Building side-yard setback on residential street - 10 feet.
(2) Building side-yard setback on collector street and wider streets - 20 feet.
(3) The maximum length-to-width ratio of single-family residential lots shall be
as nearly feasible, 1 to 3.
(4) Residential lots shall have a minimum width of 60 feet for anterior [interior]
lots and 65 feet for corner lots, and a minimum length of 100 feet.
(5) The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public
street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street.
(6) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A landscape strip
easement of at least five (5) feet wide and across which there shall be no right of
access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery. Said
landscape strip shall conform to the requirements under Section 4.00 (K) [4.00 (b)
(4)(K)].
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/418
(7) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radical [radial] to street
lines.
(D) Commercial Lots shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Commercial lots shall have a minimum width of 100' and 200' in length,
except as provided herein;
(2) If the commercial area to be developed is two acres or greater in size, smaller
commercial lots may be developed if a common parking easement is provided
within the commercial development. The common parking area must meet the
standards and specifications of the City's Off-Street Parking Ordinance.
(3) On principal arterials the setback shall be 60', along the expressway it shall be
120' feet.
(i) Parks and Playgrounds
(1) Dedication within Subdivision
Where a proposed park, playground, school, or other public use shown in the
Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, the
Commission may require the dedication or reservation of such area within the
subdivision in those cases in which the Commission deems such requirements to be
reasonable and shall pay fair market value for the land.
(2) Dedication by Developers
Developers shall be required to dedicate a portion of a residential subdivision for
open uses in the following minimum amounts:
(A) One acre for every 20 acres (residential) of the gross developed area;
(B) If development is in excess of 40 acres, the developer shall dedicate one acre for
every 20 acres of the gross developed area, plus $500 per acre or proportionately, for land
area in excess of 40 acres. The land area set aside for parks shall be dedicated to the City.
(3) Park dedication or fees-in-lieu of requirements
In lieu of requiring developers to dedicate a portion of each new residential
subdivision for parks and recreational areas, each developer is required, as a
condition of plat approval, to contribute the following amounts of money to the City,
to be set aside, dedicated and used by the City for the purchase and development of
parks and recreational areas:
(A) $300 per lot being platted for single-family residential purposes;
(B) $250 per dwelling unit being platted for multifamily residential purposes;
(C) $250 per acre being platted for commercial or industrial purposes.
The amount of the park fee to be paid by each developer as indicated shall be
increased each year by $25.00 dollars per lot or by the latest adopted city fee
schedule, after the effective date of this paragraph, on January 1st[.]
[(j) Reserved]
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/418
[(k) Reserved]
(l) Raw Land
The provisions of this Chapter providing for a fee for parks and recreational purposes
shall not preclude the acceptance of raw land for such purposes if the City Commission or
the developer shall so agree. Upon the acceptance, the City Commission may waive all or
any part of the fees required.
(m) Unsuitable Land
Land which the Commission has found to be unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding,
bad drainage, and other features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare, and general
health of future residents, and which the Commission considers inappropriate for
subdividing shall not be subdivided unless satisfactory methods for correcting same are
formulated by the developer.
(n) Streetlights
(1) A plat may not be approved unless the subdivider has complied with the requirements of
this section, if applicable.
(2) This section applies to the residential portion of a subdivision if the subdivision is
located:
(a) at least partially inside the City limits; or
(b) outside the city limits, and the subdivider has requested annexation.
(3) A subdivider shall pay street lighting charges to the appropriate utility company.
(4) Streetlights shall be placed at a maximum of 240 feet apart.
(5) Height, style and composition of streetlights shall be approved by City Administration
prior to installation.
SECTION 4.00: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) Monuments
(1) Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at
intermediate points as required by the Commission.
(2) One boundary corner shall be marked with a concrete monument, unless a concrete monument
exists on an adjacent platted subdivision within 1,300 feet of the proposed plat. Permanent markers
along boundary lines may be spaced not more than 1,300 feet apart.
(3) Monuments shall be made of an iron rod three-quarter (3/4") inches in diameter and from 24"
to 30" long with its top set flush with the ground.
(4) Iron pins at lot corners shall be of (1/2") inch iron rods, 24 inches long, with top set flush with
the ground.
(b) Utility and Street Improvements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/418
(1) Before beginning any construction of the improvements on proposed roadways or public
utilities pertaining to the subdivision, the subdivider shall file with the City six (6) complete sets of
plans and specifications of all construction, approved by the City Engineer and the Planning Director.
These shall show such features as:
(A) roadways;
(B) cross-section;
(C) longitudinal slope for drainage;
(D) full description of proposed pavement or street improvement;
(E) their grade and slope;
(F) dimensions and specifications concerning public utilities to be installed showing
proposed position on the ground;
(G) specifications of materials and construction;
(H) profile maps of all sanitary and storm sewers showing both ground surface and flow line
and any other pertinent information of similar nature. If any part of the proposed construction is
considered unsatisfactory by the City Engineer, or other duly responsible planning official,
construction shall not be started on the affected portions until alterations are made so that the
complete work shall comply to the standards approved by the City Engineer.
(2) Approval by the City Engineer or the Planning Director of a clean deviation from or
inconsistency with the requirements of this Chapter shall not estop the City from enforcing a design
that conforms to the requirements of this Chapter.
(3) The subdivider shall certify that the plan and specifications satisfies the requirements of this
Chapter and shall point out with specificity any deviations therefrom and the specific authority
authorizing the noted deviations.
(4) The following minimum standards for improvements shall be agreed to and complied with by
the subdivider of each subdivision before final approval of a plat by the Commission:
(A) All streets shall be constructed according to specifications provided by the City Policy
(Major Construction Specifications).
(B) All utility lines in a subdivision that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before
the street or alley is paved. When it is necessary that the utility lines pass under the street or
alley pavement, the appropriately sized casing shall be extended to a point at least three feet
beyond the edge of the pavement.
(C) Curb and Gutter - Combined monolithic curb and gutter shall be constructed on each side
of each street within the subdivision in accordance with construction specifications provided by
the City.
(D) Sidewalks, Alley-Pavement - Sidewalks shall be required where called for in the Major
Thoroughfare Plan or in this Chapter. When sidewalks are required, they shall comply with
construction specifications provided by the City.
(E) Sanitary Sewer - Each lot within a subdivision area shall be provided with a connection
to a sanitary sewer. Generally, each subdivision plat shall include all proposed on-site
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/418
improvements as well as all off-site improvements which shall conform to the City's Master
Sewer Plan. The minimum requirements are the following:
(1) Collection Lines:
(a) Subdivision mains shall have a minimum diameter of 8".
(b) House service line - 4" minimum diameter, with a 6" diameter preferred.
(c) Multifamily and Commercial service lines - 6" minimum diameter.
(d) Grade - minimum slope from the house to the collecting line shall be, 4" -
0.009 feet/foot, 6" - 0.006 feet/foot
(e) Materials - shall be any of the following:
(1) Cast iron soil pipe
(2) PVC gravity sewer pipe, SDR 26, bearing the NSF seal.
(2) Lift Stations:
If the design and construction of a lift station is required in order to meet the
sanitary sewer needs of a development, the set of plans and specifications for
the lift station shall clearly show compliance with Chapter 317 of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality entitled, “Design Criteria for Sewerage
Systems.” At a minimum the following list of items must also be addressed in
the plans and specifications:
(a) The entrance to the lift station shall include a lockable latch;
(b) The lift station site shall be fenced with a six (6) foot high fence, type of
fencing to be determined by City Administration.
(c) The location of the electrical equipment control unit shall be shown on the
plans. The unit must be located at least 3 feet above the ground surface;
(d) Proper ventilation shall be provided for the lift station;
(e) The bottom of the wet well shall have a minimum slope of 10% to the pump
intakes and shall have a smooth finish;
(f) The type of check valve being used must be stated. The check valve must be
accessible without entering the wet well;
(g) The gate valve shown in the plan must include a position indicator;
(h) A flexible or flanged connection shall be installed in the piping to each pump
so that the pump may be removed easily for repairs. Provisions shall be made in the
design to allow flexure where the pipes pass through the walls of the lift station;
(i) Details of the force main shall be provided. A hydrostatic test shall be done on
the force main which complies with § 317.2.d.4 of the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/418
(j) The velocity of all force mains shall comply with Chapter § 817.3.d.5 of the
Texas Water Commission's Rules;
(k) A lift station analysis for the proposed lift station in compliance with
Subsection 317.3.c.4 of the Commission's rules. The analysis should include the
following items:
(1) Plots of appropriate system head curves (for both minimum and maximum
operation conditions) together with superimposed pump head curves (indicated the
capacity, horsepower, and impeller size of the chosen pumps). These curves need
to be generated using C values of 100 and 140 and shall show the pumps operating
at the various wet well levels.
(2) The firm pumping capacity of all lift stations shall be such that the expected
peak flow can be pumped to its desired location. Firm pumping capacity is defined
as the station's maximum pumping capacity with the largest pump-out of service.
(3) Provide the wet well detention times and pump cycle times.
(4) Pump control elevations also need to be given.
(l) The Final Plat shall identify who will provide power for the lift station.
Applicant shall provide for the power company 24-month history of power outages
including the dates and durations of the power outages. A plan must be submitted
which ensures that no spillage will occur from the lift station during either the
maximum power outage during the last 24 months, or 20 minutes, whichever time is
greater. This plan may utilize line storage, portable generators, or a combination of
the two. Other options are also available as described in Chapter 317.3.e of the
Commissioner's rules. Identify the projected estimated power consumption at 25%,
50%, 75% and 100% of development at regular and peak flows, and based on
current utility rates the estimate[d] utility cost;
(m) Applicant shall submit 2 copies of operation and maintenance manuals for
each lift station[.]
(F) Water Lines - Each lot within the subdivision area shall be provided with access to the
City's water supply. The layout shall be designed to form a loop system and the subdivision
shall be provided service from two separate sources. No service laterals shall be smaller than
eight (8") inches. Location of service laterals shall be marked on construction plans. Valves
shall be appropriately provided at all connections to existing lines. For future connections, the
City shall require the developer to extend the lines beyond its subdivision to public easements
and provide valves and “ts” for future extensions. Construction shall comply with the City's
specifications.
(G) Off-Site Utility Lines - Where it shall be determined by the City Engineer that larger
mains or lines are required in order to provide for the future extension of the utility system
beyond the limits of the subdivision in question the City may, providing funds are available,
pay for the pipe in excess of the size required of the developer.
(H) Fire Hydrants - Shall be as directed by the City Engineer. In general the type of fire
hydrant used must be AWWA approved, cast iron fully bronze mounted, for a working pressure
of 150 psi, have two standard hose connections, and one standard steamer connection with
thread to conform to national standard. The variety of fire hydrant to be used will be the same
as currently found within the City, or approved for use by the City Manager, Utilities Director,
or the City Engineer. Fire hydrants shall be 14 inches from the top of the curb on [or] natural
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/418
ground, whichever is higher, to the center of the 2-inch plug. The location of the fire hydrants
will be such that it continues the pattern already established within the City of providing
standard three-way fire hydrants connected to a six (6") inch main or larger in order that there
will be a fire hydrant every 300 feet in commercial and industrial areas, and a fire hydrant every
500 feet in residential subdivision along the street.
(I) Cutoff Valves - Shall be placed on all branch lines from the feeder mains, and between
feeder mains and fire hydrants. In general, sufficient valves shall be provided so that a
shutdown of a main line will not require the closing of a length of pipe longer than 500 feet in a
commercial or industrial district and 1,200 feet in residential districts.
(J) Storm Drainage
(1) General:
(a) All drainage facilities including street curbs, gutters, inlets and pipes to the
drainage outfall system shall be designed to intercept and transport runoff from a 10-
year frequency storm.
(b) No improvements shall be constructed which will increase the frequency of
flooding or the depth of inundation of unprotected structures in the 100-year
floodplain or areas of flooding.
(c) Peak flows shall not be increased at any location for any frequency of storm,
more frequent than the 10-year storm.
(d) Regulation of peak flows to allowable levels as determined by this chapter
shall be achieved by storage on-site or off-site. Acceptable methods include swales,
bermed areas, recreation areas, and ponds but the engineer is not limited to these
methods.
(e) In subdivisions where the cost of off-site drainage is excessive in comparison
to the overall cost of development, the City Commission may allow the developer to
deposit with the City, an amount equal to the pro rata share of the planned drainage
system evaluated for the year of proposed construction. All amounts paid to the City
shall be held in a separate account and used for drainage improvements. This
exception is allowable only if the proposed development will not cause additional
flooding and/or the overloading of the existing drainage system.
(2) Street Drainage:
(a) Where additional hydraulic capacity is required on the street, curb inlets and
storm sewers must be installed to remove a portion of the flow.
(b) Streets shall be graded to utilize natural existing flow patterns.
(c) No surface street flowing over 660 feet will be allowed.
(d) Storm drainage pipes shall be made of reinforced concrete, except as
otherwise approved by the City Engineer and City Administration.
(3) Drainage Facilities:
(a) The drainage plan and statement will be submitted to City staff for review and
approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/418
(b) All drainage facilities for a proposed development will be constructed at the
developer's expense.
(c) Pipelines shall be sized so as to provide adequate capacity for the designated
drainage area.
(K) Landscape Strip Areas
(1) A landscape strip area with a minimum width of five (5) feet shall be provided
along the rear property lines of double fronting residential lots between the street right-ofway
line and the rear property line. The rear property line of double fronting residential
lots shall be the lot line adjacent to the street with the greater right-of-way or street with
the greater traffic volume or street with the greater block length as determined in this
order.
(2) A landscape strip area with a minimum width of five (5) feet shall be provided
between the street right-of-way line and any adjacent alley, service drive or service street.
(3) A landscape strip area with a minimum width of five (5) feet shall be provided
along the side property line of corner lots between the street right-of-way line and the side
property line.
(4) A landscape strip area shall be designated by a lot number on the plat and specified
as a common area.
(5) A cedar fence with masonry columns spaced every sixteen (16) to twenty (20) feet
or a masonry wall, constructed of 8" x 16" concrete masonry units, with a minimum
height of six (6) feet shall be provided within the landscape strip area along the property
line of any adjacent lots, alleys or service drives, except where the wall will serve as a
buffer between commercial and residential uses in which case the wall will be constructed
of block or brick and reach a minimum height of eight (8) feet; and shall be constructed
prior to final acceptance of the subdivision improvements.
(6) Landscape strip areas shall be sodded, seeded or hydromulched with grass. Ground
covers and shrubs may be used in lieu of grass.
(7) Trees shall not be planted within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection of a street,
alley or driveway.
(8) An automatic water-saving irrigation system shall be provided and properly
maintained for each landscape strip area to provide a moisture level to sustain plant
materials on a permanent basis.
(9) A homeowners' association shall be organized and it shall be required to maintain
common areas including the trimming and replacement of vegetation, repair and
replacement of irrigation systems, and repair and cleaning of buffer walls.
SECTION 5.00: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE.
(A) Construction of Improvements Prior to Recording of Final Plat
Should the subdivider choose to construct the required improvements prior to recording the plat, he/she will
submit to the City six (6) copies of plans and specifications of proposed improvements prepared by a qualified
engineer. An inspection fee, as determined by the City of San Juan Fee Schedule, of estimated cost of
improvements will be deposited with the City. The plans and specifications will be reviewed by the City
Engineer to assure that the construction will conform to the City's standards. All construction shall be inspected
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/418
while in progress by the City Engineer or his designee. The work will be approved by the City Engineer or his
designee and a statement signed by same stating that the construction conforms to specifications will be
presented to the City Commission for their final approval of the plat for recording. Upon completion and
acceptance, the contractor will present to the City a performance bond in the amount of the total cost of
construction. The bond shall remain valid for one (1) year from the date of final acceptance by the City of all
subdivision improvements.
(B) Bond Requirements and Other Financial Guarantees
(1) If the City Commission requires the owner of a tract to execute a bond, the owner must do so
before subdividing the tract unless an alternative financial guarantee is provided under Subsection (c)
[(e)(iii)]. The bond must:
(a) be payable to the presiding officer of the governing body or the presiding officer's
successors in office;
(b) be in an amount determined by the governing body to be adequate to ensure the proper
construction or installation of the water and sewer service facilities to service the subdivision
but not to exceed the estimated cost of the construction or installation of the facilities;
(c) be executed with sureties as may be approved by the governing body;
(d) be executed by a company authorized to do business as a surety in this state if the
governing body requires a surety bond executed by a corporate surety; and
(e) be conditioned that the water and sewer service facilities will be constructed or installed:
(i) in compliance with the model rules adopted under Section 16.343, Water Code; and
(ii) within the time stated on the plat or on the document attached to the plat for the
subdivision or within any extension of that time.
(iii) in lieu of the bond an owner may deposit cash, [or] a letter of credit issued by a
federally insured financial institution.
(iv) If an irrevocable letter of credit is used, it must:
(f) [sic] list as the sole beneficiary the presiding officer of the governing body;
and
(d) [sic] be conditioned that the water and sewer service facilities will be
constructed or installed:
(i) in compliance with the model rules adopted under Texas Water Code Section
16.343; and
(ii) within the time stated on the irrevocable Letter of Credit which shall not
exceed 12 months.
SECTION 6.00: REIMBURSEMENT OF COST OF OFF-SITE UTILITIES.
Upon the request of a developer, or upon the City's own motion, the City Engineer shall prepare a proposal for
pro rata reimbursement to the developer of a portion of the cost of extending off-site utilities consistent with the
City's off-site utilities reimbursement policy. Any reimbursement agreement shall be adopted and execute[d] at
or prior to the date of final approval of the subdivision plot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/418
SECTION 7.00: VARIANCES.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend variances from this Chapter to the City Commission
solely in those cases when in its opinion undue hardships will result from requiring strict compliance. In
considering a variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems
necessary or desirable in the public interest. In making the finding required below, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of such
variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity. No
variance can be considered unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds:
(A) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the configuration or other factor of
the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this Chapter would deprive the
applicant of the reasonable use of his/her land;
(B) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the legal property rights
of its owner;
(C) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare
or injurious to the legal rights other property owners enjoy in the area; and
(D) That the granting of the variance will not prevent the orderly subdivision of other land in the
area in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Such findings of the Planning and Zoning
Commission together with the specific facts upon which such findings [are] based shall be
incorporated into the official minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which such
variance is considered. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this Code so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and substantial
justice done. Financial hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not constitute undue hardship.
(E) The City Commission shall have the ultimate power to grant or reject variances upon receipt of
a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
SECTION 8.00: FAST-TRACK APPROVAL OF CERTIFICATES.
The City Commission finds that the additional requirements which it has imposed on property owners,
developers, builders and utilities operating within its corporate boundaries and within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction to conform their actions to the requirements of its comprehensive development plans impose a duty
on the City to respond in a judicious and efficient manner to requests made under the regulations. Therefore, in
order that property owners, developers, builders and utilities may satisfy the requirements of §§ 212.0115 and
212.012 of the Local Government Code and the requirements of these regulations without undue delay, the City
Commission hereby orders as follows:
(a) Any owner or possessor of land within the City's corporate boundaries or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction as hereinafter defined may request that the City issue a certification that the land has been
properly platted and subdivided in conformance with the City's platting and subdivision regulations.
(b) Upon a written request as provided in subsection (a), which includes the legal description of the
land, the Director of Planning or his designee shall determine, within no later than 5 days from the
date of receipt of a written application, whether the land has been previously properly platted and
subdivided as required by the City's subdivision regulations. He shall so certify if the records and
minutes of the City Commission so indicate.
SECTION 9.00: APPEAL
In the event the plat of a subdivision has been disapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
Subdivider may petition the City Commission for a hearing upon said rejection by filing a formal request for the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/418
hearing with the City Secretary after a public hearing, [and] the City Commission, upon 2/3 vote of it entire
membership, may approve the subdivision or take other action consistent with the provisions of this resolution.
The hearing shall be set within twenty-one (21) days after the filing of a request for the hearing.
ARTICLE IV
FIRE FLOW REGULATION
COMMENTARY
In Texas, a City may or may not be the exclusive provider of water or sewer services within its corporate
boundaries. Water supply corporations and sewer corporations have vast areas within their certificates of
convenience and necessity over which they have the exclusive right to provide these services. These areas
include, in particular, certain areas within the City's corporate boundaries.
The City does not have the authority to regulate water rates of the Military Highway Water Supply Corporation
or the North Alamo Water Supply Corporation, which are “retail public utilities” along with the City. However,
under Section 13.042 of the Texas Water Code, the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission has no
“power or jurisdiction” over a municipality that regulates land and supervises water and sewer utilities within its
corporate boundaries except as provided by this Code. What does this mean? It is the City's view that subsection
13.042(f) expressly provides no intention to withdraw the City's jurisdiction over “land regulation.” It would
appear that land regulation continues within the exclusive power of the City and to that extent, it will have
indirect power to set up reasonable standards over land regulation, including the size and capacity of water and
sewer lines by adopting regulations governing land development. Therefore, while the City may not control the
rate authority for a water supply corporation, it can prevent development of land which does not comply with
local subdivision regulations.
SECTION 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions are applicable to this regulation only.
Facilities: All the plant and equipment of a utility, including all tangible and intangible real and personal
property without limitation, and any and all means and instrumentalities in any manner owned, operated, leased,
licensed, used, controlled, furnished, or supplied for, by, or in connection with the business of any utility.
New Customer: Any person or entity who seeks water services at a location within the City's limits from a utility,
and has not previously had water services from that utility at that location. Provided, however, that a person or
entity who seeks water services from a location previously served with water services by a utility, shall not be
deemed a new customer for purposes of this regulation if the current character or nature of the use of the
location has not materially changed from the previous use when the location received water services.
Order: The whole or a part of the final disposition, whether affirmative, negative, injunctive, or declaratory in
form, of the regulatory authority in a matter other than rulemaking, but including issuance of certificates of
convenience and necessity and rate setting.
Proceeding: Any hearing, investigation, inquiry, or other fact-finding or decision-making procedure under this
regulation.
Service: Any act done, rendered, or performed, anything furnished or supplied, and any facility used, furnished,
or supplied by a utility in the performance of its duties under this regulation to its patrons, employees, other
utilities, and the public, as well as the interchange of facilities between two or more utilities.
Utility: Any person, corporation, public utility, water supply or sewer service corporation, operating,
maintaining, or controlling within corporate boundaries of the City facilities for providing potable water service
or sewer service, or both, for compensation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/418
SECTION 2.00 SERVICE AND RESPONSE TO REQUESTS FOR SERVICE.
The City establishes the following rules relating to service and response to requests for service for utilities
operating within the City's corporate boundaries. In this connection, the City Manager is instructed to develop
and maintain a procedure for compliance with this section.
(a) Minimum Standards of Service.
Not later than 30 days after the adoption and final passage of this regulation, every utility
providing services within this City's corporate boundaries shall submit a written report
(the “Report”) to the City Commission containing the following information:
(1) Capacity of Facility
(A) Water Utility - The Report shall indicate the treatment and storage capacity
requirements of the utility's facilities as compared with the Texas Department of Health's
minimum capacity requirements for a public drinking water system. If the utility
purchases any supply or service from another utility or provider, the Report shall also
provide the information for the other utility or provider.
If at any time subsequent to the adoption of this regulation that capacity has
reached 85 percent of capacity as compared with the minimum capacity
requirements, the utility shall submit a planning report that includes details on
how the retail public utility will provide the expected service to the remaining
areas within the City's corporate boundaries.
(B) Sewer Utility (Reserved).
(2) Design of Facility
(A) Water Facility - The Report shall clearly identify all the water storage devices,
lines, and meters within the City's corporate boundaries. The Report shall also clearly
label the size (in inches) of all lines within this area, and shall mark in an easily
identifiable manner, those liens that meet or exceed their maximum connection limit
based on Table A.
(B) Sewer Facility (Reserved.)
3. Minimum Standards for Facilities
A utility providing services within the City's corporate boundaries is prohibited from
extending service to any new customer if its facilities fail to satisfy any of the
following minimum standards:
(a) Capacity
(1) Water Facility
(A) Proposed Subdivisions - No utility shall provide water or establish
connections to provide water to a proposed subdivision or to a new customer
within a subdivision until the City has issued a certificate of fire flow compliance
for that proposed subdivision.
(B) New Customers - No utility shall provide water or establish connections to
provide water to a new customer unless the service location is within a subdivision
or area for which the utility has issued a certificate of fire flow compliance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/418
(C) Criteria for Issuing Certificate
(i) A utility may apply for a certificate of fire flow compliance at any time for any general area to which it
currently provides water service. Each identifiable subdivision may be issued its own certificate of fire flow
compliance.
(ii) The City shall issue a certificate of fire flow compliance to a utility or any person applying for a certificate
upon 1) written application and filing fee in the amount of $25.00, 2) a designation of the specific area for which
the certificate is sought, and 3) the presentation of a certified engineer's report that states that given the existing
storage capacity and distribution system, and/or the proposed improvement, the utility can currently provide a
minimum fire flow to the area in the application of 750 gpm with a residual pressure of 20 psi. The cost of the
engineer's report shall be paid by the person or utility requesting the Certificate. The Certificate shall list
conditions with particularity.
(iii) The engineer's report to be provided to the City shall state the residual pressure of water flow to the area
at 750 gpm, and shall state the sources of the water supply to the area. The engineer's report shall further state
the accuracy of the calculations and the data upon which the calculations are based.
(b) The fire-flow Certificate shall constitute an authorization for the City or utility to extend or
provide water services to a particular property or a subdivision. The Certificate shall not entitle any
person to any right or interest, it being the primary objective of the City to require the continuous
evaluation of existing water facilities and firefighting capability, rather than to create any enforceable
rights.
(c) Design: Minimum Water Line Sizes.
(1) No new water lines under eight (8) inches in diameter shall be allowed to be installed in a
water distribution system.
(2) The design of the distribution system shall be such that a customer location shall be
served from two separate water supply sources. This systematic redundancy will help ensure
that all customers continue to receive water services in the event of a failure involving one
water supply source.
(3) The table below establishes the maximum number of connections allowed [to] be made
on any existing pipe. A utility shall not make any additional connections to a pipe if after doing
so there would result a pipe with connections in excess of the maximum number of connections
allowed for a pipe of that size.
TABLE A
Maximum Number of
Connections
Maximum Line Size (in inches)
150 4"
151 - 250 6"
>250 8" and larger
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/418
COMMENTARY
Finding and Purpose of Lift Station Regulations:
The City is experiencing substantial growth. Unchecked, this growth can result in taxing the City's public
systems and facilities. Particularly with respect to potable water services, there is an increasing public demand
for water. Similarly, the lack of sewer trunk lines has increased the request for additional sewer lift stations and
pressure mains. While the City has made significant strides in improving its water treatment, storage and
distribution facilities as well as its sewer transmission and treatment facilities, it has done so in a catch-up mode.
While the City has caught up, so to speak, it needs to make sure that as growth and development occurs in the
immediate future, water systems and facilities are in place to respond to the increased demand for water.
The City Commission finds that it is the in the public interest and in furtherance of the health, welfare, and
safety of the citizens of the City, and the residents of the rural areas in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, that
the City adopt minimum design standards for water and sewer systems and minimum treatment and storage
capacity requirements for all utility systems providing water to areas under the City's jurisdiction.
In this connection, the City Commission wishes to exercise the City's sovereign authority to the fullest extent
under the Texas Constitution and to be limited only as limited in that authority by the acts of the Texas
Legislature. To the extent that the City's regulatory jurisdiction overlaps with the regulatory authority of the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, it is the City Commission's desire that its own regulatory
jurisdiction take precedent where so authorized by the Texas Water Code, and other acts of the Texas
Legislature. If a clear and irreconcilable conflict arises between the City's purported jurisdiction herein, and the
jurisdiction of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality of the Texas Department of Health, then it is the
City Commission's objective that the provisions of this regulation be interpreted to be consistent with and
subordinate to the jurisdiction of those state agencies. On the other hand, if the jurisdiction or authority of a state
agency indicates only a partial preemption over some regulatory matter, it is the desire of the City Commission
that both the state and local interest be reconciled and that this regulation be interpreted to accomplish objectives
that are set out herein.
(Ordinance 06-06 adopted 9/26/06)
CHAPTER 4 - BUILDING STANDARDS REGULATIONS
In case of conflict between this Chapter and the provisions of the Building Code, the provisions of this Chapter
shall apply.
SECTION 1.00: MINIMAL FLOOR AREA.
No permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential building that does not meet the minimum floor
area requirements under this section.
(a) The minimum floor area for each residential building shall be no less than 800 square feet.
(b) A room where a tub or shower, and lavatory are to be located shall have a minimum floor area
of 30 square feet (2.8 square meters), with no dimension less than four feet (1.2 meters).
SECTION 2.00: FOUNDATION.
(a) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a residential building unless the foundation for
said building is determined by the building official to be safe.
(b) A foundation for a building will be considered safe if it is capable of supporting the load which normal use
may cause to be placed thereon.
(c) A foundation is considered unsafe if:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/418
(1) The unit has a dirt floor;
(2) The floor will move under normal stress, due to improper reinforcement; or
(3) Supporting piers are not of one solid-piece construction.
SECTION 3.00: FINANCIAL COMMITMENT.
(a) The City Manager, with the approval of the City Commission, is hereby authorized and directed to
establish a schedule, based on the square floor area of a residential building, to determine the amount of
financial commitment that must be made to ensure the completion of proposed residential building construction.
(b) The City Manager, with the approval of the City Commission, is hereby authorized and directed to modify
the schedule required in subsection (a) as necessary.
(c) A person applying for a permit for the construction of a residential building must demonstrate to the
Building Official that he has sufficient funds to meet the financial commitment required to finish construction. It
shall be sufficient proof that a person has sufficient funds to meet financial commitment if that person can show:
(1) a letter of credit for an amount no less than the financial commitment;
(2) statements from:
(A) a bank, or
(B) other savings institution that indicate the applicant has an account under his name with
available funds in an amount no less than the financial requirement; or
(3) any other such documents that tends to establish that the applicant has sufficient funds to meet
the financial commitment for the completion of construction.
SECTION 4.00: MOVING STRUCTURES INTO CITY LIMITS.
(a) It shall be unlawful to bring into the City limits any structure that is intended to be used as a residential
unit or commercial unit, unless that structure is composed of at least 90% of new material.
(b) Any conflict between this section and State or Federal law dealing with manufactured or modular homes
shall be resolved in favor of the State or Federal law.
(c) This section does not prohibit the movement of structures already within City limits.
(d) A person must obtain a building permit for a structure before moving a single-family residential unit that is
neither a modular home or a manufactured home within City limits.
(1) The building official shall ensure that the structure to be moved within the City limits complies
with the requirements of this Code, as if the structure were a new building.
(2) An additional inspection fee of $50.00 shall be required of the applicant.
(3) It shall be unlawful to move the structure within the City limits until:
(A) it is inspected, and
(B) receives approval from the building official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/418
(4) An additional $10 per mile to be traveled will be required as part of the inspection fee if the
building official must travel more than 15 miles to inspect the structure.
SECTION 5.00: MINIMAL RESIDENTIAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
Each applicant for a building permit to construct a residential building shall ensure that, at a minimum, the
following requirements are met:
(a) Sanitary facilities required. Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water
and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained in good sanitary working condition free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
(b) Location of sanitary facilities:
(1) All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible
to the occupants of such dwelling unit. The tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a
room affording privacy to the user and such room shall have a minimum floor space of 30
square feet (2.8 square meters), with no dimension less than four feet (1.2 meters).
(2) Bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or other
protected or enclosed areas, not including kitchens or other food preparation areas.
(c) Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have connected to the kitchen sink,
lavatory and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be
supplied through an approved distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
(d) Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which are
properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn as required by the
Standard Plumbing Code, to not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (49 degrees Celsius).
(e) Electric lights and outlets required.
(1) Every habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote convenience
outlets;
(2) Bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one wall-switch controlled ceiling or wall-type
light fixture;
(3) In kitchens, three separate and remote convenience outlets shall be provided, and a wall
or ceiling type light fixture controlled by a wall switch shall be required;
(4) Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall
contain at least one electric fixture;
(5) In bathrooms, the electric light fixture shall be controlled by a wall switch;
(6) In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be
provided at least one convenience outlet;
(7) Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and
safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner;
and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/418
(8) Improperly insulated electrical wires or excessive multiple connections per outlet are
specifically prohibited.
(f) Minimum requirements for electrical systems. Every electrical outlet and fixture required by
this Chapter shall be installed, maintained and connected to a source of electric power in accordance
with the provisions of the electrical code of the city.
(g) Foundation. The building foundation shall be made of concrete or concrete piers.
(h) Exterior walls:
(1) Every exterior wall of a dwelling unit shall be free of holes, breaks, or loose or rotting
boards or timbers, to the extent that such conditions might admit rain or dampness to the
interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building.
(2) All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
(i) Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and maintained in a safe manner and have no defects
which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building.
(j) Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have:
(1) safe, unobstructed means of egress;
(2) minimum ceiling height of seven feet; and
(3) leading to a safe and open space at ground level.
(k) Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stairway, porch and any
appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may
cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(l) Windows and doors. Every intended opening in a structure shall be covered with a:
(1) window;
(2) exterior door;
(3) basement;
(4) cellar door; or
(5) hatchway -
as applicable, which shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and
shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
(m) Interior floor, walls and ceilings. Every:
(1) floor;
(2) interior wall; and
(3) ceiling -
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/418
shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be
placed thereon.
(n) Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained structurally
sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying loads
which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
SECTION 6.00: ENFORCEMENT.
(a) If a person constructs a residential structure or moves a single-family residential structure within the City
limits, and that structure does not meet or exceed the minimal requirements set forth under this Code, then the
building official shall cause further construction to cease unless that construction is to repair deficiencies. No
further non-remedial construction shall be allowed until all deficiencies have been removed, and approved by
the building official.
(b) If the deficiencies are not cured after 120 days after construction has been ceased. The building official
shall determine whether such construction constitutes a nuisance. Any portion of the structure that has been
previously erected shall be removed or demolished at the expense of the owner if determined to be a nuisance.
(c) In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City and its officers shall have the right to enjoin:
(1) any violation of this Code; or
(2) enforce any order as provided by application to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1999 Unified Development Code)
SECTION 7.00: PERMIT FEES
(a) Building Fees:
Total Valuation
$1,000 and less No fee, unless inspection required, in which case a
$15.00 fee for each inspection will be required.
$1,000 to $50,000 $15.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $50,000.00.
$50,001 to $100,000 $260.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/418
$100,001 to $500,000 $460.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000.00.
$500,001.00 and up $1,660.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for
each additional thousand or fraction thereof.
Plan Checking Fees The fee shall be one-half of the building permit fee
and shall be in addition to the building permit fee.
This fee shall only apply to commercial buildings.
(b) Moving Fees: For the moving of any building or structure $100.00
(c) Demolition Fees: For the demolition of any building or
structure
$100.00
(d) Plumbing Fees:
Issuance of Permit $15.00
Reinspection $25.00
Installation, Alteration or Repair of Water Piping $10.00
Sewer Tap $185.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/418
Septic Tank $25.00
Grease Trap $25.00
Sand Trap $25.00
Lint Trap $25.00
Kitchen Sink $5.00
Garbage Disposal $5.00
Dishwasher $5.00
Toilet $5.00
Lavatory $5.00
Shower $5.00
Bathtub $5.00
Tub/Shower $5.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/418
Laundry Sink $5.00
Floor Drain $5.00
Washing Machine Drain $5.00
Urinal $5.00
Fountain $5.00
Water Heater $5.00
A/C Drain $5.00
Vacuum Breakers or Backflow Protection Devices $5.00
Gas Piping $10.00
Gas Test Inspection $10.00
(e) Electrical Fees:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/418
Issuance of Permit $15.00
Reinspection $25.00
Working Clearance $25.00
Temporary Pole $20.00
New Service
1. 100 Amps or less $40.00
2. 125 Amps $50.00
3. 150 Amps $60.00
4. 200 Amps $70.00
5. 250 Amps $80.00
6. More than 250 Amps $100.00
Change of or Increase Service $20.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/418
Exterior Vents $2.50
Signs $3.00
Range $3.00
Dryer $3.00
Water Heater $3.00
Dishwasher $3.00
Garbage Disposal $3.00
A/C Window Unit $3.00
(f) Mechanical Fees:
Issuance of Permit $15.00
Reinspection $25.00
All Heating, Ventilation, Duct Work, Air-Conditioning and
Refrigeration Systems:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/418
1. 1 - 2 Tons $20.00 for the first ton
plus $20.00 for the
additional ton. A
fraction of a ton is
$10.00.
2. 2.1 - 4 Tons $40.00 for the first 2
tons plus $10.00 for
each additional ton. A
fraction of a ton is
$5.00.
3. 4.1 - 10 Tons $60.00 for the first 4
tons plus $5.00 for
each additional ton. A
fraction of a ton is
$2.50.
4. More Than 10 Tons $90.00 for the first 10
tons plus $1.00 for
each additional ton or
fraction thereof.
All Boilers (based on BTU input)
33,000 BTU (1 BHP) to 165,000 BTU (5 BHP) $10.00
165,001 BTU (5 BHP) to 330,000 BTU (10 BHP) $15.00
330,001 BTU (10 BHP) to 1,165,000 BTU (52 BHP) $20.00
1,165,001 BTU (52 BHP) to 3,330,000 BTU (98 BHP) $30.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/418
More Than 3,330,000 BTU $40.00
(Ordinance 03-010, adopted 9/23/03)
CHAPTER 5 - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
SECTION 1.00: APPLICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
(a) The landscaping requirements of this chapter apply to any premises on which construction occurs for
which a building permit is required, except as follows:
(1) The remodeling of the interior of a building or the facade of a building that does not alter the
location of exterior walls; or
(2) The expansion of a Single-Family Dwelling.
(b) Any requirement of this chapter that applies to a Front Yard also applies to the Street Side Yard, unless
otherwise specified. Any other requirement of this chapter that applies to a Side Yard does not apply to a Street
Side Yard, unless specified otherwise.
(c) Whenever this chapter imposes a requirement based on the classification of a premises as a Residential or
Nonresidential use, the requirement shall also apply to the portions of a premises used for Residential uses and
Nonresidential uses located in a planned unit development, as determined by the Planning Director.
SECTION 2.00: LANDSCAPE PLAN, DEVIATIONS AND APPEALS.
(a) For any premises to be developed for Multifamily Dwellings or Nonresidential use, a landscape plan must
be submitted to the City showing how the requirements of this chapter are to be met. The required plan must be
submitted on sheets of a size not to exceed 24" x 36". If the plan meets the requirements of this chapter, the
Planning Director may approve the plan.
(b) Where improvements are proposed to a developed premises devoted to a Nonresidential use that was
developed prior to the effective date of this chapter and does not meet the landscaping requirements of this
chapter, the Planning Director may approve a landscape plan with deviations from the requirements of this
chapter or impose alternative requirements that serve the purpose and intent of this chapter, if the requirements
of this chapter cannot be reasonably complied with because of the existing developed conditions.
(c) In approving a landscape plan, the Planning Director may allow or require minor deviations from the
requirements of this chapter whenever a literal application of a requirement to a premises would, because of
unusual circumstances or situations not generally common to other premises, not achieve the purpose or intent of
the regulation or cause an undesired result.
SECTION 3.00: COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) All landscaping requirements of this chapter, including the requirements contained in an approved
landscape plan, must be met prior to and as a condition for the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any
premises to which these regulations apply. If weather conditions, scheduling delays, or similar conditions delay
compliance, the Planning Director may grant a temporary Certificate of Occupancy if the owner or person in
control of the premises enters into an agreement with the City agreeing to comply with the landscaping
requirements within a specified time, not to exceed six months.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/418
(b) All vegetation required to be installed must, after installation, be maintained in good condition. If the
required vegetation becomes diseased, deteriorated, or dies, the owner of the premises must replace the
vegetation within 90 days of written notice from the City.
(c) All fences required by this chapter must be maintained by the owner in good condition so that there are no
damaged or missing boards or parts, all structural supports are sound and sufficient to maintain the fence in its
original upright condition, and any surface treatment, including paint or stucco, is substantially maintained in its
original appearance so that there [is] no graffiti, no noticeable cracking, discoloration, or similar surface
blemishes or defects.
SECTION 4.00: RESIDENTIAL FRONT YARD LANDSCAPING.
For any premises located in a Residential District, the premises must have one shade tree located within 15 feet
of the Front Lot Line for each 60 feet of lot width or portion thereof, measured along the Front Lot Line. Trees
may be clustered or spaced linearly and need not be placed evenly at 60-foot intervals. For premises developed
for multifamily dwellings, one additional tree must be planted in the Front Yard of the premises for each
dwelling unit.
SECTION 5.00: NONRESIDENTIAL USE LANDSCAPING.
The following landscape requirements apply to all premises developed for a Nonresidential Use:
(1) If the premises abutting the opposite side of the street is used or zoned for Residential Use, the
premises must have one shade tree located in the Front Yard for each 30 feet of lot width, or portion
thereof, measured along the front lot line. If the premises abutting the opposite side of the street is
used or zoned for Nonresidential Use, the premises must contain one shade tree for every 50 feet of
lot width, or portion thereof, measured along the front lot line. The trees may be clustered or spaced
linearly and need not be placed evenly.
(2) If the premises abuts another premises used for residential purposes, the premises must have an
opaque screen at least eight feet in height located along the abutting lot line, from the front building
line to the rear lot line. The fence is not required if a comparable fence is already existing on the
abutting residential property.
(3) All portions of the ground located in the front yard or the street side yard of the premises which
are not covered by driveways, parking lots, and similar permanent improvements, must be
landscaped.
(4) All side yards must contain a six-foot-wide landscaped area extending from the front lot line to
the rear lot line.
SECTION 6.00: FRONT YARD PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
Any premises zoned or used for Nonresidential Use that contains a parking lot or vehicle use area within a front
yard or street side yard must have a 15-foot-wide landscaped area located between all portions of the parking lot,
including a vehicle use area, and the public street. The landscaped area must have a continuous hedge, fence or
berm of a minimum height of three feet to screen the parking lot and vehicle use area from the street. If fences
are used to provide screening, one shrub or vine must be planted on the street side of the fence or berm for each
ten feet of street frontage, but the plants need not be spaced evenly apart. The remainder of the landscaped area
must contain plants, grass, or ground cover. All other portions of the front yard lying between the parking lot and
front lot line which are not improved, must be landscaped.
SECTION 7.00: SIDE AND REAR YARD PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/418
(a) Any premises used or zoned for a nonresidential use that contains a parking lot or vehicle use area in a side
yard or rear yard that abuts a premises used or zoned for a residential use, must have a continuous hedge, fence
or with a minimum height of eight feet, located between the parking lot, including a vehicle use area, and the lot
line. The area required to be screened must also contain one tree for each thirty linear feet of landscaping or
screening, or portion thereof.
(b) Any premises used or zoned for nonresidential use that contains a parking lot or vehicle use area in a side
or rear yard that abuts a premises used or zoned for nonresidential use, must have a screen of hedges, fences or
berms, of a minimum height of three feet, located between the parking lot, including the vehicle use area, and
the side or rear lot line so as to provide screening for 25% of the parking lot and vehicle use area. The required
screening may be grouped and dispersed randomly and need not be spaced evenly. The area required to be
screened must also contain one tree for each fifty linear feet of screened area, or portion thereof.
(c) All plants used to satisfy the requirements of this section must be located in landscaped areas that are at
least 2-1/2 feet in width.
(d) Each required tree must be planted in a landscaped area of at least 36 square feet, with a minimum
dimension of six feet.
SECTION 8.00: INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
Any premises containing a parking lot that has more than ten parking spaces must meet the following
landscaping requirements for the parking lot:
(a) For each twenty parking spaces, or fraction thereof, landscaped areas containing a total of at
least 162 square feet must be provided within the parking lot. Landscaped areas or islands must be a
minimum of six feet in width, measured from the back of curb, and be dispersed throughout the
parking lot. One shade tree must be provided for each required landscaped island. The remaining area
or island must be landscaped with plants not exceeding three feet in height.
(b) Landscaped islands must be protected from vehicle intrusion by curbs or similar structures. The
front of a vehicle may encroach upon the island when the area is a minimum of six feet in depth and
protected by wheel stops or curbs. Two feet of the landscaped area may be counted as part of the
required depth of the abutting parking space.
SECTION 9.00: ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SCREENING.
The following landscape and screening requirements apply to premises use for Multifamily Dwellings or a
Nonresidential Use:
(a) Areas used to hold refuse containers must be screened from the public view with a solid
masonry fence not less than six feet in height.
(b) Exterior ground-mounted or building-mounted equipment to serve as a building, including
mechanical equipment, utility meter banks, and heating and cooling equipment must be screened
from public view with landscaping or with an architectural treatment compatible with building
architecture.
(c) All rooftop equipment must be screened from the public view with an architectural treatment
which is compatible with the building architecture. The methods of screening rooftop equipment
include the use of parapet walls and the encasement of partition screens.
(d) All materials, products, or equipment which are stored outside of a fully enclosed building,
other than for display, must be entirely screened from the public view.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/418
(e) For the purposes of this section, “screened from the public view” means not visible at eye level
from any point on the lot line of the abutting premises or from any point on a street.
SECTION 10.00: TREE PRESERVATION.
(a) The landscape plan required by this chapter must show the location of all existing trees with a caliper
equal to or greater than six inches, wooded areas, areas with dense shrubbery, and which trees and plants will be
preserved and which will be removed.
(b) Improvements must be designed whenever reasonably possible to preserve existing trees. The Planning
Director may approve a landscape plan that provides for the removal of existing trees where it is determined by
the Planning Director that the development cannot reasonably preserve the trees. For each existing tree that is
preserved, the owner may receive credit for two trees that are otherwise required to be installed to comply with
this chapter.
(c) If the Planning Director approves the removal of an existing tree, the landscape plan must provide for the
planting of two replacement trees of like type for each existing tree to be removed. The replacement trees are in
addition to any other trees required to be planted by this chapter.
(d) Whenever one or more existing trees, or existing shrubs provide an effective and desirable buffer or screen
for a proposed use or development, the Planning Director may require that the existing trees or shrubs or
portions thereof, be preserved if the preservation can be accomplished without undue interference with the
development of the premises. The Planning Director will credit any existing trees or shrubs which are preserved
against any requirements for trees, shrubs, or screening as provided in this chapter, if the preserved trees or
shrubs substantially serve the purpose of the requirement.
SECTION 11.00: DESIGN PLANTING AND CRITERIA.
(a) Any tree, shrub, plant, fence, or screen installed to satisfy the requirements of this chapter must meet the
following requirements:
(1) Trees must be a minimum of seven feet in overall height immediately after planting and must
have an average mature crown spread of at least 15 feet in diameter. Trees having an average mature
crown spread of less than 15 feet in diameter may be grouped in sufficient number so as to create the
equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread. Any trees or plants used to meet the requirements of this
chapter are recommended to be one of the preferred trees or plants listed in Table A.
(2) Shrubs must have a minimum of two feet in height when measured immediately after planting.
When used for screening purposes, the shrubs must be planted in triangular centers and not be
separated by more than three feet. ‘Whenever hedges are used to meet a screening requirement, the
plants must be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen
within one year of planting.
(3) Vines must be a minimum of 30 inches in height immediately after planting and may be used in
conjunction with fences to meet physical barrier requirements.
(4) Ground covers used in place of grass, in whole or in part, must be planted to present a finished
appearance and reasonable complete coverage within three months after planting.
(5) Grass must be of a species normally grown as permanent lawns in the Texas Rio Grande Valley
Region. Solid sod must be used to provide coverage and soil stabilization in swales or other areas
subject to erosion.
(6) Detention and retention basins and ponds must be landscaped with shade and ornamental trees,
shrubbery, hedges, or other plants.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/418
(7) Indigenous and drought-resistant plant material should be used, but if not used, an irrigation
system must be installed or a watering source made available within 100 feet.
(8) Any fence installed to meet the requirements of this chapter must, unless otherwise specified,
be constructed of wood, stone, brick, masonry, stucco, or concrete.
TABLE A
PREFERRED LANDSCAPE MATERIALS
Preferred trees and shrubs to be used to meet the city landscaping standards include, but are not specifically
restricted to:
Plant Type Botanical Name Common Name
Shade Trees
Quercus Virginiana Live Oak; Encino
Celtis Laevigata Sugar Hackberry; Palo
Blanco
Ulmus Crassifolia Cedar Elm; Olmo
Pithecellobium Ebano Texas Ebony; Ebano
Leucaena Pulverulenta Tepeguaje; Lead Tree
Prospis Glandulosa Honey Mesquite
Fraxinum Berlandieria Rio Grande Ash; Fresno
Ehretia Anacua Anacua; Sugarberry
Plant Type Botanical Name Common Name
Ornamental Trees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/418
Lagerstroemia Indica Crepe Myrtle
Celtis Pallida Granjeno, Spiny Hackberry
Pithecellobium Pallens Tenaza
Acacia Smallii Texas Huisache
Acacia Berlandieri Guajillo
Parkinsonia Aculeata Retama; Lluvia de Oro
Cercidium Texanum Texas Paloverde
Guaiacum Angustifolium Soapbush; Guayacan
Esenbeckia Runyonii Jopoy
Sapindus Drumrnondii Western Soapberry,
Jaboncillo
Condalia Hookeri Brasil, Bluewood
Bumelia Celastrina Coma Del Sur; Saffron-plum
Diospyros Texana Chapote; Persimmon
Cordia Boissieri Mexican Olive; Anacahuita
Sophora Secundiflora Mountain Laurel
Shrubs for Screening
Photinia Fraseri Oleander
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/418
Leucophyllum Frutescens Purple Sage; Cenizo
Bouganvillea
Xylosma Flexuosa Holly; Coronillo
Acacia Rigidula Black Brush
Citherexylum Berlandieri Tamaulipan Fiddlewood
Shrubs for Mass Plantings
Viguiera Stenoloba Skeletonbush
Schaefferia Cuneifola Desert Yaupon; Capul
Coursetia Axillaris Texas Baby-Bonnets
Sophora Tomentosa Yellow Sophora; Tambalisa
Salvia Ballotiflora Blue Sage; Mejorana
Malpighia Glabra Manzanita
Croton Humilis Low Croton
Ground Cover Plantings
Lantana Horrida Texas Lantana
Buchloe Dactyloides Buffalo Grass
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/418
Verbena
Ruellia Corzoi Ruellia
Vines
Passiflora Foetida Blue Passion Vine
Passiflora Filipes Yellow Passion Vine
(Ordinance 2002-002 adopted 5/8/02)
CHAPTER 6 - OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I - RESPONSIBILITY FOR OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES
The provision for and maintenance of off-street parking facilities shall be the joint and several responsibility of
the operator and owner of the structure and/or land on which is located the use for which off-street parking
facilities are required.
ARTICLE II - MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 1.00: MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS.
(a) It shall be unlawful to issue a permit for:
(1) the erection of a new structure; or
(2) building, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, moving or installation) the expansion, enlargement
or change in use unless the Planning Department has reviewed the off-street parking plan and has
approved the permit conditioned upon the designation of off-street parking facilities.
(b) There shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected, or altered to increase its floor area,
off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
SECTION 2.00: RESIDENTIAL USES.
(a) Dwellings: Including single-family and duplexes. One parking space for each dwelling unit.
(b) Multifamily Dwellings: One and a half parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
(c) Rooming or Boarding House: One parking space for each two sleeping rooms.
(d) Sanitarium, Convalescent Home, Home for children, the Aging or Similar Institution: One parking space
for each six beds.
SECTION 3.00: PUBLIC FACILITIES.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/418
(a) Private Club or Lodge: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
(b) Church or Temple: One parking space for every five seats in the main auditorium.
(c) School: (Except High School or College) one parking space for each ten seats in the auditorium or main
assembly room or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater.
(d) High School: One parking space for each eight seats in the main auditorium or three spaces for each
classroom, whichever is greater, and one space for each two employees.
(e) County Club or Golf Club: Five parking spaces for each hole.
(f) Community Center, Library, Museum or Art Gallery: Ten parking spaces, plus one additional space for
each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 sq. ft.
(g) Hospital: One parking space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.
(h) Theater or Auditorium (except school): One parking space for each four seats or bench seating places, or
(a) one space per 800 sq. ft. of outdoor area, (b) one space per 200 sq. ft. of indoor recreational area exceeding
2,000 sq. ft. and (c) one space per 100 sq. ft. of associated indoor use whichever is greater.
(i) Sports Arena, Stadium, or Gymnasium: One parking space for each five seats or bench seating places.
(j) Hotel: One parking space for each guest room two sleeping rooms or suites plus one space for each 200 sq.
ft. of commercial floor area contained therein including convention facilities.
(k) Tourist Home, Cabin or Motel: One parking space for each sleeping room or suite.
(l) Dance Hall, Assembly or Exhibition Hall without Fixed Seats: One parking space per 800 sq. ft. of outdoor
recreational area and one space for each 200 square feet of indoor recreational area, and one space per 100 sq. ft.
of associated indoor use.
SECTION 4.00: COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL
(a) Business or Professional Office, Studio: Three parking spaces, plus one additional parking spaces for each
400 square feet of floor area over 1,000.
(b) Manufacturing, wholesaling, and processing establishments: One space per 800 sq. ft. gross floor area plus
one parking space for each two employees on the working shift.
(c) Warehousing: One space per 2000 sq. ft. gross floor area.
(d) Miniwarehouses: Three (3) spaces per office area.
(e) Restaurants, cafeterias, delicatessens, and other food serving establishments, except drive-in
establishments: One space per 100 sq. ft. of gross area.
(f) Drive-in eating establishments, where food or drink is served to customers in their vehicles: Two (2) spaces
per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area with a minimum of 20 spaces for on-premises consumption.
(g) Automotive, lumber, nursery (plant) and affiliated activities: One space per 200 sq. ft. of gross retail
sales/services floor area, and one space per 800 sq. ft. of enclosed storage and/or display area, and one space per
200 sq. ft. of open sales/storage/display area.
(h) Bank, Medical or Dental Clinic: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/418
(i) Bowling Alley: Five parking spaces for each alley and additional parking spaces for each accessory use to
be determined accordingly.
(j) Mortuary of [or] Funeral Home: One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space in slumber
rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms and one space per 100 sq. ft. of associated indoor use.
(k) Retail Store or Personal Service Establishment: One parking space for each 200 feet of floor area
(excluding theaters).
(l) Furniture or Appliance Store, Showroom Sales and Service Store, Wholesale Establishments, and Service
Clothing or Shoe Repair or Service Shop: Two parking spaces, plus one additional parking space for each 300
square feet of floor area over 1,000.
(m) Gasoline Dispensing Establishments: Two parking spaces per nozzle (in addition to the off-street parking
required under other provisions of the Ordinance).
(n) Printing Establishment: Two parking spaces, plus one additional parking space for each 300 square feet of
floor area.
ARTICLE III - COMPUTING NUMBER OF SPACES
In computing the number of such parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
SECTION 1.00: FLOOR AREA.
The gross floor area of the specific use.
SECTION 1.01: Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces shall be construed to be the nearest whole
number.
SECTION 1.02: The parking space required for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as
required for a use of similar nature.
SECTION 1.03: If a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this Code is:
(a) changed or enlarged in floor area;
(b) number of employees;
(c) number of dwelling units; or
(d) seating capacity or otherwise -
to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces
shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the
effective date of this Code is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area used, said building or use
shall then and thereafter comply with the off-street parking requirements set forth.
SECTION 1.04: In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal to the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
ARTICLE IV - SPECIFICATION FOR PARKING SPACES
SECTION 1.00: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/418
All parking spaces required shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served where:
(a) an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where
such spaces are provided collectively; or
(b) used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments.
The required spaces may be located elsewhere so long as the distance between the two lots does not exceed 300
feet from the institutional building served and does exceed 500 feet from any other nonresidential building
served.
SECTION 1.01: Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for:
(a) theaters;
(b) bowling alleys;
(c) dance halls
(d) nightclubs; or cafes; and
(e) up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium
may be provided and used jointly by:
(1) banks;
(2) offices;
(3) retail stores;
(4) repair shops;
(5) service establishments; and
similar uses which are not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those
listed in (a) through (e); provided, however, that written agreement is properly executed and
filed as specified below.
SECTION 1.02: In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building
or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby
assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned,
approved as to form by the City Attorney, and filed with the application for a building permit.
ARTICLE V - REQUIREMENTS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING
SECTION 1.00: TURNAROUNDS.
All parking areas containing three (3) or more parking spaces shall include a turnaround which is designed and
located so that vehicles can enter and exit the parking area without backing onto a public right-of-way.
SECTION 2.00: DIMENSIONS.
Off-street parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of:
(a) nine (9) feet in width; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/418
(b) eighteen (18) feet in length (depth of stall perpendicular to aisle) -
exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps and other appurtenances and except as provided in Subsection
(b) [Section 3.00].
SECTION 3.00: COMPACT VEHICLES.
Up to thirty (30) percent of the required parking spaces may be designated for use by compact vehicles, with
minimum dimensions of eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in length. Compact vehicles parking areas
shall be identified by either of the following methods:
(a) Posting signs a minimum of eighteen by twenty-four (18 x 24) inches in size at each end of the
designated parking area.
(b) Individually marking each parking space surface with lettering a minimum of six (6) inches in
size.
SECTION 4.00: AISLE WIDTH.
The minimum width of and depth of stalls, and width of access aisles (for one-way and two-way operation)
internal to a parking lot or structure shall be as follows:
Parking Direction of
Parking
Width of Stall Depth of Stall
Perpendicular
to Aisle
Width of Aisle
(1-way and 2-
way)
30 Drive In 9 18.0 12/19
45 Drive In 9 18.0 12/19
60 Drive In 9 18.0 20/20
75 Drive In 9 18.0 22/22
90 Drive In 9 18.0 25/25
SECTION 5.00: USE OF PAVED ALLEYS.
When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width and area of said alley (if
improved as required herein) may be considered in satisfying the maneuvering space requirement.
SECTION 6.00: EXCESS FACILITIES.
Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of these requirements, or provided but not required by
this Chapter, the off-street parking facilities shall nonetheless comply with the minimum requirements for offstreet
parking and maneuvering space herein specified.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/418
ARTICLE VI - SHARING OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES
Either part or all of the required off-street parking facilities may be located on a site other than the one occupied
by the use of structure requiring such facilities.
(a) Cooperative parking plan. Two (2) or more uses may share the same off-street parking facilities and each
use may be considered as having provided such shared space individually. Such shared parking space, however,
shall not be considered as having been provided individually unless the schedules of operation of all such uses
are such that none of the uses sharing the facilities require the off-street parking facilities at the same time. This
arrangement for sharing of off-street parking facilities shall be known as a cooperative parking plan.
(b) Application for approval of cooperative parking plan. An application for approval of a cooperative
[parking plan] shall be filed with the Director of Public Works by the owner of the entire land area to be
included within the cooperative parking plan, the owner or owners of all structures then existing on such land
area, and all parties having a legal interest in such land area and structures. Sufficient evidence to establish the
status of applicants as owners or parties in interest shall be provided. The application shall include plans
showing the location of the uses or structures for which off-street parking facilities are required, the location of
the off-street parking facilities, and the schedule of times used by those sharing in common.
(c) Registration of cooperative parking plan. The application shall be reviewed for approval or disapproval by
the Directors of Planning and Public Works. Upon approval, a copy of the plan shall be registered among the
records of the Directors of Public Works and shall thereafter be binding upon the applicants, their heirs,
successors and assigns. The registration shall limit and control the issuance and validity of permits and
certificates and shall restrict, limit, and control the use and operation of all land and structures included within
such cooperative parking plan.
(d) Amendment or withdrawal of cooperative parking plan. Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the
same limitations and requirements by which the cooperative parking plan was approved and registered, any such
plan may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, if all land and structures remaining under
such plan comply with all the conditions [and all land and structures] withdrawn from such plan comply with the
regulations of this chapter.
ARTICLE VII - LOADING SPACE
SECTION 1.00: WHEN APPLICABLE.
No structure shall be designed, erected, altered, used, or occupied unless the off-street truck loading facilities
herein required are provided. In the event that structures are enlarged, expanded, or changed, the structures shall
not be used, occupied, or operated unless there is provided at least the amount of off-street truck loading
facilities that would be required if the increment were a separate structure.
SECTION 2.00: WHEN REQUIRED.
Truck loading facilities, shall be required in all zones for structures containing uses devoted to businesses,
industry, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, processing, offices, professional buildings, hotels, multiplefamily
dwellings, hospitals, airports, railroad terminals, and any buildings of a commercial nature.
SECTION 3.00: RESPONSIBILITY.
The provision for and maintenance of the off-street truck loading facilities shall be the joint and several
responsibility of the operator and owner of the land upon which the structure requiring the facilities is located.
SECTION 4.00: MINIMUM REQUIREMENT.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/418
Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage,
warehouse, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading space in accordance with the
following requirements:
One designated loading space is required for a nonresidential building with total floor area in
excess of 10,000 square feet and for each additional 15,000 square feet, or fraction thereof.
SECTION 5.00: TYPES AND LOCATION.
(a) Types. There shall be two sizes of off-street truck loading spaces designated “large” and “small.”
(1) Large spaces. Each large space shall have an overhead clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet,
shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, and shall be at least fifty (50) feet long, exclusive of access or
maneuvering area, platform, and other appurtenances;
(2) Small spaces. Each small space shall have an overhead clearance of at least ten (10) feet, shall
be at least eight (8) feet wide, and shall be at least twenty (20) feet long, exclusive of access or
maneuvering area, platform and other appurtenances.
(b) Location. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be located on the same lot on which the structure for
which they are provided is located; provided, however, that facilities provided under cooperative arrangement as
hereinafter permitted may be located on another site not more than three hundred (300) feet from the structure
for which they are provided.
(c) When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width and area of said alley
may be used to satisfy the maneuvering space requirement.
SECTION 6.00: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
Off-street truck facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following
specifications:
(a) Drainage and surfacing. Areas shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete,
asphaltic concrete, or asphalt, and maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris.
(b) Protective screen fencing. Areas shall be provided with protective screen fencing such that
occupants of adjacent structures are not unreasonably disturbed by the movement of vehicles either
during the day or night.
(c) Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably disturb
occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic;
(d) Entrances and exits. Areas shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize
traffic congestion.
SECTION 7.00: COMBINED FACILITIES.
Requirements for the provision of off-street truck loading facilities with respect to two (2) or more structures
may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the requisite number of spaces for each use in a common truck
loading facility, cooperatively established and operated; provided, however, that the total number of spaces
designed is not less than the sum of the individual requirements unless, in the opinion of the individual
requirements, [sic] unless in the opinion of the Director of Planning, a lesser number of spaces will be adequate,
taking into account the respective times of usage of the truck loading facilities by the individual users, the
character of the merchandise, and related factors. In order to eliminate a multiplicity of individual facilities, to
conserve space where space is at a premium, and to promote orderly development generally, the Director of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/418
Planning is hereby authorized to plan and group off-street truck loading facilities cooperatively for a number of
structures requiring such facilities within close proximity to one another in a given area in such manner as to
obtain maximum efficiency and capacity, provided consent thereto is obtained from the participants in the
cooperative plan.
SECTION 8.00: MINIMUM TRUCK LOADING SPACES.
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure Required No. of Spaces
up to and including 12,500 1 (small)
12,501 up to and including 25,000 2 (small)
25,001 up to and including 40,000 1 (large)
40,001 up to and including 100,000 2 (large)
For each additional 80,000 over 100,000 1 (large)
SECTION 9.00: WAIVER.
The Director of Public Works is authorized to waive the off-street loading requirements for structures that are
required to provide and maintain fewer than five (5) off-street parking spaces, or any other structure if the design
and the proposed use of the structure shows no need of off-street loading.
ARTICLE VIII - ACCESS DRIVEWAYS TO STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
SECTION 1.00: PERMITS.
To secure a permit to construct a private driveway or revise an existing driveway, the applicant shall contact the
Planning Department, at which time details of the permit will be initiated. Design layout and construction details
shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review. The following information shall be provided by the
applicant prior to the processing of the permit:
(a) Vicinity map showing location of property respect to arterial streets, railroads, etc.;
(b) Map showing streets, alleys, rights-of-way, and all utilities, together with the width and
location of existing driveways, on both sides of the street, for a distance of 150 feet beyond property
lines;
(c) Description of the proposed use of the property;
(d) Location and geometric of proposed access points and the use of each point (i.e. entrance only,
exit only, or entrance and exit);
(e) Location and size of all existing and proposed buildings;
(f) Proposed parking arrangements and number of spaces; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/418
(g) Location and size of all permanent signs.
When:
(a) the permit has been prepared; and
(b) a statement agreeing to comply with its terms, design and construction requirements has been
signed by the applicant and Code Enforcement Officer -
The permit shall become valid.
Exception: If access or exit driveway is to be constructed on a State or Federal Highway, the Texas Department
of Transportation shall also approve and sign the permit before it becomes valid. Once the applicant's permit has
been approved by the City and the Texas Department of Transportation, and received by the applicant, he or she
may begin construction as per permit.
All permits for the use of access drives shall be considered limited use permits and must be reapplied for upon
every change in [use and] a certificate of occupancy for commercial and industrial property will not be made
until the access drive permits for that property have been issued.
SECTION 2.00: PERMIT FEES.
Permit fees shall be based on total cost of construction of curb, gutter and parking area. Permit fees are $10.00
minimum, plus $3.00 for every $1,000.00 of construction or a fractional part of each $1,000.00 cost of
construction.
SECTION 3.00: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Definitions: The following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
(1) Applications: Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or lessee, who shall
represent all parties in interest, and such permits shall be only for bona fide purpose of securing or
changing access to his property.
(2) Commercial Driveways: A commercial driveway is an entrance and/or exit from any
commercial business or similar type of use. The maximum width of any one opening to be 45 feet.
(3) Public Access Driveway: A public access driveway includes all approaches to a public right-ofway
[from] schools, churches, governmental buildings and other uses of a similar nature. The
maximum width of any one [opening] shall be 45 feet.
(4) Private Driveways: A private driveway is an entrance to and/or exit from a single-family
dwelling and shall not exceed 25 feet in width.
(5) Materials: The permit holder shall furnish all materials and labor necessary for the construction
of access and/or exit as authorized by the permit. The cost of relocation of any City-owned utility as
may be necessary to complete the requirements of the permit will be paid by the permit holder. All
materials shall be of accepted quality and shall be subject to inspection and approval of the City.
(6) Maintenance and Inspection: The City reserves the right to inspect these installations at the
time of construction and at all times thereafter, and to require such changes and repairs as may be
considered necessary to provide protection of life and property on or adjacent to the City Street or
State Highway. The cost of any changes, repairs and maintenance of driveways and/or exits will be
the responsibility of the permit holder or lessee.
(7) Design and Construction:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/418
(A) All parts of entrances and/or exits, including the radii, shall be confined within the
grantee's property frontage.
(B) Pedestrian use of driveways over City and State right-of-way shall be considered when
designing commercial and public access driveways.
(C) Location and design of access for street and highway traffic and for the users of the
driveway. If in the opinion of the Planning Department the proposed driveway does not meet
these conditions, no permit shall be issued.
(D) If a permit is denied by the Planning Department, the applicant may file an appeal in
writing with the Department for a hearing. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the
filing of said appeal.
(8) General Requirements.
(A) Drainage and surfacing. Areas shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with
concrete, asphaltic concrete, or asphalt and maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust,
trash and debris.
(B) Wheel guards. Boundary or perimeter areas shall be provided with wheel guards or
bumper guards, so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the property line
of the parking area.
(C) Protective screen fencing. Areas shall be provided with protective screen fencing so that
occupants of adjacent structures are not unreasonably disturbed by the movement of vehicles
either during the day or night.
(D) Lighting. Facilities shall be arranged so that the source of light is concealed from public
view and from adjacent residential properties and does not interfere with traffic. To the extent
reasonably and economically possible, contents shall be underground and overhead wires shall
be prohibited.
(E) Entrances and exits. Facilities shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to
minimize traffic congestion.
(F) Prohibition of other uses. Facilities shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, or
servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies.
(G) Limitation on size of vehicles. In residential districts facilities shall be used only by
vehicles up to three-fourths (3/4) ton.
SECTION 4.00: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
Off-street parking facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following
specifications.
(a) Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed of standard commercial grade concrete. Laydown
gutter in public and commercial grade driveway shall be a minimum of 7" thick and shall be
reinforced with 6 gauge 6 x 6 wire mesh.
(b) Where existing curb and gutter is installed and the permit holder has been granted a permit for
a new commercial driveway, only the curb shall be removed and new curb returns shall be installed.
Minimum radii of curb returns to be 10 feet. The City may require valley gutter (for surface drainage
purposes) to be replaced if broken or damaged to a point that it is not in serviceable condition. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/418
City, at its election, may require the installation of curb and gutter based upon a review of the
location and use of the development and the presence of drainage and facilities.
(c) Where driveways cross existing sidewalks, a concrete apron with curb returns shall be installed
and designed so as not to cause danger to pedestrians who use sidewalks.
ARTICLE IX - PARKING AREA PAVING
Paving of the parking area shall conform to the following requirements:
SECTION 1.00: ASPHALT PAVING.
The subgrade shall be so shaped so that the underlying sections of the base material and pavement will direct
drainage toward the center of the lot and then out of the drive. Generally, the shape shall be 1/4" per foot in the
direction of drainage. The subgrade, when shaped and to the proper grade, shall then be compacted to 90% of
the standard proctor density. Following compaction of the subgrade sufficient caliche shall be added so that it
can be shaped and compacted to ninety-five (95) percent of standard proctor density and be of at least six (6)
inches in thickness in all areas.
The wearing surface shall be composed of 125 # per square yard asphalt surface treatment and may be either
cold mix LRA, or hot mix.
SECTION 2.00: CONCRETE PAVING.
Concrete paving shall be of a minimum of 4" thick and shall be reinforced with 6 gauge 6 x 6 wire mesh.
COMMENTARY
It is the intent of these regulations to provide for the comprehensive enforcement of its zoning regulations and
major thoroughfare plan as integral elements of the comprehensive plan.
The City Commission recognizes that all too often in the past the lack of stringent off-street parking
requirements has resulted in public thoroughfares being relied on by the public to park their motor vehicles. This
restricts the flow of traffic on public thoroughfares; imposes unnecessary risks and hazards on the traveling
public; and impedes the orderly growth of the community.
In this connection, the off-street parking requirements have the following objectives: 1) first, and foremost, to
dedicate streets to the purpose for which they were designed: to carry motor vehicle traffic; 2) second, to retain
in city streets the level of intensity of traffic flow as designated by the major thoroughfare plan (e.g. a secondary
vehicles to move relatively unimpeded by uncontrolled access to the thoroughfare from on-street parking; 3)
third, to impose reasonable requirements on property owners to designate off-street parking areas, including for
garbage collection, and delivery and loading areas on their properties in conformity with acceptable standards;
and 4) finally, to accomplish these objectives in way that improves the aesthetic value of our community.
CHAPTER 7 - BUILDING WASTE REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 1.00: DEFINITIONS.
Fill Materials: Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural and man-made inert solid materials used to fill land if the
object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements;
Industrial solid waste: Solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry or manufacturing, or
mining or agricultural operations, including discarded or unwanted solid materials suspended or transported in
liquids, and discarded or unwanted materials in liquid or semi-liquid form; the term “industrial solid waste” does
not include waste materials, the discharge of which is subject to the Texas Water Quality Act;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/418
Municipal solid waste: Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, trade, business and
recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles,
and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste;
Rubbish: Nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
waste materials; combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior (wood shavings) furniture,
rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery,
tin cans[,] aluminum cans, metal, furniture, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator
temperatures (1600 f to 1800 f);
Sanitary Landfill: A controlled area of land upon which solid waste is disposed of in accordance with standards,
regulations or orders established by the Texas State Department of Health or the Texas Water Quality Board;
Solid waste: All putrescible and nonputrescible discarded or unwanted solid materials, including municipal solid
waste and industrial solid waste; as used in this Act, the term “solid waste” does not include, and this Act does
not apply to:
(1) soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural and man-made inert solid materials used to fill land if
the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or
(2) waste materials which result from activities associated with the exploration, development, or
production of natural oil or gas and are subject to control by the Texas Railroad Commission.
SECTION 2.00 REMOVAL AND BOND:
(a) No solid waste, rubbish, or fill material resulting from building or remodeling operations shall be removed
by the City except under strict adherence hereto. Every application for a building, remodeling or a demolition
permit shall be accompanied by a Waste Disposal Plan. The plan must provide for the removal and disposal of
all solid waste, rubbish or fill material at applicants' expense to a landfill that is operating pursuant to Chapter
361 of the Texas Health & Safety Code or by another option approved at the discretion of the City Manager or
his designee. The building inspector shall require one or more of the following in the Waste Disposal Plan: the
placement of a commercial or other metal container at the job site for collection of waste; the placement of some
temporary ground cover on which waste materials may be temporarily placed or some movable trailer other
containers. The building inspector is authorized to levy a cash bond in the amount of $100.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
building to be constructed, repaired or remodeled. Applicants must provide satisfactory proof of the removal of
solid waste, rubbish or fill material from the property and that its disposal at a sanitary landfill or a site approved
by the City Manager in order to receive any reimbursement of the cash bond. Upon satisfactory proof that the
removed solid waste, rubbish or fill material has been deposited at a sanitary landfill the City shall reimburse
90% of the cash bond. The City shall in no event, other than as a result of noncompliance with the provisions of
this section by applicant, retain more than $50.00 if 10% of the cash bond exceeds $50.00.
(b) The City Manager shall advertise for submission of proposals for 3-year franchise agreements to provide
the City exclusive disposal services as required by this Chapter.
SECTION 3.00 VIOLATIONS:
The following acts shall constitute a violation:
(a) Initiating building or remodeling operations without a building permit, posting bond or
providing a waste disposal plan;
(b) Initiating demolition operations without a demolition permit, posting bond or providing a waste
disposal plan; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/418
(c) Failure to remove Solid Waste, Rubbish, or Fill Material within 14 days of completion of the
work or permitted.
(d) Failure to show proof. Failure to show proof as required by Section 2.00 above within 10
working days from the request for reimbursement of the cash bond by said person, shall forfeit the
entire cash bond amount.
COMMENTARY
It was the intent of Ordinance No. 95-012 to provide for the removal of solid waste, rubbish, or fill material
resulting from building or remodeling operations so that any construction site remains free of debris for safety
reasons. It is envisioned that no waste from these operations will be placed on any right-of-way. Typical solid
waste is collected and disposed of by the City. See General Code, Chapter 8 [article 13.02 of the Code of
Ordinances].
CHAPTER 8 - FRANCHISES
ARTICLE I - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND ANTENNA REGULATIONS
SECTION 1.00: APPLICABILITY.
(a) New Towers and Antennas. All new towers or antennas in the City shall be subject to these regulations.
(b) Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive-Only Antennas. This regulation shall not govern any tower, or
the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(c) Preexisting Towers or Antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet
the requirements of this regulation, other than the requirements of Sections 2(f) and 2(g).
(d) AM Array. For purposes of implementing this regulation, an AM array, consisting of one or more tower
units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one
tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the
towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by
right.
SECTION 2.00: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Principal or Accessory Use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A
different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on such lot.
(b) Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district
development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other
such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(c) Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Planning
Director an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either
within the jurisdiction of the City or within one mile of the City limits, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. The Planning Director may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits or other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the jurisdiction of the City, provided, however that the Planning Director is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/418
(d) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of
the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible,
use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting
and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical
and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(e) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
(f) State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the
FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense.
(g) Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall
ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes
and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the
tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to
bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the
tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(h) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated
and applied to facilities located in the City irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
(i) Not Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this regulation
and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
(j) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law
for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in City have been obtained and shall
file a copy of all required franchises with the Planning Director.
(k) Public Notice. Any special use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or
special use shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that
are located within the corresponding separation distance listed in Section 5(b)(5)(ii), Table 2, in addition to any
notice otherwise required by the zoning regulations.
(l) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
(m) Buildings and Support Equipment. Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or towers
shall comply with the requirements of Section 5.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/418
(n) Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan. The City encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single
application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall
be given priority in the review process.
SECTION 3.00: PERMITTED USES.
(a) General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require
administrative approval or a special use permit.
(b) Permitted Uses. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City
provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the City are specifically
permitted.
SECTION 4.00: ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES.
(a) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers and
antennas.
(1) The Planning Director may administratively approve the uses listed in this regulation.
(2) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Planning Director providing the
information set forth in Sections 4(b)(1) and 4(b)(3) of this regulation and a nonrefundable fee as
established by resolution of the City Commission to reimburse the City for the costs of reviewing the
application.
(3) The Planning Director shall review the application for administrative approval and determine if
the proposed use complies with Sections 1, 4(b)(4) and 4(b)(5) of this regulation.
(4) The Planning Director shall respond to each such application within sixty (60) days after
receiving it by either approving or denying the application. If the Planning Director fails to respond
to the applicant within said sixty (60) days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved.
(5) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Planning Director may, in order to
encourage shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements in Section
5(b)(4) or separation distances between towers in Section 5(b)(5) by up to fifty percent (50%).
(6) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Planning Director may, in order to
encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to
monopole construction.
(7) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an application for a special use
permit pursuant to Section 5 prior to filing any appeal that may be available under the zoning
regulations.
(b) List of Administratively Approved Uses. The following uses may be approved by the Planning Director
after conducting an administrative review:
(1) Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other
supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in any industrial or heavy
commercial zoning district;
(2) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of subsections (A)
and (B) below.
(A) Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the Planning Director
as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or multifamily
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/418
structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided:
(i) The antenna does not extend more than thirty (30) feet above the highest point of the
structure; and
(ii) The antenna complies with all applicable FCC, FAA and building codes and
regulations.
(B) An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the Planning
Director. To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
towers, a collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take
precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a
manner consistent with the following:
(i) A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an
additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the
Planning Director allows reconstruction as a monopole.
(ii) An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed thirty
(30) feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate the collocation of an additional
antenna. This height change may only occur one time per communication tower.
(c) [(C)] The additional height shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth
in Section 5. The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance
separations.
(1) A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of an additional
antenna may be moved on-site within fifty (50) feet of its existing location.
(2) After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one tower may remain
on the site.
(3) A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower
location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to
Section 5(b)(5). The relocation of a tower shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation
of Section 5(b)(5).
(d) [(D)] The on-site relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to
residential units or residentially zoned lands as established in Section 5(b)(5) shall only be
permitted when approved by the Planning Director.
(3) New towers in nonresidential zoning districts. Locating any new tower in a nonresidential
zoning district other than industrial or heavy commercial, provided a licensed professional engineer
certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the
applicant; the Planning Director concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in the
Commentary and the requirements of the Commentary; the tower meets the setback requirements in
Section 5(b)(4) and separation distances in Section 5(b)(5); and the tower meets the following height
and usage criteria:
(i) for a single user, up to ninety (90) feet in height;
(ii) for two users, up to one hundred twenty (120) feet in height; and
(iii) for three or more users, up to one hundred fifty (150) feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/418
(4) Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other than industrial or heavy
commercial that in the judgment of the Planning Director is in conformity with the goals set forth in
Commentary of this regulation.
(5) Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone
wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers.
(c) [(e)] Single-Family Residential. Used in single-family residential zones will not be administratively
approved unless placed on a existing tower or alternative tower structure previously approved by the City.
SECTION 5.00: SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
(a) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas
by the Planning Commission:
(1) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Section 3 of this regulation or permitted to
be approved administratively pursuant to Section 4 of this regulation, then a special use permit shall
be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
(2) Applications for special use permits under this Section shall be subject to the procedures and
requirements of the zoning regulation, except as modified in this Section.
(3) In granting a special use permit, the Planning Commission may impose conditions to the extent
the Planning Commission concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of
the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(4) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical,
or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(5) An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information described in this Section and
a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the City Commission to reimburse the City for the
costs of reviewing the application.
(b) Towers.
(1) In addition to any information required for applications for special use permits pursuant to the
zoning regulation, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following
information:
(i) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower,
on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other
municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable
separation distances set forth in Section 5(b)(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other
structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the Planning Director to be
necessary to assess compliance with this regulation.
(ii) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
(iii) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted
residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(iv) The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites
shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/418
(v) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(vi) Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination.
(vii) A description of compliance with Sections 5(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (l), and (m), 5(b)(4),
5(b)(5) and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
(viii) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will
accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users.
(ix) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in
the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(x) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative
technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided
through the use of the proposed new tower.
(xi) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas within the City
based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the
event the proposed tower is erected.
(2) Factors Considered in Granting Special Use Permits for Towers. In addition to any standards
for consideration of special use permit applications pursuant to the zoning regulation, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a
special use permit, although the Planning and Zoning Commission may waive or reduce the burden
on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Planning Commission concludes that the goals
of this regulation are better served thereby:
(i) Height of the proposed tower;
(ii) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;
(iii) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(iv) Surrounding topography;
(v) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(vi) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the
effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(vii) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(viii) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not
requiring the use of towers or structures as discussed below.
(3) Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, or Alternative Technology. No new
tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require
the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's a proposed antenna. An applicant
shall submit information requested by the Planning Commission related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna
may consist of any of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/418
(i) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(ii) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(iii) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support
applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
(iv) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the
antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures
would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(v) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an
existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(vi) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing
towers and structures unsuitable.
(vii) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use
of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative
technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the
technology unsuitable.
(4) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which a special use
permit is required; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may reduce the standard
setback requirements if the goals of this regulation would be better served thereby:
(i) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
(ii) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback
requirements.
(5) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for
which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may reduce
the standard separation requirements if the goals of this regulation would be better served thereby.
(i) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the
off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided
in Table 1.
(b) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards
established in Table 1.
Table 1:
Off-site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/418
Single-family or duplex residential units1 200 feet or 300% height of
tower whichever is greater
Vacant single-family or duplex residentially zoned land
which is either platted or has preliminary subdivision plan
approval which is not expired
200 feet or 300% height of
tower2 whichever is greater
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands3 100 feet or 100% height of
tower whichever is greater
Existing multifamily residential units greater than duplex
units
100 feet or 100% height of
tower whichever is greater
Nonresidentially zoned lands or nonresidential uses None; only setbacks apply
1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes.
2 Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback line.
3 Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid
development plan approval and any multifamily residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
(ii) Separation distances between towers.
(a) Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured between
the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be measured by
drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances
(listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
(b) Table 2:
Existing Towers - Types
Lattice Guyed Monopole
75 Ft. in Height
or Greater
Monopole
Less than 75
Ft. in Height
Lattice 5000 5000 1,500 750
Guyed 5000 5000 1,500 750
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/418
Monopole 75 Ft. in
Height or Greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole Less than 75
Ft. in Height
750 750 750 750
(6) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height
and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided however, that the
Planning Commission may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
(7) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for
which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may waive
such requirements if the goals of this regulation would be better served thereby.
(i) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively
screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer
shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of the
compound.
(ii) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived.
(iii) Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
SECTION 6.00: BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE.
(a) Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with
antennas shall comply with the following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square feet of gross floor area or be
more than 500 feet in height.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment
structure and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles or Light Poles. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association
with antennas shall be located in accordance with the following:
(1) In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be located:
(i) In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than 100 feet in
height or 25 square feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of
200 feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with
an ultimate height of at least 42-48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(ii) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than 3 feet in height or 200
square feet in gross floor area. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/418
(2) In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than
12 feet in height or 750 square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by
an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties
which abut or are directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence 6 feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least
36 inches.
(c) Antennas Located on Towers. The related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than 750
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 750 feet in height, and shall be located in accordance with the
minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located.
(d) Modification of Building Size Requirements. The requirements of Sections 6(a) through (c) may be
modified by the Planning Director in the case of administratively approved uses or by the Planning Commission
in the case of uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation.
SECTION 7.00: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of
notice from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or
tower within said ninety (90) day shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If
there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
using the tower.
SECTION 8.00: NONCONFORMING USES.
(a) Not Expansion of Nonconforming Use. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in
accordance with the provisions of this regulation shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
(b) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist.
Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower
shall comply with the requirements of this regulation.
(c) Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers or Antennas. Notwithstanding Section 7, bona
fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first
obtain administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the separation requirements
specified in Sections 5(b)(4) and 5(b)(5). The type, height, and location of the tower on-site shall be of the same
type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the
then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or
destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in Section 7.
COMMENTARY
Purpose: The purpose of this regulation is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless
communications towers and antennas. The goals of this regulation are to: (1) protect residential areas and land
uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; (2) encourage the location of towers in
nonresidential areas; (3) minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; (4) strongly encourage
the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers; (5) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the
adverse impact on the community is minimal; (6) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/418
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; (7) enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; (8)
consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and (9) avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these
goals, City of San Juan shall give due consideration to the City of San Juan's master plan, zoning map, existing
land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
APPENDIX
Ordinances not included in this codification are listed as follows:
(1)
(2)
(1999 Unified Development Code)