7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/448
City of Sachse
Charter and Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 1
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included through Ordinance 3922 adopted 5/6/19.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as the “Code of Ordinances, City
of Sachse, Texas,” and may be so cited. (1988 Code)
Sec. 1-2. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor unless expressly so provided, shall
they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. (1988 Code)
Sec. 1-3. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be
observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Chapter. Whenever the words “this ordinance”, “section”, “subsection”, “paragraph”, or “article” are used, they shall pertain to the
chapter or section of this Code of Ordinances in which they are found unless specifically and clearly in reference to a separate
chapter or section.
City. The words “this city”, “this town”, “the town”, or “the city” shall mean the City of Sachse, Dallas and Collin Counties, Texas.
City council. Whenever the words “town council”, “the council”, “city council”, “board of aldermen”, or “governing body” are used,
they shall mean the city council, City of Sachse, Texas.
Councilmember. “Councilmember” as used in this Code shall be synonymous with the term “alderman” or “councilman” and shall
mean a member of the governing body of the City of Sachse, Texas.
Males and females. Throughout this Code, words used expressing masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine.
Person. Whenever the word “person” or its plural form are used in this Code, it shall mean any person, firm, corporation,
partnership, association of persons, owner, agent, or occupant.
Public place. Whenever the word “public place” is used, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall mean any public road,
street, alley, park, building, or other property of the city or any other places to which people commonly resort for the purpose of
business, recreation, or amusement.
V.T.C.S. Whenever the abbreviation V.T.C.S. is used it shall mean Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes of Texas.
(1988 Code)
Sec. 1-4. Amendments or additions to Code.
All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code, which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code, may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by
omission from reprinted pages.
The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new
Code by the city council.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specified reference to the
section number of this Code in the following language:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/448
“That chapter _______, section _______, of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sachse, Texas, is hereby amended to
read as follows...”
The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
In the event of a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used:
“That chapter _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sachse, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section,
to be numbered section _______, which said section reads as follows...”
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
In the event it is desired to delete a section from the Code of Ordinances, the following language shall be used:
“That chapter _______, section _______, of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sachse, Texas, is hereby deleted
from said Code of Ordinances.”
It is hereby provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this Code in the manner provided for above,
shall not be deemed invalid as a result of such failure to follow the procedure outlined in this section.
(1988 Code)
Sec. 1-5. Supplementation of Code.
A. Authorization. Supplements to this Code of Ordinances shall be prepared and printed to include ordinances adopted
subsequent to adoption of this Code of Ordinances at least once a year. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and
will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared
that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
B. Insertion of supplement. In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed, shall
be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages. An instruction sheet shall be prepared for each
supplement to indicate pages to be removed and pages to be inserted.
C. Changes. When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency, or organization authorized
to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in
the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary
to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter”, “this section”, “this
subsection”, etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted
into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material
included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
(1988 Code)
Sec. 1-6. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this
Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by
the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city
council without the incorporation in this Code of any unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. (Ordinance
adopting Code of Ordinances)
Sec. 1-7. General penalty for violations of Code.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or
a misdemeanor, or wherever the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of
any such provision shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500.00, except for violations of municipal ordinances that
govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, in which cases a fine not to exceed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/448
$2,000.00 is hereby authorized; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the
same or similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The
city may also bring suit for injunction against any person that shall violate or threaten to violate any of the provisions of this Code
or any city ordinance in order to prevent a continued violation or threatened violation. (Ordinance 651 adopted 2/1/88)
Sec. 1-8. City council meetings.
A. Time and place established. Regular meetings of the city council of the City of Sachse, Texas shall be held on the first and
third Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m. in the Sachse city hall, unless the place of the meeting is otherwise specified by the
mayor in the notice calling the meeting.
B. Agenda. There is hereby established as a procedure for council meetings that, when an item of business has been placed
on the agenda and a vote is taken on that item, it shall not thereafter be placed again on the agenda for a period of three months.
(Ordinance 220 adopted 8/9/76; Ordinance 318 adopted 4/26/82)
Sec. 1-9. Ad valorem (property) tax.
A. Elderly exemption. Pursuant to Article VIII, 1-b(b) of the Texas Constitution, there is hereby exempted from ad valorem
taxation $50,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons, married or unmarried, including those living
alone, who are 65 years of age or older, from all ad valorem taxes levied against such residence homesteads by the City of
Sachse, Texas for the year 1988 or any year thereafter.
B. Disability exemption. Pursuant to Article VIII, section 1-b of the Texas Constitution, there is hereby granted for the taxable
year of 1988, a residence homestead exemption from all ad valorem taxes to be levied for said year in the amount of $50,000.00
of the appraised valuation of residence homesteads of persons, married or unmarried, including those living alone, who are
under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefit under federal old age, survivors and disability insurance
or its successors.
(Ordinance 712 adopted 10/17/88; Ordinance 713 adopted 10/17/88)
Sec. 1-10. Sales tax.
A. Adopted. A local sales tax of one percent was adopted by the voters of the city as a result of an election held on November
22, 1969.
B. Residential gas and electricity exempted. The City of Sachse, by majority vote of its governing body, hereby votes to
exempt from the taxes authorized by the local sales and use tax act (Article 1066c, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) the receipts
from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for
residential use, as authorized by section 6 of House Bill No. 1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session.
(Ordinance 108 adopted 11/25/69; Ordinance 245 adopted 8/28/78)
Sec. 1-11. Claims for damages against city.
A. Filing claims. The City of Sachse shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such
personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury
results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall,
within 180 days, from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city manager of the
following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time
when the injury was received;
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained;
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained;
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred;
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle;
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is
presented;
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the
knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of
the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed;
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along
with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/448
B. Council consideration required prior to suit. No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the
City of Sachse unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied
to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city
council refused.
C. Notices. All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the mayor and city manager at the
Sachse city hall and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the city manager.
D. No authority to waive provisions. Neither the mayor, city councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall
have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this section.
E. Notice to be sworn to. The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or
injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render
the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth
of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(Ordinance 493 adopted 8/4/86)
Editor's note – See also city charter, sections 12.03-12.05. Conflicts between this section and provisions of the city charter have been
resolved with the adoption of the Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 1-12. Records management.
A. Definition of city records. All papers, correspondence, memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans, photographs, sound
and video recordings, files, microform, magnetic or paper tape, punched card or other documents, regardless of physical form or
characteristic, which have been or shall be created, received, filed, or recorded by any city office or department or its lawful
successor, or officials thereof in pursuance of law or ordinance or in the conduct, transaction, or performance of any business,
duty, or function of public business, whether or not confidential or restricted in use, are hereby declared to be the records of the
City of Sachse, and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner. Library and museum materials acquired solely for reference, exhibit, or display and
stocks of publications shall not constitute records for the purpose of this section.
B. City records declared public property. All city records as defined in subsection A of this section are hereby declared to be
the property of the City of Sachse. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right
to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files,
or use of such records is prohibited.
C. Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Sachse to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls
over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive
system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition.
D. Office of records manager established. The city council shall appoint the city secretary as the records manager officer, who
shall administer the records management program and shall be responsible for city-wide files management and the direction and
control of the city's records disposition program. The records manager shall report to and be responsible to the city council.
E. Duties of records manager. The records manager shall have the following duties, and others as assigned by the city
council:
(1) Plan, formulate, and prescribe basic files management and records disposition policies, systems, standards,
and procedures.
(2) Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in cooperation with department heads for all city offices
and departments, define and identify all vital and permanent records, and establish retention periods for all records.
Retention periods shall be no shorter than desired by the originating office, but shall be as long as deemed necessary
by either the records manager or the city council.
(3) Review schedules annually and update or amend as needed.
(4) Coordinate the city-wide files management and records disposition programs and report annually to the city
council on program effectiveness in each city department.
(5) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city offices and departments by preparation of
manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation.
(6) Develop, disseminate, and coordinate files maintenance and records disposition procedures, including, but not
limited to, those prescribed by this section, to meet the current and long-term information needs of the city.
(7) Train departmental records officers and other personnel in the fundamentals of records management and their
duties in the records management program.
(8) Carry out at the proper time action such as destruction and transfers of files as required by records schedules.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/448
(9) Design and manage the operations of a records center for the low-cost storage of inactive records.
(10) Establish and monitor compliance with standards for filing and storage equipment and supplies in all city
offices.
(11) Develop a city-wide forms design and control system.
(12) Establish in cooperation with other responsible city officials a disaster plan for each city office and department
to ensure maximum availability of the records for reestablishing operations quickly and with minimum disruption and
expense.
(13) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city.
(14) Protect privacy and assure availability of public information from records stored in the records center and bring
to the attention of the city council and city manager any office not in compliance with laws or ordinances regarding
public access to information or protection of privacy.
F. Responsibilities of city department heads. All city officers and department heads are responsible for the implementation and
operation of effective files procedures, records transfers and dispositions, and other activities within their areas of responsibility in
accordance with the provisions of this section. They shall designate records officers within their offices and provide the records
manager the names of such designees and of all file stations and files custodians under their supervision. Persons designated as
records officers shall report directly to the head of their departments on matters relating to the records management program and
should have full access to all files in their department.
G. Responsibilities of records officers. The records officer in each office and department is responsible for providing
coordination between the records manager and personnel in his or her office to ensure that provisions of this section are
complied with. This responsibility shall include overseeing the application of records schedules within the office or department.
H. City offices to use records schedule. All city offices and departments shall adopt records retention and disposition
schedules and destroy, transfer, or otherwise dispose of records only according to such schedules.
I. Development of records retention and disposition schedules. Retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be
submitted by the records manager to the city council and city attorney, who shall notify the records manager within ten working
days of their approval or of any objection to a retention period. At the expiration of the ten-day period, if no objection has been
submitted, the records schedule shall be adopted and shall have full force as sufficient authorization for records destruction or
other action. If objection is made, the records manager shall determine a retention period satisfactory to the office or department
concerned, to the city council and to the city attorney.
When a records retention and disposition schedule is adopted, it shall thenceforth constitute full authority to destroy, transfer, or
take other actions, and the city council hereby directs that such action be taken by the records manager or under his or her
supervision. The records manager shall notify the state librarian of intended destruction, as required by law, but no further notice
to the city council or other city office shall be required.
J. One-time destruction of records. Prior to the adoption of records schedules for an office, one-time destruction of
accumulated obsolete records of that office may be made by or under the supervision of the records manager. Prior to such
destruction the records manager shall submit lists of records to be destroyed to the city council, city manager and city attorney,
who shall give notice within ten working days of any records they believe should not be destroyed, and such records shall be
retained for a period suggested by either. The records manager shall also submit notice as required by law to the state librarian.
Obsolete records shall include those no longer created by the office or department and no longer needed for administrative,
legal, fiscal, or other research purposes.
K. Records center. The records center operation shall utilize one or more buildings to store inactive records; to ensure the
security of such records from deterioration, theft, or damage during the period of storage; and to permit fast and efficient retrieval
of information from stored records.
L. Preservation of permanent records. The records manager shall develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation
of the historically valuable records of the city. The records manager shall provide housing under archival conditions for such
records in the records center or in another municipal facility and in such manner that the records, unless their use is restricted by
law or regulation, are open to the public for research purposes. If city-owned facilities are not available, the records manager
shall arrange for the transfer of the records to the Texas state library for perpetual care and preservation in one of its nearby
regional historical resource depositories, or shall make other arrangements for their permanent preservation not contrary to law
or regulation. In no circumstances shall the permanent records of the city be transferred to private individuals, to private historical
societies or museums, or to private colleges or universities.
M. Noncurrent records not be maintained in office files. Records no longer required in the conduct of current business by any
office or department of the city shall be promptly transferred to the records center or archives or the state library, or be destroyed,
at the time such action is designated on an approved records schedule. Such records shall not be maintained in current office
files or equipment.
(Ordinance 879 adopted 5/21/90)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/448
Sec. 1-13. Industrial development sales and excise tax.
(a) All action concerning the submission of the proposition to the voters of the city having been taken and the tax authorized by
section 4b of the development corporation act of 1979, V.A.T.C.S., Article 5190.6 (the “Act”) have been approved by the voters of
the city, the city council does hereby authorize the levy of a sales and excise tax (the “tax”) within the city for the benefit of the
corporation at a rate of one-half of one percent on the sale of items at retail and an excise tax at the same rate on the use,
storage or other consumption within the city of tangible personal property purchased, leased or rented from a retailer during such
time as the tax is effective within the city.
(b) The tax shall be administered, collected and remitted in accordance with the act and, to the extent not inconsistent with the
act, in accordance with Chapter 321, Texas Tax Code, as amended from time to time.
(c) The effective date of the tax within the city shall be July 1, 1994 unless the comptroller of public accounts notifies the city in
accordance with the act that more time is needed to implement the tax, in which event the tax shall be effective as of July 1,
1994.
(d) The mayor is authorized to provide a copy of the ordinance levying the tax to the comptroller of public accounts as soon as
possible, but in no event later than ten days following the adoption of the ordinance, such copy to be sent to the comptroller by
certified mail in accordance with the provisions of the act.
(Ordinance 1174 adopted 5/2/94)
Sec. 1-14. Telecommunications tax.
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the City of Sachse, Texas. For purposes of this
section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications
device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The application of the exemption provided for in Article 1066c, section 4B(a), V.A.T.C.S. is hereby repealed by the City of
Sachse, Texas as authorized by section 4B(b) thereof.
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the City of Sachse, Texas, for all other
sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state of Texas, that being $0.01 for local tax and $0.005 for economic
development tax.
(d) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the State of Texas by United States registered or certified mail a copy
of this section along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and discussion on this section.
(e) This section shall become effective as of January 1, 1995.
(Ordinance 1195 adopted 9/19/94)
Sec. 1-15. Municipal court building security fund.
A. Fund established. There is hereby established a municipal court building security fund to be used only to finance the
following items when used for the sole purpose of providing security services for building, housing a municipal court.
(1) The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2) Hand-held metal detectors;
(3) Walk through metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing
appropriate security services;
(7) Signages;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains or other security hardware; and
(10) Any other item or for any other purpose authorized by Article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure
as may be amended by the Texas legislature from time to time.
B. Fee amount and collection.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/448
(a) A defendant convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court of the City of Sachse, Texas
shall pay a $3.00 security fee as costs of the court. A person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(b) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the municipal treasurer or other official of
the City of Sachse, Texas who discharges the duties delegated to the municipal treasurer for deposit in a fund to be
known as the municipal court building security fund.
(Ordinance 1298, secs. I, II, adopted 9/18/95)
Sec. 1-16. Municipal court technology fund.
A. Establishment of municipal court technology fund.
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the fund,
pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue
account.
B. Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection.
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the
municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision;
or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999.
(d) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the Municipal Treasurer of the City of Sachse, who
shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund.
C. Designated use of the fund and administration.
(a) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of, or to maintain the technological enhancements for the
Municipal Court of the City of Sachse, Texas, including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; or
(8) Docket management systems.
(Ordinance 1682, secs. 1–3, 7, adopted 9/20/99; Ordinance 2093, secs. 1, 2, adopted 9/20/04)
Sec. 1-17. Adoption of fees and charges.
(a) To the extent allowed by law, the general and special fees and charges to be assessed and collected by the City of Sachse
as authorized by this Code or any other code or ordinance of the city shall be as established by appropriate City Council
resolution.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/448
(b) The purpose of this chapter is to provide reference to such fees and charges which shall be assembled and maintained in a
master fee resolution which shall be kept on file with the City Secretary, and may be amended from time to time.
(c) In the event there is a conflict between the established fee by a code or ordinance and the provisions of such master fee
resolution, the code or ordinance shall prevail.
(Ordinance 2176, sec. 1, adopted 11/21/05)
Sec. 1-18. Municipal court of record.
(a) Created; jurisdiction.
(1) There is hereby created a municipal court of record in and for the City of Sachse, Texas, to be designated as
“The Municipal Court of Record in the City of Sachse.” The court shall have no term and may sit at any time for the
transaction of business of the Court. Where the term “municipal court” is used in the City's Charter or this Code of
Ordinances, it shall mean the municipal court of record created herein. Any provision of the City Charter, city
ordinances, or state law that is applicable to a municipal court shall be applicable to the municipal court of record
created herein unless the provision is in conflict or inconsistent with Chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code, as
amended, which governs the municipal courts of record.
(2) The municipal court of record shall be a unified municipal court and shall have and exercise that jurisdiction
conferred by Section 30.00005 of Chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. The municipal court of
record shall also have:
a. Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under Subchapter A, Chapter
214, Local Government Code, or Subchapter E, Chapter 683, Transportation Code;
b. Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under Subchapter B, Chapter 54, Texas
Local Government Code, as amended, within the city's territorial limits and property owned by the city located in
the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement
ordinances; and
c. Authority to issue:
1. Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement
ordinance violation; and
2. Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending property and
removing the debris from the premises.
(b) Judge; powers and duties.
(1) The municipal court of record is presided over by a municipal judge who shall be appointed by the city council
for a term of two years and shall be entitled to compensation as set by the city council. The amount of the judge's
compensation may not be diminished during the judge's term of office. The compensation may not be based directly
or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court.
(2) The municipal judge must be a citizen of the United States, a resident of the State of Texas, a licensed attorney
in good standing and have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in the State of Texas. In the event of
a vacancy in the office of the municipal judge, the city council may appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy and to
preside over the municipal court of record for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(3) A person may not serve as a municipal judge if the person is employed as an employee of the city. A municipal
judge who accepts employment with the city vacates the judicial office.
(4) The city council may appoint alternate judges, subject to the same qualifications as the municipal judge, who
shall have all the powers and shall discharge all the duties of the municipal judge while serving as municipal judge.
Each appointment shall be for a term of two years. The municipal judges may exchange benches and act for each
other in any proceeding pending in the court. An act performed by any of the judges is binding on all parties to the
proceeding.
(5) The municipal judge and alternate judges shall take judicial notice of state law and the ordinances and
corporate limits of the city and shall have all powers and authority as provided by Section 30.00007 of the Texas
Government Code, as amended. The judges may grant writs of mandamus, attachment, and other writs necessary to
the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court and may issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense
charged is within the jurisdiction of the court. A municipal judge is a magistrate and may issue administrative search
warrants.
(c) Court clerk.
(1) The city manager or his designee shall appoint the clerk of the municipal court of record who may hire, direct,
and remove the personnel authorized in the city's annual budget for the clerk's office. The clerk or the clerk's deputies
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/448
shall have all duties and authority as provided by Section 30.00009 of the Texas Government Code, as amended.
(2) The court clerk shall acquire and maintain a seal in conformance with state law for the municipal court of record
in the city.
(3) The court clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for jury service in the municipal court of record.
(d) Record of proceedings; fees. Upon request of the judge or upon written request of one of the parties to a trial, proceedings
of the municipal court of record, limited to trial testimony and hearings on motions before the court, shall be recorded. For the
purpose of recording the proceedings and preserving a record in cases tried before the municipal court of record, a good quality
electronic recording device shall be used. When the recording device is used, a court reporter need not be present at the trial to
certify the reporter's record. The recording shall be kept and stored for a 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the
proceeding, trial or denial of motion for a new trial, whichever occurs last. If the case is appealed, the proceedings shall be
transcribed by an official court reporter.
(e) Appeal.
(1) A defendant has the right of appeal from a judgment or conviction in the municipal court of record. The state has
the right to an appeal as provided by Article 44.01, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(2) The appellate court shall determine each appeal from the court on the basis of the errors that are set forth in the
appellant's motion and that are presented in the clerk's record and reporter's record, if any, prepared from the
proceedings leading to the appeal. An appeal from the court shall not be by trial de novo.
(3) To perfect an appeal, the defendant must file a motion for new trial not later than ten days after the date on
which the judgment and sentence are rendered. The motion must be in writing and must be filed with the clerk of the
municipal court of record. The motion constitutes the assignment of error on appeal. A ground or an error not set forth
in the motion is waived. If the court does not act on the motion before the expiration of 30 days after it is filed with the
clerk, the motion is overruled by operation of law.
(4) After an order overruling a motion for new trial, the defendant shall give written notice of appeal and pay a fee
for the preparation of the clerk's record of $25.00 not later than ten days after the date on which the motion is
overruled. The court shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If the case is reversed on appeal,
the fee shall be refunded to the defendant.
(5) The appellant shall pay for any reporter's record containing a transcription of the proceedings unless the court
finds, after a hearing in response to an affidavit by the defendant, that the defendant is unable to pay or provide
security for the reporter's record. If the court so finds, the court shall order the reporter to prepare the record without
charge to the defendant. Before the recorded proceedings are transcribed, the defendant shall, unless found by the
court to be unable to pay for the reporter's record, post a cash deposit with the municipal court for the estimated cost
of the record. The cash deposit shall be based on an estimate provided by the court reporter or the length of
proceedings as indicated by the amount of tape used to electronically record the proceedings, if any, the cost of the
court reporter, typing, and other incidental services. The municipal court may post a current schedule of the charges
for transcription fees, including deposits. If the cash deposit exceeds the actual cost of the reporter's record, the court
reporter shall refund the difference to the defendant. If the cash deposit is insufficient to cover the actual cost of the
transcription, the defendant must pay the additional amount to the court reporter before the transcription may be
submitted. If a case is reversed on appeal, the court shall promptly refund to the defendant any amounts paid for the
reporter's record.
(6) The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a record on
appeal in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(7) If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an appeal until the defendant files an appeal bond
with the municipal court of record. The bond must be approved by the court and must be filed not later than the 10th
day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. If the defendant is in custody, the defendant shall be
committed to jail unless the defendant posts the appeal bond. The appeal bond must be in the amount of $100.00 or
double the amount of the fines and costs adjudged against the defendant, whichever is greater. The bond must 1)
state that the defendant was convicted in the case and has appealed; and be conditioned on the defendant's
immediate and daily personal appearance in the court to which the appeal is taken.
(f) Court costs. Upon conviction, a defendant shall also remit to the city such court costs as are authorized by law, imposed by
the state, and established by the city.
(Ordinance 2255, sec. 1, adopted 11/6/06)
Sec. 1-19. Tangible personal property in transit tax.
The goods-in-transit, as defined Tex. Tax Code 11.253(a)(2), as amended by House Bill 621, enacted by the 80th Texas
Legislature in Regular Session shall remain subject to taxation by the City of Sachse, Texas. (Ordinance 3011 adopted 10/15/07)
Sec. 1-20. Hotel occupancy tax.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/448
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of this section, except where the context clearly
indicates another meaning, are respectively defined as follows:
City tax collector. The City Tax Collector for the City of Sachse, Texas.
Consideration. The monetary cost of a room in such hotel and other facilities as defined in this section, only if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping, and excluding the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such
room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which members of the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations,
including hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other
building where rooms are furnished for consideration, but not including hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, or dormitory or
other housing facilities owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution
of higher education.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one which is
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is not a permanent resident as hereinafter defined.
Occupant. Anyone who, for consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under
any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident as hereinafter
defined.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30
consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period.
Person. Any individual, corporation, or other legal entity owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February
and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and
September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December.
B. Tax levy. There is hereby levied upon the occupancy of any room furnished by any hotel within the corporate limits of the
City of Sachse, Texas, a hotel occupancy tax equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to
such hotel, where said consideration of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day and such room or space is ordinary
used for sleeping. This tax shall be exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies under the law.
C. Collection and reporting the tax. Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax
levied by this section for the City of Sachse.
D. When tax due and payable; filing of report. On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person
required to collect the tax imposed hereby, shall file a report with the city tax collector showing the total for all room occupancies
in the preceding quarter, and any other information the city tax collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax
due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be submitted in a form prescribed by the city tax
collector.
E. Authority of city tax collector to make necessary rules and regulations; access to books, records. The city tax collector shall
have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby,
and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to all books and records of hotels subject to this section as necessary to enable
him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this section, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions
of this section.
F. Effect of failure to collect tax, file report. Any person who 1) fails to file a report as required herein, 2) files a false report, or
3) fails to pay to the city tax collector the tax as required herein when said report or payment is due, shall owe a penalty of five
percent of the total tax amount due. After the first 30 days, said persons shall owe an additional five percent of such tax.
However, such total penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per
annum beginning 60 days from the due date.
G. Use of revenues. All revenue received from any hotel occupancy tax authorized under this section shall be used only for
those purposes authorized by Chapter 351, Texas Tax Code, Vernon's Revised Civil Statutes, as amended. The city council shall
review and approve all distributions of funds collected under this section.
H. Administration of revenues. Organizations or individuals requesting funding for projects or activities authorized under this
section shall present their annual budgets during October of each year for review by the city council in any form required by the
city tax collector. Budgets must specify in detail how the funds will be expended and how the projects or activities meet the
requirements of subsection (g). The city tax collector is hereby authorized to disperse funds and amounts approved by the city
council to those organizations and/or individuals meeting the criteria of this section.
I. Penalty of fine. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, including persons who 1) fail to collect the tax, 2)
file a false return, or 3) who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be charged with a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction,
be fined in any sum not to exceed $500.00, and each 24 hours of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/448
J. Additional penalties. The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax
imposed hereby and required to pay the collection over to the city who has 1) failed to file a report, 2) filed a false report, or 3)
failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid, enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the
city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, and/or seek any other remedy permitted by law.
K. Exceptions; refunds.
(1) No tax shall be imposed under this section upon the following individuals:
a. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30
consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year, so long as there is no interruption of payment for
the period;
b. Employees of federal government entities traveling on official business;
c. Foreign diplomats who present a tax exemption card issued by the United States Department of state; and
d. Federal or state military personnel.
(2) In order to receive a refund of hotel occupancy taxes paid under this section, state government entities must file
a refund claim no later than 60 days after the end of the period in which the state government entity's occupancy
occurred. A refund claim must be on a form provided by the city tax collector in accordance with the requirements
promulgated by the Texas Comptroller in Section 3.161 of Title 34 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 3236, sec. 1, adopted 9/7/10)
Sec. 1-21. Library.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
Library shall mean the Sachse Public Library.
Library manager shall mean the library manager or designee.
Library board shall mean the Advisory Board of the Sachse Public Library.
B. Library manager. All library department activities shall be administered under the direction of a library manager. The
manager is responsible for carrying out approved policies under the direction of the city manager. The library manager shall
provide staff support to the library board.
The city shall be entitled to pursue collection of fees and/or costs for overdue or lost materials through its employees and agents.
C. Operating policies and procedures. The library manager shall be responsible for day to day operations of the library. The
library will be operated in accordance with administrative directives and procedures issued by the city manager or his designee,
the library manager. All policies shall be recommended by the library board and approved by the city council, a copy of which
shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary.
D. Identification of borrowers; overdue materials.
(1) Any person making application to borrow materials from the library will be required to present whatever
documents are deemed necessary by the librarian for adequate identification of the applicant.
(2) Any person who has outstanding fees for overdue materials may be disallowed from further borrowing until the
fees have been paid.
(3) The fees for failure to return library materials, which have been borrowed from the library shall be established by
city council resolution.
(Ordinance 3371, sec. 1, adopted 3/19/12)
Sec. 1-22. Code of ethics.
A. Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that
public officials be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city; that no officer shall permit any interest,
financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any business, transaction or professional activity to conflict with the
proper discharge of such person's duties in the public interest; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the city
council at all times shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body. To implement such a policy, the city council deems it advisable to
enact a code of ethics for officials, as defined in this article, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a
guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms,
the overriding interest being that such officers of the city shall at all times strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety.
B. Title; application.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/448
(1) This section shall be known as the code of ethics.
(2) This code shall apply to all officials as defined in this section.
(3) This code of ethics does not apply to employees, including those individuals employed on a full-time, part-time
or internship basis nor to independent contractors of the city. The standards of conduct for employees are governed
by the city personnel policies.
(4) This code of ethics applies to members of the city council, all city boards, committees or commissions as
defined in this article.
(5) This code of ethics applies to the conduct or actions of public officers, as defined in this article which occurs in
whole or in part after the date of adoption of this article.
(6) This code of ethics applies to officers on while such persons hold such position or office.
C. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Benefit means anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary or economic gain or pecuniary or economic advantage, including
benefit to any other person in whose welfare the beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest.
Business entity means any person, entity, corporation (whether for-profit or nonprofit), general or limited partnership, sole
proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated association or firm, institution, trust, foundation, holding company, joint-stock
company, receivership, or other entity recognized by law, whether or not organized for profit, which has an economic interest, or
seeking such, in conducting business with the city. Business entity also includes any business entity that represents a party
conducting or seeking to conduct business with the city.
City means the City of Sachse, Texas.
City council means the governing body of the city.
Confidential information means any information to which an official has access in such person's official capacity which may not
be disclosed to the public except pursuant to state and/or federal law and which is not otherwise a matter of public record or
public knowledge. Confidential information includes the following information, however transmitted:
(1) Any information from a meeting closed to the public pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act or other law
regardless of whether disclosure violates the Texas Open Meetings Act or Texas Public Information Act;
(2) Any information protected by attorney client, attorney work product, or other applicable legal privilege; and
(3) Any information deemed confidential by law.
Contract means any lease, claim, account or demand against or agreement with any entity or person, whether express or
implied, executed or executory, oral or written.
Corporation means any corporation that has a board of directors appointed in whole or in part by the city council that is operating
under the direct authority of or subject to the direct control of the city council.
Employee means any person employed by the city, including those individuals on a part-time or internship basis, but does not
include independent contractors.
Gift means anything of value, regardless of form, offered or given in the absence of adequate and lawful consideration. It does
not include the receipt or acceptance of campaign contributions which are regulated by federal, state and/or local laws or
ordinances.
Knowingly means a person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the nature of the person's conduct or to
circumstances surrounding the conduct when the person is aware of the nature of the conduct or that the circumstances exist. A
person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of the person's conduct whether the person is aware that the
conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result.
Officer or official means any member of the city council and any appointed member of a city board, commission or committee
established by resolution, ordinance, City Charter, state law or otherwise, on a temporary or permanent basis, operating either
under the direct or indirect authority or subject to either the direct or indirect control of the city council. Such term includes but is
not limited to the members of the city council, planning and zoning commission, the board of adjustment, the building and
standards commission, the library board, the parks and recreation board, animal shelter advisory board and the board of
directors of the city's economic development corporation.
Relative means any person related to an officer within the first degree by consanguinity or affinity. This relationship includes the
spouse, parents, children, stepchildren, father and mother-in-law, or son and daughter-in-law of the officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/448
Special privilege means a right, advantage or favor of or for a particular person, occasion or purpose not otherwise available to
others.
Substantial interest means the following:
(1) In a business entity means:
(a) The person owns ten percent or more of the voting stock or shares of a business entity;
(b) The person owns ten percent or more or $15,000.00 or more of the fair market value of a business entity;
or
(c) Funds received by the person from the business entity exceed ten percent of the person's gross income
for the previous year; and action on the matter involving the business entity will have a specific economic effect
on the business entity that is distinguishable from the effect on the public.
(2) In real property means the person has an interest in the real property that is equitable or legal ownership with a
fair market value of $2,500.00 or more; and it is reasonably foreseeable that an action on a matter involving the real
property will have a specific economic effect on the value of the real property distinguishable from its effect on the
public.
(3) An official is considered to have a substantial interest under the code of conduct if a relative has a substantial
interest under the code of conduct.
D. Standards of conduct. No officer of the city or a relative thereof shall:
(1) Have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, nor shall such person be financially
interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies
or service. The “financial interest” contemplated under this section requires that such person receive an actual
financial benefit from the transaction with the city. An actual financial benefit from the transaction shall include:
(a) An ownership in the entity transacting business with the city where the ownership interest is more than ten
percent.
(b) Compensation as an employee, officer or director of the entity transacting business with the city where
such compensation is affected by the entity's transaction with the city.
(2) Participate in a vote or decision on any matter in which the officer has a substantial interest.
(3) Represent or appear in behalf of private interests of others before the city council, or any agency, board,
commission, corporation, or committee of the city, nor shall represent any private interests of others in any action or
proceeding involving the city, nor voluntarily participate on behalf of others in any litigation to which the city is, or might
be, an adverse party. The restrictions of this subsection do not prohibit an officer, or relative of an officer, who is the
president, vice president or officer of a homeowner's association from appearing before the city council, or any
agency, board, commission, or committee of the city to represent such homeowner's association, except that no such
officer or relative of such officer shall appear before the agency, board, commission or committee of the city of which
such officer is a member.
(4) Accept any gift from any person that might reasonably tend to influence such officer in the discharge of such
person's official duties. The prohibition against gifts shall not apply to:
(a) A lawful campaign contribution;
(b) An honorarium in consideration for services unless the officer would not have been asked to provide the
services but for the officer's position;
(c) Meals, lodging, transportation in connection with services rendered by the officer at a conference, seminar
or similar event that is more than merely perfunctory;
(d) Complimentary copies of trade publications and other related materials;
(e) Attendance at hospitality functions at local, regional, state or national association meetings and/or
conferences;
(f) Any gift which would have been offered or given to the person if such person was not an officer or
employee of the city;
(g) An occasional item with a value less than $50.00;
(h) Tee shirts, caps, mementos and other similar promotional material or items;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/448
(i) Meals, transportation and lodging in connection with a seminar or conference at which the officer is
providing services;
(j) Gifts on account of kinship or a personal, or professional, or business relationship independent of the
officer's status;
(k) Complimentary attendance at political or charitable fundraising events; and
(l) Meals, lodging, transportation, or entertainment furnished in connection with public events, appearances or
ceremonies related to official city business, if furnished by the sponsor of such public events.
(5) Use such person's official position to secure special privileges or benefits for such person or others.
(6) Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen, individual, business organization or
group beyond that which is normally available to every other citizen, individual, business organization or group.
(7) Disclose confidential information.
(8) Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with or will be incompatible with such person's official position
or duties as an officer of the city.
(9) Use city supplies, personnel, property, equipment or facilities (whether tangible or intangible) for any purpose
other than the conduct of official city business, unless otherwise provided for by law, ordinance or city policy.
(10) Act as a surety on any official bond required for any officer or employee of the city, or for a business that has a
contract, work or business with the city.
(11) Fail to timely produce public information in response to a public information request. Public information
specifically includes any electronic communication created, transmitted, or received, or maintained on any device if
the communication is in connection with the transaction of official business.
E. Additional standards.
(1) No member of the city council who is on the board of a nonprofit organization may vote on any funding request
by that nonprofit organization, unless the nonprofit organization has a board of directors or trustees appointed in
whole or in part by the city council.
(2) With the exception of those proceedings allowed under this article, no member of the city council shall
personally appear in such person's own behalf before the city council, or any city board, commission, corporation or
committee but may designate and be represented by a person of such person's choice in any such personal matter.
(3) No member of the city council, the city plan commission, or board of adjustment shall participate in, or vote on,
any land use matter in which such officer has a substantial interest in any real property within 200 feet of the real
property, the subject of the land use matter.
F. Use of social media.
(1) Officers who post on any social media website that may be viewed by the public are expected to exercise the
highest levels of accuracy, professionalism, respect, and concern for the reputation and peace of mind of individuals
who may be affected by the post and the reputation and image of the city. Any comments, opinions, or statements
posted by an officer are subject to the restrictions under the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(2) Multiple officers shall not comment on the same social media post so as not to create a “walking quorum” of the
city council, board or commission.
(3) Officers shall refrain from posting personal opinions on matters to be brought before the city council, board or
commission including, but not limited to, personal opinions on pending matters before the city council, board or
commission, declaration of how an officer intends to vote on an issue, engaging or debating with citizens on items
presented to the council, board or commission, or officers' arguments for or against an item. These postings could be
considered a violation of the Texas Open Meetings Act and could result in criminal and civil liabilities for the officer
under Texas Government Code Chapter 551.
(4) Officers shall not post official statements on behalf of the city. Officers do not have the authority to make official
statements or claim that they can fix or resolve an issue; or, that they can have an issue fixed or resolved. Official
statements on behalf of the city shall come from the mayor, mayor pro-tem, city manager, or city attorney or other
person designated by the city manager or mayor.
(5) Officers shall maintain professionalism and common courtesy in their posts when commenting in their official
capacity and remain neutral to prevent the interpretation that a decision has already been made in an open meeting
which is a violation of the Texas Open Meetings Act.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/448
(6) Officers shall not use their official positions to post negative or derogatory comments or voice their personal
opinions against an individual, business or entity. Such conduct could result in negative feedback for the officer and
the city, and the officer could potentially be liable for slander, defamation of character or other civil remedies as
determined by a court.
(7) When posting an on-line communication that discusses city-related issues, but which is not posted as an
approved representative of the city or on the city's behalf, all persons must make it clear that they are speaking for
themselves, and not on behalf of the city by displaying a disclaimer that states that it is their own opinion and not
necessarily the opinion or position held by the city, city council, board or commission.
G. Disclosure of substantial interest. Any officer, who has a substantial interest in any matter pending before the body, board,
commission, corporation or committee of which the officer is a member, before a vote or decision on such matter, shall file an
affidavit stating the nature and extent of the substantial interest, and shall abstain from further participation in such matter. The
affidavit shall be on a form provided by the city and must be filed with record keeper for such body, board, commission,
corporation or committee.
H. Complaints against officers.
(1) All complaints or allegations of a violation of this code of ethics against an officer shall be made in writing on a
form provided by the city, sworn to before a notary public, and filed of record with the city secretary. Such complaint
shall describe in detail the act or acts complained of and the specific section(s) of this code of ethics alleged to have
been violated. A general complaint lacking in detail shall not be sufficient to invoke the investigation procedures
contained herein; and anonymous complaints shall not be considered. The city secretary shall provide a copy of the
complaint to the affected officer and the city council, and immediately refer the complaint to the city attorney, who shall
initially review the complaint to determine if the complaint contains sufficient detail and alleges a violation of the code
of ethics. The affected officer may file a written response to the complaint within seven business days after the
complaint is filed with the city secretary, who shall forward the response, if any, to the city attorney.
(2) The city attorney shall submit a written report to the city council as soon as possible but not later than 15
business days after the receipt of the complaint, unless an extension is granted by a majority of the non-implicated
city council members. The city attorney may contact the complainant, interview witnesses and examine any
documents necessary for the report. Such report shall be comprehensive and explain in detail all facts, findings, and
conclusions in support of the city attorney's opinion as to whether or not a violation of this code of ethics occurred.
When the city attorney receives a vague complaint or one lacking in detail, the city attorney shall contact the
complainant to request a written clarification. If the complainant fails to provide the city attorney with written
clarification, or if after written clarification is provided, it is the opinion of the city attorney that the complaint is
insufficient in detail and/or fails to allege a prima facie violation of the code of ethics, a written report to that effect shall
be submitted to the city council. If the city attorney determines that a criminal violation may exist, the city attorney
shall refer the matter to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(3) If it is determined by the city attorney that the facts as alleged could constitute a violation of this code of ethics,
then the city attorney shall, within 15 business days after receipt of the complaint, notify the mayor and city council
members of the existence and nature of the complaint. The city council shall cause a meeting to convene, whether
regular or special, within 15 business days after being so notified by the city attorney to further consider said
complaint in executive session with a quorum of the city council causing such a meeting to be convened. In any
event, the city attorney shall immediately proceed to fully investigate the alleged improprieties. For purposes of this
investigation, the city attorney shall have all of the powers of investigation as are given to the city council by reason of
the City Charter and shall report back to the city council as soon as possible but in no event more than 15 business
days from the date of notification of the city council unless an extension is granted by the city council. Said report shall
be comprehensive and explain in detail all facts, findings and conclusions in support of the city attorney's opinion as to
whether a violation of this code of ethics occurred.
(4) The city council shall consider the complaint and the city attorney's report at an executive session of the city
council. The affected officer may request that the complaint be considered in a public meeting. At such meeting, the
city attorney shall present a written report to the city council describing in detail the nature of the complaint and the
city attorney's findings and conclusions as to a possible violation of this code of ethics. The affected officer shall have
the right to a full and complete hearing before the city council with the opportunity to call and cross-examine
witnesses and present evidence in such person's behalf. The non-implicated city council members in attendance shall
conduct a hearing and review the complaint. The city council may reject the complaint or take action authorized under
subsection I, violations.
(5) No action or decision with regard to the complaint shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the
public.
(6) The city council may appoint outside legal counsel, or may direct the city attorney to appoint outside legal
counsel, or the city attorney in the city attorney's discretion, may appoint outside legal counsel, to perform the duties
and responsibilities of the city attorney under subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this section.
(7) A complaint or allegation of a violation of this article may only be made against an officer while such person
holds such position or office. A complaint made against an officer pursuant to this section shall be processed and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/448
resolved even if such person resigns from, or ceases to hold such position or office, prior to resolution of the
complaint.
I. Violations. The city council may take any one or more of the following actions in an open meeting concerning a complaint:
(1) Issue a statement finding the complaint is totally without merit, brought for the purpose of harassment, or
brought in bad faith.
(2) Issue a letter of notification when the violation is unintentional. A letter of notification shall advise the officer of
any steps to be taken to avoid future violations.
(3) Issue a letter of admonition when the violation is minor or may have been unintentional but calls for a more
substantial response than a letter of notification.
(4) Issue a reprimand when a violation has been committed knowingly or intentionally.
(5) Remove from office an officer, other than a city council member, for a serious or repeated violation of this code
of ethics. Removal shall be, to the extent by and allowed, in compliance with the Charter and state law.
(6) Pass a resolution of censure or a recommendation of recall when the city council finds that a serious or
repeated violation of this code of ethics has been committed intentionally by a member of the city council.
J. Adoption of state statute. Texas Local Government Code Sections 171.001 and 176.002, as amended, being the statute
which regulates conflicts of interest of officers of municipalities in the state and disclosure of certain relationships with local
government officers, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code of conduct for all purposes, with the proviso that, in the
case of a conflict between the provisions of this code of conduct and the state statute, then in that event the more restrictive
provision shall govern.
K. Limitations. A person must bring a complaint that an officer has violated a provision(s) of this code of conduct not later than
12 months after the day the complained act(s) occurred.
L. Interpretation of content. Any officer may request and the city attorney shall issue, a verbal or written opinion (as deemed
appropriate) concerning the meaning or effect of any section, word, or requirement of this code of ethics as it affects such
person.
(Ordinance 3858, sec. 1, adopted 3/19/18)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
Sec. 2-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted
as follows:
Abandon: To cease to provide control over, and cease to provide shelter, food and water for an animal without transferring such
care, custody, and physical control of such animal to another person with that person's knowledge and consent.
Animal: Any living creature including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, insects, fowl and
livestock but specifically excluding human beings.
Animal control authority or animal warden: A person or persons, or an establishment authorized by the chief of police for
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs, cats or other animals which come into the custody of the city in the
performance of their official duties and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Animal shelter: The public animal shelter or pound established and maintained by the city for the purpose of impounding and
caring for animals held under the authority of this Code and/or state law.
Animal warden: The chief of police shall be designated as the animal warden and has authority to appoint representatives or
designates to enforce the provisions of this Code, to receive reports of animal bites, insure quarantine of possibly rabid animals
and otherwise carry out all provisions of the Texas Penal Code related to control and eradication of rabies.
At large: Any animal, except cats, which is not restrained by means of a leash or chain of sufficient strength to control the actions
of such animal while outside a building, habitation or an anti-escape enclosure. Any cat which does not display a rabies or
license tag on collar or harness or which is unconfined during estrus, or both. Automobiles shall constitute appropriate
confinement and animals in automobiles shall not be considered at large.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/448
Cat: A domesticated member of the Felidae (feline) family regardless of sex, other than a lion, tiger, bobcat, jaguar, panther,
leopard, cougar, lynx and cheetahs, and other like carnivorous wild animals.
City: Shall mean the City of Sachse, Texas.
Commercial animal establishment: Any pet shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, recurring animal
exhibition, kennel or veterinarian clinic.
Dangerous dog: A dog that is deemed dangerous by the animal control authority or the municipal court after being involved in an
incident in which the dog:
(a) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or other domestic animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a
place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog
from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(b) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than a secure enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that
was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to
reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person.
Defilement: To foul, dirty, pollute or make filthy, either by animal or body wastes, or by the carrying or dragging of foul material.
Dog: A member of the Canidae (canine) family regardless of sex, other than a wolf, jackal, fox, dingo, coyote or other prohibited
animals.
Estray: Any livestock permitted, suffered or allowed by the owner to be at large on private or public property.
Estrus: A period of time during which most female animals may conceive, commonly known as “heat.”
Euthanized: Shall mean to cause the death of an animal by a method which:
(a) Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence of pain or distress, or
(b) Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent, given by qualified personnel, which causes painless loss of
consciousness, and death following such loss of consciousness.
Food: Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or sale in whole or
part for human consumption.
Food processing establishment: A commercial establishment in which food is manufactured or packaged for human
consumption.
Food service establishment: Any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portions service, and includes the site
at which individual portions are provided. The term includes any such place regardless of whether consumption is on or off the
premises and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. The term also includes delicatessen-type operations that
prepare sandwiches intended for individual portion service. The term does not include private homes where food is prepared for
individual family consumption, vending machines and supply vehicles.
Fowl: Any live bird.
Guard/attack dog: A dog which is trained to attack persons upon the command of its master, custodian or owner, or upon the
actions of an individual.
Hand breeding: Pertains to the breeding of horses. While the animals are bred a restraining line is kept on both the mare and the
stallion.
Harbored animal: An animal that is fed or sheltered for a period of ten days and/or an animal which returns to a specific premises
on three consecutive occasions pursued by the animal warden.
Impound: To take into custody or to place in the animal control shelter of the city or other authorized confinement area.
Kennel: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a
fee, or selling animals.
Livestock, large: Livestock that weigh more than 400 pounds at maturity; horses, cows, mules and other livestock of similar size.
Livestock, medium: Livestock that weight more than 20 pounds but less than 400 pounds at maturity; goats, sheep, miniature
horses and other livestock of similar size.
Livestock, small: Livestock that weigh less than 20 pounds at maturity; rabbits, poultry and other livestock of similar size.
On premises: Any animal confined on premises of owner in a building or substantial anti-escape enclosure, or secured on the
premises by a metal chain leash sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from escaping from the premises and so arranged
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/448
that the animal will remain upon the premises when the leash is stretched to full length.
Owner: Any person who owns, keeps, shelters, maintains, feeds, harbors or has temporary or permanent custody of a domestic
or prohibited animal, or who knowingly permits a domestic or prohibited animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person over which that person has control. An animal shall be deemed to be owned by a person who harbored it, fed it, or
sheltered it for five consecutive days or more. If a person under the age of 17 years owns an animal subject to the provisions of
this chapter, the head of the household of which such person under the age of 17 years is a member shall be the person
responsible for the animal under this chapter. Such household head may himself be under the age of 17 years and therefore
subject to prosecution under this chapter. There may be more than one person responsible for an animal.
Pet: Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
Pet shop: Any person operating separately or in connection with another business or enterprise, except for a licensed kennel,
that buys, sells, boards, or grooms any species of animal.
Primary quarters: A pen, corral or anti-escape enclosure within a larger grazing area in which livestock are kept.
Riding school/stable: Any place which has available for hire, boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule,
burro or other large animal.
Secure enclosure: A fenced area or structure that is:
(a) Locked;
(b) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(c) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(d) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(e) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the animal control authority.
Serious bodily injury: An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping of muscle that would cause a reasonable
prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the
person actually sought medical treatment.
Spayed: Refers to a female animal incapable of becoming impregnated, an animal that is infertile.
Unprovoked: Any action by an animal that is not:
(a) In response to being tormented, abused, or assaulted by any person;
(b) In response to pain or injury; or
(c) In protection of itself, its owner, its food, kennel, immediate territory, or nursing offspring.
Vaccination: The application of an anti-rabies vaccine into a dog, cat or other domestic animal, which vaccine is approved by the
state department of health and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Texas.
Veterinarian: A person qualified and authorized to treat diseases and injuries of animals who is licensed by the Texas Board of
Veterinary Examiners.
Veterinary clinic/hospital: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and
treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
Vicious animal:
(a) Any animal, other than a dog, that bites or scratches or attacks any human being or other animal without
provocation or constitutes a physical threat by reason of its behavior;
(b) Any animal which because of its physical nature and vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical
harm or death to human beings and would constitute a danger to human life or property;
(c) Any animal which has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that
the animal is possessed of tendencies to attack or to bite human beings or other animals;
(d) Any animal certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation thereof, as posing a danger to human
life, animal life or property upon the basis of a reasonable medical probability;
(e) Any animal that commits an unprovoked attack on a person or animal on public or private property; or
(f) Any animal that attacks or threatens to attack a person.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/448
Wild animal: All species of animal which commonly exist in a natural unconfined state and is usually not domesticated. This will
apply regardless of state or duration of the captivity. The term shall include, but not be limited to, skunks, foxes, lions, tigers,
panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles, apes, monkeys, elephants, rhinoceros, ferret and all forms of poisonous or
constricting reptiles and other like animals, and all varieties and offspring of each.
(1988 Code; Ordinance 3307, sec. 1, adopted 8/15/11)
Sec. 2-2. Vaccination of dogs and cats required.
All dogs and cats over three months of age must be vaccinated annually for rabies with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the
Texas Department of Health and administered by a veterinarian. A metal tag of vaccination with the year of vaccination, a
certificate number and the name, address and phone number of the vaccinating veterinarian must be securely attached to a
collar or harness that must be worn by the dog or cat at all times. In addition to the metal tag, a paper certificate must be issued
stating the name of the owner, the address and phone number of the owner or nearest relative or friend at home or work, a
description of the dog or cat with name of animal, the date of vaccination, the number of the metal certificate and kind of vaccine
used. The owner of any dog or cat shall display and exhibit a current vaccination certificate for his animal(s) upon request of the
animal warden. Every dog or cat shall be vaccinated at least once within each 12-month period from the time of its last
vaccination. A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall, upon request of the animal warden, acknowledge to
such animal warden whether or not an animal at a particular location, or owned by a named person, has been vaccinated within
the last 12 months, and other pertinent information. A rabies tag and/or license tag shall be valid only for the dog or cat for which
it was originally issued. Any person establishing residence within the city shall comply with the vaccination requirements of this
Code within ten days of establishing such residency.
All dogs and cats must be vaccinated for rabies by four months of age. Each dog or cat must receive a booster within the 12-
month interval following the initial vaccination. Every dog and cat must be re-vaccinated against rabies at least once every three
years.
(1988 Code; Ordinance 2012, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/03)
Sec. 2-3. Dogs at large.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or harboring a dog to permit such animal to run at large. No dog shall be permitted to
be upon any public street, alley or in any public place or upon the realty or premises of another within the city, unless such dog is
at such time and in such place under the control of such owner by means of a leash or metal chain of sufficient strength and
length to control the actions of such dog. At all other times, such dog shall be confined to the realty or premises of the owner of
such dog by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent such dog from escaping therefrom, or inside a house
on such premises, or secured on such premises by a leash consisting of a metal chain of sufficient strength to prevent said dog
from escaping from such premises when such chain is stretched to its full length. The finding or presence of any such dog in any
public street, alley or road or any such public place or upon the realty or premises of another within the city shall be prima facie
evidence that such owner of the dog knowingly permitted the same to be in or upon such place or location at such time. (1988
Code)
Sec. 2-4. Cats at large.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any cat to let such cat be at large, unless a valid rabies and license tag is attached to its
collar or harness. (1988 Code)
Sec. 2-5. Dogs and cats; confinement during estrus.
Any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus shall be confined during such period of time in an anti-escape house,
building or enclosure and said area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined
animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered by the animal warden to remove the animal in estrus to a boarding kennel,
veterinary hospital or animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of the animals confinement shall be paid by the owner.
Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal warden shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat shall be
impounded. (1988 Code)
Sec. 2-6. Impoundment.
The following animals may be impounded and the owner issued citations:
1. Any animal that constitutes a public nuisance;
2. Any animal infected or kept under conditions which could endanger public health;
3. Any animal in violation of any provision of this Code;
4. Any animal subject to impoundment under any provision of state law.
(1988 Code)
Sec. 2-7. Right of property owner to confine; notification of animal warden.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/448
If any of the domestic animals named in this chapter are found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the
premises shall have the right to confine such animal in a humane manner until an animal warden can be notified. When so
notified, an animal warden shall impound such animal as herein provided. (1988 Code)
Sec. 2-8. Disposition of impounded animals.
If the owner of an animal is known, immediate notice of impoundment shall be given to said owner. Any impounded animal,
unless under quarantine, may be redeemed upon payment of the impoundment fee, care and feeding fees, veterinary fee, rabies
vaccination fee and such other costs as set out in the fee schedule. Any impounded vicious or wild animal, unless there is reason
to believe it has an owner, may be immediately euthanized as deemed appropriate by the animal warden. If a nursing baby
animal is impounded without the mother, or if the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious milk, such animal may be
immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering. Disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel or inhumane
treatment, as defined in this chapter, shall be determined by the court of jurisdiction. Any animal, except vicious or wild animals,
not reclaimed by the owner becomes the property of the city and may be euthanized or adopted to a suitable owner at the
discretion of the animal warden. Such unclaimed animal shall be held for three working days for all animals, except however, any
animal wearing a current rabies and license shall be held for not less than five working days. If an animal is wearing a current
rabies and license tag, reasonable effort shall be made by the animal warden to contact the owner of such impounded animal;
however, final responsibility for reclaiming of an impounded animal is that of the owner. (1988 Code)
Sec. 2-9. Adoption of dogs and cats.
Any individual may adopt a dog or cat (the “animal”) from the city animal shelter under the following conditions:
(1) The animal has been classified as adoptable by the animal warden.
(2) The prospective adopter has proper facilities to care for the animal in a lawful and humane manner.
(3) When an adoption occurs and the appropriate fees are paid, shelter staff will make an appointment with
veterinary services to have the adoptive animal sterilized, vaccinated and microchipped. The prospective adopter
must agree to return the animal on the appointment date for these services. Additional time will be allowed for dogs
and cats adopted at an age of less than six months, but only for the minimum time necessary for the animal to reach
the age of six months.
(4) The prospective adopter signs an affidavit stating the animal will be cared for in a lawful and humane way; that
the animal is being adopted for ownership and not resale.
(5) Adopted animals may be returned to the animal shelter within 48 hours from the time of adoption, for any
reason, but no refund will be made of any fees paid for the adoption originally.
(6) All animals made available for adoption by the animal warden are believed to be in good health at the time of
adoption; however, no guarantee, either implied or expressed, shall be provided for any animal adopted from the
animal shelter, and no refunds will be given for any fees paid for such adoption, regardless of the reason, nor shall be
city assume any liability resulting from the proper adoption of an animal from the animals shelter.
(7) The adoption fee, which is set by city council resolution, is paid by the adopter.
(8) Animals shall not be released from the animal shelter for use in research.
(9) At the discretion of the animal warden, animals may be released to animal rescue groups and other animal
shelters.
(1988 Code; Ordinance 3331, sec. 1, adopted 10/17/11)
Editor's note – The age at which adopted animals must be spayed or neutered was changed from four months to six months with the
adoption of this Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 2-10. Health of animals.
The animal warden shall be authorized to euthanize or place in the care of the Dallas or Collin County Humane Society any
animal suffering from extreme injury or illness, whether such animal is found on public or private property, and after a reasonable
effort has been made to locate the owner of such animal. When the redemption of an animal suffering from any disease or injury
is sought by its owner, such animal shall not be released until the animal warden is satisfied that its proper treatment is assured.
(1988 Code)
Sec. 2-11. Multiple ownership of dogs and cats in a private residence.
No person shall keep or harbor more than five dogs or cats in any combination. Puppies and kittens under three months of age
shall not be counted for purposes of this section. The harboring or more than five dogs or cats may be allowed at the discretion
of the animal warden by the issuance of a permit. (1988 Code)
Sec. 2-12. Multiple ownership; kennel permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/448
Any person, firm or corporation wishing to keep more than five dogs or cats may procure a kennel permit from the animal
warden. Kennels will be maintained in conformance with this chapter and the location of such kennel must comply with all zoning
regulations of the city. (1988 Code)
Sec. 2-13. Guard dogs.
A. General requirements.
(1) All dogs kept solely for the protection of persons and property, residential, commercial or personal, shall be
registered with the city animal warden. The area or premises within which the dog is confined shall be conspicuously
posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two inches high, stating “GUARD DOG ON PREMISES” and
such signs shall not be more than 200 feet apart. A guard dog shall be issued a tag varying in color from a rabies tag.
A currently dated tag shall be attached to the collar or harness of the dog at all times and shall bear the words
“GUARD OR ATTACK DOG.”
(2) A dog which has received guard dog training may be destroyed when such dog is found running at large.
(3) A guard dog must wear a muzzle when out of confinement.
B. Permit required.
(1) A person must obtain a permit to own, lease, or harbor a guard dog by application to the animal warden.
Procedures for permit application, for inspection of guard dog facilities, and for the issuance of dog identification tags
will be established by the animal warden. The permit shall be valid for one year and must be renewed. Permits for
both permanent and temporary locations may be transferred to a new location owned by the same business during
the permit year. However, such transfers shall not be effective until the animal warden has approved the required
facilities at the new location and the information required below for permit locations has been recorded. Five working
days advance notification to the animal warden shall be required for permit transfers.
(2) Guard dog permit applications shall include the following information:
(a) The name, address, telephone number and drivers license number of the property owner where guard
dogs will be used;
(b) The name, address, telephone number of the dog's handler(s) who can be reached at any time;
(c) The number of dogs to be used and general description of their use;
(d) The location(s) where the dogs are to be used;
(e) The guard dog trainer or company from which the guard dog received its training; and
(f) Any other information the animal warden deems necessary.
(3) Permit holders shall notify the animal warden immediately if any information recorded as part of the permit
application changes during the period of time for which the permit is issued.
(4) The animal warden shall inspect the facilities where the guard dog is to be used and housed at the time of the
original application and at the time of renewal of such permit.
(5) If the inspection reveals that the requirements of this section are met, a permit fee for each approved property
shall be paid to the animal warden. The permit shall be displayed at the approved property.
C. Standards established.
(1) Whenever there is a guard dog on the premises, the standards of this section, in addition to the other
requirements of this chapter shall be complied with.
(2) Housing must have anti-escape fences completely surrounding it and/or be an anti-escape building sufficient to
house guard dogs.
(3) All gates and entrances to the area where the guard dog is housed, used or trained must be kept locked when
not in use.
(4) Additional measures judged necessary by the animal warden that must be taken to protect the public from
accidental contact with any guard dog.
(5) Where guard dogs are used outside buildings, the area must be enclosed by at least a six-foot chain-link fence
or other fence of equal security, wall or adequate wood fence, to which anti-escape devices have been added.
(6) In order to control noise, the animal warden may require a sight barrier which breaks the dog's line of sight.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/448
(7) In buildings where the guard dogs are used, exterior glass must be adequate, or additional protective measures
required by the animal warden must be taken by the owner to prevent the dog from jumping through it.
(8) The building and yard in which a guard dog is used must be posted with guard dog signs, approved by the
animal warden, that shall not be more than 200 feet apart, and shall be at all property corners and at every entrance
into the area.
(9) For guard dogs either transported or utilized in vehicles, measures prescribed by rule and regulation by the
animal warden must be taken to protect the public from accidental contact with a guard dog.
(10) A handler is required to be physically present while guard dogs are being utilized at temporary sites which do
not comply with this section or at those commercial locations that do not comply with the provisions of this section.
(11) An animal warden may conduct inspections and examinations of guard dogs and guard dog establishments at
such intervals as he deems necessary to ensure that standards are met.
(12) The city animal warden shall have the authority to revoke the license/permit so issued if an animal poses an
imminent threat to public safety or welfare. (1988 Code)
Sec. 2-14. Dangerous dogs.
A. Nuisance declared.
(1) It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner harbors, keeps or maintains a dangerous dog in the
city unless the owner complies with the requirements of this section, and state statutes regulating dangerous dogs.
The City of Sachse hereby adopts the regulations and procedures outlined in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 822, except as otherwise amended herein.
B. Requirements for owner of dangerous dog.
(1) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person
shall:
(a) Register the dangerous dog with the animal control authority;
(b) Provide animal control with two colored pictures of the animal;
(c) Have the dangerous dog microchipped for its lifetime and enrolled with a national registry; and present
proof to the animal control authority. The owner of the dangerous dog shall microchip the dog by implanting a
microchip identification device on the dog within seven calendar days after being notified by the animal control
authority or by the municipal court that such dog is dangerous. The cost of the microchip service shall be at the
expense of the owner;
(d) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate physical control of a person or in a
secure enclosure as that term is defined in section 2-1; and, post signs on all four sides of the enclosure in oneinch
letters warning of the presence of the dangerous dog;
(e) Secure the dangerous dog with a muzzle in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal when the dangerous dog is taken off
the property of the owner for any reason; and
(f) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to
cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person.
(2) For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when:
(a) The owner knows of an attack described in the definition of “dangerous dog”;
(b) The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog; or
(c) The owner receives notice that the municipal court has found that the dog is dangerous.
(3) If a person reports an incident described in the definition of “dangerous dog,” the animal control authority may
investigate the incident. After receiving sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority shall
determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog and shall notify the owner of that determination.
(4) The owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is a
dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to the municipal court. The
determination of the animal control authority is final if the owner does not file a timely appeal with the municipal court.
The owner shall confine the dog during the pendency of an appeal with the animal control authority or in a manner
satisfactory to the animal control authority. An owner may appeal a decision of the municipal court in the same
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/448
manner as appeal for other civil cases. The determination of the municipal court judge is final if the owner does not
file a timely appeal.
(5) The animal control authority shall provide written notice of the date, time and location of the hearing to the
owner of the dangerous dog and to any complainant, either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. At
the hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to be heard.
C. Registration.
(1) The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(a) Presents:
(i) Proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover
damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person;
(ii) Proof of current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and
(iii) Proof of a secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept.
(b) Pays an annual registration fee established by resolution of the city council from time to time;
(c) Provides two color identification photographs of at least three inches by three inches of each dangerous
dog with one photograph showing the frontal view and the other photograph showing the side view of each dog;
and
(d) Provides the name, general description, including sex, weight, color, predominant breed, height and length
and any other discernible features of the dangerous dog.
(2) The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog, a registration tag which
shall be placed and maintained on the dog's collar at all times.
(3) If the owner of a dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the 14th day
after the date of sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority for the area in which the new address is
located. If the dangerous dog has been sold or given away, the former owner shall provide the animal control authority
with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If the new owner resides in the city or if the animal
is kept in the city, the animal control authority shall notify the new owner in person or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that a determination has been made that the dog is dangerous and provide the new owner with a copy of
the requirements for the owner of a dangerous dog. It shall be unlawful for the new owner to fail to comply with such
requirements.
(4) The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall immediately notify the animal control authority if the dangerous
dog is running at large, has bitten or attacked a human being or another animal, has died, or has been sold or given
away.
D. Attack by dangerous dog.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked
attack on a person or another animal outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to a person or another
animal.
(2) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court which hears the case may order the
dangerous dog destroyed by a licensed veterinarian or the animal control authority.
E. Violations.
(1) A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to
comply with any requirements for ownership of a dangerous dog. An offense under this subsection is a class C
misdemeanor. If the owner of any dog determined to be dangerous under this section fails or refuses to comply with
requirements of this section, the dog shall be seized by the animal control authority and humanely destroyed.
F. Defense.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 2-14 D. or subsection 2-14 E. that the person is a veterinarian, a
peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or a person employed by the state or political
subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals, and has temporary ownership, custody and control of the
dangerous dog in connection with that position; provided, however, that for any person to claim a defense under this
section, that person must be acting within the course and scope of their official duties with regard to the dangerous
dog.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 2-14 D. or subsection 2-14 E. that the person is an employee of
the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/448
dogs for law enforcement or correction purposes; provided, however, that for any person to claim a defense under this
section, that person must be acting within the course and scope of their official duties with regard to the dangerous
dog.
(3) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 2-14 D. or subsection 2-14 E. that the dog at issue is a trained
guard dog in the performance of official duties while confined or under the control of its handler.
(Ordinance 3307, sec. 1, adopted 8/15/11)
Sec. 2-15. Vicious animals.
Any vicious animal found at large and endangering the safety of persons and property may be destroyed by the animal warden,
any peace officer or animal control officer in the interest of public safety if such danger is imminent and a real or apparent
necessity exists to destroy such vicious animal. The animal warden may order any owner or person having care, custody or
control of any vicious animal to take such animal permanently from the city. This order may be appealed in writing within ten days
of receipt of the order, to the city manager. He will make a decision to either uphold, reverse or modify the order and may
stipulate restrictions on the animal as a condition to allow the animal to remain in the city. If the city manager upholds the order,
the owner or person having care, control or custody shall not bring the animal back inside the city limits of the city. If the owner or
person having care, custody or control of a vicious animal fails to remove such animal as provided for above, such animal may
be impounded and/or humanely euthanized. The owner or person having care, custody or control of a vicious animal must report
the disposition and relocation of such animal to the animal warden in writing, within ten days after the expiration date of the
ordered removal of such animal from the city. Each day thereafter such information is not provided shall constitute a separate
offense. Those authorized to enforce this chapter shall be authorized to request search and seizure warrant(s) if there is cause to
believe that an animal ordered removed from the city for being vicious has not been so removed, or in any other violation in
which the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure authorizes the issuance of such warrant(s). (1988 Code)
Formerly, sec. 2-14.
Sec. 2-16. Animal bites and rabies.
A. Reports.
(1) It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner in the city who treats a person or persons for
any animal bite to report such treatment to the animal warden within 12 hours after such treatment, giving the name,
age, sex, and precise location of the bitten person or persons and such other information as the warden may require.
(2) Those authorized to enforce this chapter shall investigate each bite incident, utilizing standard reporting forms
provided by the Texas Department of Health, and/or forms furnished by the city.
(3) It shall be the duty of every veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any disease among animals capable
of being communicable to man, to immediately report that fact no later than 24 hours from the time of the incident,
together with the street and number of the premises at which the animal(s) are kept, to the city animal warden.
(4) Any person having knowledge of a rabid animal or the presence of any disease among animals capable of
being communicated to man, shall immediately report that fact no later than 24 hours from the time of the incident,
together with the street address at which the animal(s) are kept, to the city animal warden.
B. Confinement.
(1) If a vaccinated dog or cat inflicts a bite or scratch, or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits, and the
owner of the animal is known to the animal warden, the animal shall be quarantined for a ten-day observation period
beginning with the date of the bite, scratch or attack.
(2) Every animal that bites a human or attacks another animal in an unnatural manner, or has rabies or any other
zoonotic disease, or is under suspicion of having rabies or any other zoonotic disease, shall be immediately confined
by the owner, who shall promptly notify the animal warden of the place where such animal is confined and the reason
therefor.
(3) The owner shall not permit such confined animal to come in contact with any other person or animal.
(4) The owner shall surrender possession of such animal to animal control on demand for supervised quarantine.
Supervised quarantine shall be at the animal shelter or a veterinary hospital, except as otherwise outlined herein.
(5) The quarantine shall be for not less than ten days beginning on the first day of the bite incident and shall be
under the supervision of a veterinarian, who shall submit written reports to animal control as to the animal's health on
the initial day of observation and on the fifth and tenth day immediately following the date of the incident leading to
quarantine.
(6) Any animal quarantined at a location other than the animal shelter shall be observed by the same veterinarian
throughout the required quarantine period in the same manner as outlined above, and the owner shall immediately
notify animal control of the name of the veterinarian supervising the quarantine.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/448
(7) The owner of an animal may request permission from the animal warden for home quarantine if the following
criteria are met:
(a) Secure facilities must be available at the home of the animal's owner, and must be approved by the animal
warden;
(b) The animal must be currently vaccinated against rabies;
(c) The owner of the animal was not in violation of any provision of this chapter at the time of the bite; and
(d) A City of Sachse animal control department “animal home observation agreement” must be filled out by
the owner of the animal, and the appropriate fee paid in advance.
(8) If a biting animal cannot be maintained in a secure quarantine, it shall be humanely destroyed and the brain
submitted to a Texas Department of Health certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
(9) No wild animal will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely
destroyed in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a Texas Department of
Health certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
(10) The violation of quarantine by any person shall be just cause for seizure and impoundment of the quarantined
animal by the animal warden. It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the observation period.
(11) Without permission of animal warden, it shall be unlawful for any person to kill or remove from the city limits
any animal that has bitten a person or other animal, or that has been placed under quarantine, except when it is
necessary to destroy such animal to protect the life of any person or other animal.
(12) The animal warden shall direct the disposition of any animal suspected of being rabid or having any other
zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human being.
(13) Any animal which has been exposed to rabies shall be handled in one of the following ways:
(a) Humane destruction with notification to, or under the supervision of the animal warden;
(b) If not currently vaccinated, the animal shall be immediately vaccinated and quarantined for at least six
months immediately following the date of exposure, and revaccinated after five months of quarantine. The
animal shall be examined, by a veterinarian, on the first and last day of quarantine; or
(c) If currently vaccinated, immediate revaccination and quarantine for at least 90 days immediately following
the date of exposure.
(14) It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse or fail to surrender an animal for supervised quarantine or humane
destruction, as required herein for rabies control, when demand therefor is made by the animal warden.
(15) Any person having possession of, or responsibility for, a quarantined animal shall immediately notify the animal
warden if such animal escapes or becomes or appears to become sick, or dies, and in case of death of the animal
while under quarantine, such person shall immediately surrender the dead animal to the animal warden for diagnostic
purposes.
(16) A person desiring a suspect animal quarantined and/or a specimen sent to laboratory for testing must pay all
charges against the animal in advance.
(17) The owner of the animal that is quarantined under this chapter shall pay to the animal warden the costs of the
quarantine and disposition of the animal outlined herein, and the animal warden may bring suit to collect those costs.
The animal warden may sell and retain the proceeds or keep, grant or destroy an animal that the owner of custodian
does not take possession of on or before the third day following the final day of the quarantine.
(18) If the owner of an animal is unknown or cannot be found, such animal may be destroyed without being
quarantined, and a specimen forwarded for laboratory testing. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-15.
Sec. 2-17. Livestock estrays.
Any livestock permitted, suffered or allowed by the owner to be at large on private or public property shall be reported to the
sheriff of Collin or Dallas County as soon as reasonably possible, in accordance with state law. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-16.
Sec. 2-18. Large and medium livestock; distance from living quarters.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/448
It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep on premises under his control, within the city limits, any large or medium livestock in
such a manner that the livestock's primary quarters are closer than 150 feet from any human living quarters, other than the
owner's or keeper's living quarters. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-17.
Sec. 2-19. Small livestock; distance from living quarters.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep on premises under his control, within the city limits, any small livestock in such a
manner that the livestock will be quartered closer than 30 feet from any living quarters. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-18.
Sec. 2-20. Stallions capable of breeding.
Stallions capable of breeding will be confined in such a manner that said horses will not be dangerous to human beings. All
breeding shall be done through hand breeding under the control of an adult. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-19.
Sec. 2-21. Horse stable permit.
A permit shall be required to operate a livestock stable, and a permit fee, renewable annually upon inspection, must be paid. All
owners/operators of stables where animals are boarded or grazed for a fee must obtain a permit. Conditions for obtaining a
permit are:
1. The stable owner/operator maintain a register identifying all animals boarded or grazed; the name, address and
telephone number of the owners of each animal including an alternative emergency telephone number and a
statement by the owner of each animal boarded or grazed either assuming total responsibility for the care and feeding
of the animal, or transferring all responsibility for the care and feeding of the animal to the stable owner/operator.
2. The stable owner/operator maintain the stables and grounds in compliance with this chapter so as not to
endanger the public or animal health or safety, or create a nuisance.
3. The stable owner/operator must also provide an emergency telephone number where the stable owner/operator
or caretaker can be reached if they are not on the premises.
(Ordinance 526 adopted 12/1/86)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-20.
Sec. 2-22. Dog and cat permits and tags.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor or permit to be kept or harbored by any person, any dog or cat four months
of age or older within the city, unless a current registration permit from the City of Sachse, Texas has been issued for such animal
in accordance with this section. The owner of any dog or cat kept or harbored within the City of Sachse, Texas shall make
application to the animal warden for a registration permit for such dog or cat. Such application shall contain information on the
dog's or cat's description, date of vaccination and name, address, and telephone number, both work and home of the owner. A
copy of the animal's current vaccination certificate must be presented with application for registration, accompanied by a fee of
$7.00, unless the dog or cat being registered has been neutered or spayed and proof of such surgical sterilization can be shown
to the animal control officer then the fee will be $2.00. Upon compliance with registration procedures set forth above, the animal
warden shall issue a registration certificate and a metal tag. The tag and the registration certificate shall each bear a registration
number, the number being the same on each. The metal tag must be attached to the animal's collar or harness that must be
worn at all times by the animal so registered. If a permit tag issued under this section is lost, stolen or disfigured, a replacement
tag may be obtained by payment of a fee of $1.00 and presentation of the original registration certificate. If both tag and
certificate are missing, a new permit will be required as stated in this section. Registration permits will be renewed on an annual
basis and will be valid for a period of one year from the date of the last rabies vaccination.
A registration or vaccination certificate and permit tag shall be valid only for the animal for which it was originally issued. If there
is a change in ownership of a registered dog or cat, the new owner shall have the registration transferred to his or her name.
There shall be no charge for said transfer. Application for such transfer shall be made to the animal control division in writing or in
person. Fee-exempt registrations may be issued for police or sheriff's department dogs, and dogs trained to assist the auditorily
or visually impaired.
(Ordinance 817 adopted 9/18/89)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-21.
Sec. 2-23. Commercial businesses involving animals or fowl.
No person shall conduct the commercial business of selling, grooming, breeding, showing, exhibiting or boarding of animals
without a valid permit from the animal warden. Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, grooming, breeding,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/448
showing, exhibiting or boarding of animals and all persons who conduct animal club shows, must comply with all existing
regulations governing said business or show, and shall maintain said animals in compliance with this chapter so as not to
endanger the public or animal health or safety or create a nuisance. Every person holding a permit hereunder shall maintain
accurate records of all transactions involving animals, which records shall show the date, type of animal, animal registration
number and parties of such transaction. Such records shall be kept for at least one year, and must be made available upon
request, by the animal warden, to enforce this chapter. Application for permits shall be made to the animal warden on forms
furnished by said authority. The application shall not be approved until certification has been received from appropriate city
officials that the zoning, construction and facility comply with existing ordinances for establishments housing such business. If the
permit application is approved by the animal warden, said permit shall be issued upon the payment of the appropriate fee. The
animal warden shall make necessary inspections to assure compliance under this chapter. Animals shall be kept under sanitary
conditions so as not to present danger to the public or animal health or create a nuisance. All permits issued under this section
shall be valid for 12 months and shall be renewed annually thereafter by proper written application and payment of fee. No permit
issued under this section shall be renewed without compliance with regulations for initial permit. Permits to show or exhibit
animals (rodeo, circus, show, etc.) shall be valid only for the 30-day period immediately following issue. No permit shall be
transferable in any way. Persons requiring more than one permit will be charged only one fee for all of the permits needed. The
fee shall be the amount of the highest individual permit fee which would have been charged if the permits had been issued
separately. In cases involving a scientific or educational program, a nonprofit organization's show, exhibition or humane activity or
animals owned by the city, the animal warden may waive sections of this chapter regarding permits, fees and/or conditions,
within his/her discretion. All businesses described in this section must display the required permits in public view at the place of
business. The animal warden may revoke any permit without refund, for any failure to comply with any provision contained
herein. Appeals of revocation may be made within 30 days to the city manager, and must be made in writing. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-22.
Sec. 2-24. Cruelty to animals.
Cruelty to animals shall be prohibited within the Sachse city limits as follows:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully or maliciously kill, abuse, kick, maim or disfigure,
overwork, overload, torture, beat with a stick, chain, club or other object, mutilate, burn, or scald with any substance
or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious or
trespassing animals.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail unreasonably to provide necessary food, care, exercise or shelter for
any animal in his custody.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place or confine or allow such animal to be confined in such a
manner that it must remain in a motor vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such periods of time as may
endanger the health or well-being of the animal due to heat, lack of food and/or water, or any circumstances which
might cause suffering, disability or death.
4. It shall be unlawful to cause, instigate or permit one animal to fight with another animal or human being.
5. No person shall tie or fasten any animal to any lamppost, lightpole, utility pole, awning post, tree, fence, hydrant
or shrubbery belonging to another without the consent of the owner.
6. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to abandon or dump any animal within the city. All animals which
are abandoned shall be considered surrendered to the animal warden for impoundment or disposal under the
provisions of this chapter.
7. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal or pet shall immediately report
such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator
shall at once report the accident to the animal warden or an appropriate law enforcement agency.
8. It shall be unlawful for any person to expose any poisoned meat or other known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so the same shall be liable to be eaten by a domestic animal, pet or person. This section is not
intended to prohibit the prudent use of herbicides, insecticides or rodent-type traps.
9. Any person or persons violating this section shall bear the full cost and expenses incurred by the city in the
transportation, care, medical treatment, impoundment cost and disposal of said animal(s), including such animal(s)
removal from a vehicle.
10. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as toys, premiums or novelties,
baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three weeks old or rabbits under two months old, unless the manner or
method of display is first approved by the animal warden.
11. It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of any chickens, ducklings, other
fowl or rabbits, or to possess, for the purpose of sale or to be given away, any of the above-mentioned animals which
have been so colored.
(1988 Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/448
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-23.
Sec. 2-25. Molesting or releasing animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner, tease, annoy, disturb, molest or irritate an animal that is confined to the
owner's premises. It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner of a pet animal or his/her authorized agent, to willfully
open any door or gate on any private or public premises for the purposes of enticing or enabling any animal to leave such private
or public premises. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-24.
Sec. 2-26. Keeping of wild animals.
It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep or permit to be kept on his premises, or premises under his control, any wild or vicious
animal for sale, display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply
to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses. It shall be unlawful for a person to keep, or permit to be kept any
wild animal as a pet. The animal warden may issue temporary approval for the keeping, care and protection of an injured,
newborn or immature animal native to this area which it deems to be incapable of caring for itself. The animal warden shall have
the power to release, or order released, any animal being kept temporarily under the provisions herein. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-25.
Sec. 2-27. Skinning or selling of dog or cat skins.
It shall be unlawful for any person to skin, or to buy or sell, or attempt to buy or sell the skin of any domesticated dog or cat within
the city, or cause such animals to be skinned or to cause such skin to be bought or sold within the city. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-26.
Sec. 2-28. Inspection of animals and premises.
Animals and premises whereon animals are kept or maintained shall be subject to inspection by the animal warden, at any
reasonable hour, or at any hour in cases of emergency, if such animal warden knows or reasonably believes a violation of this
chapter may exist. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-27.
Sec. 2-29. Tampering with traps and equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment set out by an animal
warden. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-28.
Sec. 2-30. Compliance with chapter required.
It shall be unlawful and it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to do any act required herein. No
mental element need be present to constitute an offense under this chapter. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-29.
Sec. 2-31. Interference with city agent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere with, molest or injure an agent of the city authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or seek to release any animal properly in the custody of such authorized agent. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-30.
Sec. 2-32. Care of domesticated animals.
Owners of animals shall provide adequate food for such animals at suitable intervals of not more than 24 hours if the dietary
requirements of the species so require, and shall provide a quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the physical condition
and age of the animal, served in a clean receptacle or container, sufficient to maintain an adequate level of nutrition for such
animal. If kept outdoors, animals shall be provided with adequate outdoor shelter which shall mean a structurally sound and
weatherproof shelter which provides access to shade from direct sunlight and regress from extremes of temperature, thereby
providing for its health and comfort. If indoors, animals shall be provided with adequate indoor shelter which shall mean a
properly ventilated and illuminated facility, sufficiently regulated by heating or cooling to protect the animal from extremes of
temperature, thereby providing for its health and comfort. Animals shall be kept in areas which maintain adequate sanitation
which shall mean periodic cleaning and sanitizing or primary enclosures and housing facilities to remove excreta and other waste
materials and dirt, so as to minimize health hazards, flies or odors. Animals shall be provided with adequate space which shall
mean primary enclosures, and housing facilities shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow
each animal to make normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement to maintain physical condition.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/448
Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition, debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns.
Owners of animals shall provide adequate veterinary care for their animals. A sick, diseased or injured animal shall be provided
with a proper program of care by a veterinarian or humanely euthanized. Animals shall be provided with an adequate supply of
clean, fresh potable water provided in a sanitary manner. If potable water is not accessible to the animal at all times, it shall be
provided daily for such duration and of sufficient quantity as necessary for the animals health and comfort. (Ordinance 526
adopted 12/1/86)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-31.
Sec. 2-33. Animal; public nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person/persons to keep or harbor any animal which can be defined as a public nuisance, including
any animal which molests passersby or passing vehicles, attacks other animals or human beings, trespasses on school grounds,
roams at large, causes any damage, erosion, or defilement to public or private property or barks, whines, meows, howls, crows,
or makes other annoying noises in an excessive, continuous or unreasonable fashion or at unreasonable hours, or the keeping of
bees in such a manner as to deny the lawful use of adjacent property or endanger personal health and welfare, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. (Ordinance 1033 adopted 8/3/92)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-32.
Sec. 2-34. Animal waste.
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any feces deposited by such owner's animal on public or
private property. Feces deposited by an animal upon the private property of any person other than such animal's owner shall be
collected and removed at once by such animal's owner. Collection and removal of animal feces shall be in a container of such a
type that, when closed, is rat-proof and fly-tight. Such container shall be kept closed after each collection. At least once a week,
each such animal owner shall cause all feces so collected to be disposed of in such a way as not to permit fly breeding. (1988
Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-33.
Sec. 2-35. Storage of feed.
All feed provided for animals shall be stored and kept in a ratproof, fly-tight building, box, container or receptacle. Horse stables
must carry out a continuous, active rat control program. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-34.
Sec. 2-36. Removal of dead animals.
The animal warden may upon request of the animal's owner, remove or have removed any dead animal from any property in the
city. The animal's owner shall pay a fee for such service as set out in the city fee schedule. (Ordinance 526 adopted 12/1/86)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-35.
Sec. 2-37. Livestock and fowl permit and restrictions.
A. In general. All owners who keep medium and large livestock within the city must first obtain a permit from the animal
warden. The animal warden may make an inspection of the applicant's facility to ensure that all sections of this chapter are met
before issuing a permit. The animal warden shall have the authority to revoke a permit at any time the owner does not comply
with this chapter or any other requirements. The permit shall be valid for a period of five years and must be renewed. In order to
qualify for a permit for either medium or large livestock, an owner must have at least one acre of land. A minimum of one-third of
that acre shall be set aside for exclusive use by the livestock. For the first full acre two adult large livestock and one immature
large livestock under six months will be allowed, or for the first full acre six adult medium livestock, and their immature off spring
under six months will be allowed. If a combination of large and medium livestock is desired, it will be calculated that three
medium adult livestock will be equal to one adult large livestock. For each additional full acre set aside for exclusive use by the
livestock, one additional adult large livestock or three additional adult medium livestock will be allowed. When large and/or
medium livestock are to be confined to an enclosed restrictive structure for more than 24 hours a minimum floor space of 144
square feet for large livestock, and 20 square feet for medium livestock shall be provided for each animal for their exclusive use.
Small livestock may be kept on any property in the city if all other requirements of this chapter are met. All small, medium and
large livestock shall be contained on the owners premises by a fence constructed as provided in this chapter. Owners of small
livestock will be allowed to keep a maximum of 15 adult livestock over six months of age. All small livestock shall be in an
enclosed cage or fence and be provided a shelter with a minimum of three square feet of floor space per animal. All livestock
kept on property used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes shall be contained behind the rear building line. If
additional adjacent land is available the owner may request a variance from the animal warden, and it shall be recorded on the
owner's permit. Livestock kept on property zoned agricultural or residential estate may be contained in front of the rear building
line. No livestock shall be kept on property used for multifamily dwellings.
B. Swine.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/448
(a) It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep swine within the city limits except for pot-bellied pigs which meets with
the requirements set forth in subsection (b) below.
(b) Requirements for keeping pot-bellied pigs:
(1) Pot-bellied pig. The term “pot-bellied pig” shall refer to a variety of swine that is no more than 18 inches in
height at shoulder level when fully grown, has short erect ears and a straight tail. No swine shall be considered a
pot-bellied pig if its weight exceeds 95 pounds, or unless registered with a licensed breeder.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or raise more than two adult pot-bellied pigs in any one
location within the city. In order for a pot-bellied pig to be considered as adult it must be six months of age.
Nonadult pot-bellied pigs raised in any one location in the city may not come from more than one litter.
(3) All such pot-bellied pigs shall be kept indoors at all times other than for evacuation of waste material or
during exercise periods. The animals may not be left in the backyard or front yard of the owner's or harborer's
residence unattended. All waste material must be collected and disposed of in a manner that will not create a
nuisance.
(4) Pot-bellied pigs are subject to all applicable laws pertaining to running at large and impoundment.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or raise a pot bellied pig which has not received annual
vaccinations for erysipelas, parvo virus and leptospirosis (the first of which vaccination shall be obtained before
the animal reaches the age of four months). It shall be the responsibility of the owner or caretaker of the potbellied
pig to forward to the animal control department within 14 days of the vaccination a certificate from a
licensed veterinarian which shall include the following information:
(a) Name, address, and phone number of the owner;
(b) Name, address and phone number of the licensed veterinarian issuing the certificate;
(c) Name and description of the animal;
(d) Types and dates of the vaccinations;
(e) Tag number(s);
(f) Approximate weight, height and age of the animal; and
(g) The animal's general health.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a pot-bellied pig at any location within the city unless such a
person has first filed with the animal control warden a completed application for a permit to keep a pot-bellied
pig. The application must be accompanied by a fee of $20.00 per animal and the required veterinary certificate.
The permit must be renewed annually.
(7) Upon the owner's or harborer's compliance with the above provisions of this section the animal warden or
his representative shall register the pot-bellied pig and issue a metal registration tag.
(8) It shall be unlawful for any person to commercially breed pot-bellied pigs within the city without obtaining a
permit from the animal warden. All applicable laws pertaining to the commercial breeding of animals apply to this
section.
(9) Should the pot-bellied pig die, be moved or acquire a new owner or caretaker, it shall be the registered
owner's duty to inform the animal control warden of this fact within 14 days of the event.
C. Pigeons.
(1) Intent. The intent of this subsection is to permit only those pigeon lofts in residential zones which can and will be
maintained in such a manner that will protect the health and safety of the community, and will not become a public
nuisance.
(2) Definitions as used in this subsection.
(a) Aviary means any cage or enclosure where birds are kept or maintained for breeding, display, exhibition
and amusement.
(b) Fancy pigeon means a pigeon which, through past breeding, has developed certain distinctive physical
and/or performing characteristics as to be clearly identified as such. These pigeons shall be banded with a
seamless, numbered leg band issued by an active show club or association. Examples: Rollers, Frillbacks, and
Fantails.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/448
(c) Leg band means a ring of metal or plastic placed on the leg of a pigeon which bears thereon the means of
identifying the owner or keeper thereof.
(d) Loft means only the structure(s) for the keeping or housing of pigeons as are duly licensed as herein
provided.
(e) Mature birds means those pigeons aged six months or over.
(f) Permit means a license issued by the animal control department for the maintenance of a pigeon loft or by
the office of the building inspector for the construction of a pigeon loft.
(g) Pigeon means a member of the family Columbidae.
(h) Racing pigeon means a pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has developed a distinctive
physical and/or mental characteristics to enable the pigeon to return to its home after having been released a
considerable distance therefrom. These pigeons shall be banded with a seamless, numbered leg band, issued
by an active racing club or association, and raised for the purpose of racing. Also known as Antwerp, carrier
pigeon or racing pigeon.
(i) Supervised exercise means that while the racing and/or fancy pigeons are outside of the loft, an owner
shall insure that his racing and/or fancy pigeons do not roost on a neighbor's property nor interfere with a
neighbor's enjoyment of his homestead.
(3) Permit application. A permit from the department of animal control shall be required to maintain a fancy or
racing pigeon loft or to keep fancy or racing pigeons within the City of Sachse, after the effective date of this
subsection. The keeping of common pigeons shall not be permitted.
The applicant shall file an application for such a permit on a form prescribed by the animal control officer. At this
time, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of $5.00. The application shall include a statement in writing by the applicant
and adequate evidence showing that the construction and operation of the proposed loft will conform to standards and
requirements. The application shall also include the name of the pigeon club or organization the birds are registered
with, a contact person within the organization and a phone number where this person can be reached.
(4) Application for permit; contents; information; accompanying documents; submission to director.
(a) An application for a permit or permit renewal shall be filed by the fancy or racing pigeon owner together
with an address or legal description of the property upon which the loft is kept or proposed to be kept.
(b) The application must be signed by the fancy or racing pigeon owner as defined in this subsection.
(c) The permit application shall be on a form provided by the department of animal control, and shall be
accompanied by the required permit fee.
(d) A drawing showing the size and location of the loft(s), and measured distance to property lines and
habitable buildings on the property must accompany the application.
(e) Written verification from the department of the building inspector that construction of the loft(s) complies
with applicable building ordinances or codes.
(f) The number of fancy or racing pigeons to be kept in the loft.
(g) Such additional information deemed necessary to properly and effectively administer the provision of this
subsection.
(5) Term of permit; renewal fee.
(a) All permits shall be for a period of one year.
(b) Applications for permit renewal shall be submitted 30 days prior to the expiration date in the manner
provided in paragraph (3) together with the prescribed permit fee.
(6) Suspension; revocation of permit; prosecution.
(a) All pigeon lofts shall be subject to inspection by the animal control officer as provided in this subsection.
Upon failure to comply with any or all of these rules and regulations or the conditions specified by the animal
control officer, the officer shall notify the owner of the pigeons as specified at the time of permitting. After proper
written notifications of violation and a period of ten days time to effect compliance, noncompliance shall be
grounds for permit suspension. After this ten-day period, the animal control officer shall reinspect the loft to
determine if the violations still exist. Three violations and a permit may be relocated by the animal control officer.
The owner shall be notified in writing of the effective date of such permit suspension or revocation together with
the reasons therefor. Suspension or revocation shall be without prejudice to the owner's right to a hearing before
the municipal court judge.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/448
(b) The issuance of a permit shall not be held to exempt the owner to whom the permit was issued from being
cited for flagrant violations of this subsection.
(7) Exceptions. At the time of the passage of this subsection the following persons are keeping and maintaining
pigeons within the City of Sachse: Warren Glover, 4903 Sachse Road, James Bodiford, 2107 Cartwright, Don Rice,
1601 Blackburn Rd., and Lewis Lopez, 4203 Pleasant Valley Rd. The above-named persons shall be permitted to
continue their present operation but shall not be allowed to expand either the number of birds, the size of the loft or
the location of the loft unless such expansion or change is fully compliant with the provision of this subsection. These
persons shall comply with all other provisions or regulations of this subsection. These exempted persons may not
transfer their rights of exemption to another person.
(8) Loft construction.
(a) The physical construction of the loft(s) shall be in compliance with applicable municipal building
ordinances and codes.
(b) The pigeon loft shall be of a size sufficient to house the number of pigeons contemplated. In no case shall
there be more than 75 mature birds on lots up to one-quarter acre in size; 100 mature birds for lots that are onequarter
to one-half acre in size; and 150 mature birds on lots that are greater than one-half acre in size.
(c) If the loft has a ventilated floor it must be underpenned (skirted) so no wild birds can enter.
(d) The loft shall be constructed in a location which is well drained and will not allow water to flow beneath the
structure.
(e) The height of the loft must not exceed eight feet above grade.
(f) That portion of the pigeon loft designated as the aviary or fly way shall be constructed so that it faces the
residence of the owner.
(g) Pigeon lofts shall be enclosed in such a manner as to prevent feathers from being blown into adjacent
properties. It is suggested that one-half inch galvanized wire and hardware cloth be used to enclose lofts.
(9) Loft location.
(a) Lofts established, hereafter constructed, erected, maintained or operated in the City of Sachse, shall be in
no yard other than the rear yard.
(b) Further, the loft shall not be located nearer than 35 feet from any residential structure on an adjoining or
adjacent lot or parcel, 50 feet from any swimming pool on an adjoining or adjacent lot or parcel, and ten feet
from the owner's residence or swimming pool.
(10) Privacy fence. If the loft is closer than 100 feet to the property line, then an eight-foot wood privacy fence shall
be required.
(11) Loft maintenance.
(a) The pigeon loft shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner at all times and shall be subject to
periodic inspection.
(b) Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in the loft or be stored on the premises. It shall be the duty of
each such permittee to scrape or clean said loft(s) at lease three times each week.
(c) Pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited periods necessary for exercise, training and
competition; and at no time shall pigeons be allowed to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others.
(d) All grains and food stored for the use and feeding of such pigeons shall be kept in a rodent-proof
container. Spilled or excess feed in or around the loft shall be promptly removed and disposed of.
(e) All pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft or premises in which such pigeons are housed and
contained.
(12) Commercial use prohibited. Owners possessing a valid permit from the department of animal control may
utilize their loft(s) for the breeding, raising, harboring, training, conditioning, and flying of fancy or racing pigeons, but
shall not use such lofts for the business of breeding, raising, or harboring for commercial or marketing purposes.
(13) Right of entry for inspection. The animal control officer may enter and inspect any property at reasonable times
for the purpose of investigating either an actual or suspected violation or to ascertain compliance or noncompliance
with this subsection.
(14) Shooting and trapping racing and/or fancy pigeons. No persons, not being the owner thereof, shall shoot, kill,
maim or entrap a domestic pigeon if it has the name of the owner stamped upon its wing or tail, or has a band with the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/448
owner's name, initials or a number on its leg.
(Ordinance 886 adopted 6/18/90; Ordinance 1417 adopted 12/2/96)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-36.
Sec. 2-38. Livestock fencing.
A. In general. All fences that are presently being used for confinement of livestock and are not in conformance with the
following requirements shall be a nonconforming use and be allowed to remain in use. The nonconforming fences must still
confine the livestock to the owner's premises. Barb wire fences and electric fences shall never be used for a perimeter fence in
the city. Barb wire fences and electric fences may be allowed on the interior of an approved perimeter fence. All electric fences
shall meet state regulations and the controller shall be UL approved.
B. Fencing for large and medium livestock. For the use as a perimeter fence to contain large and medium livestock the fence
shall be constructed as follows:
(1) Fences made of wire shall be:
(a) Made of woven wire;
(b) A minimum of 55 inches, and a maximum of 96 inches high, as measured from ground level:
(c) A minimum of 11-gauge wire;
(d) A maximum of six inches between the wire stays; and
(e) A maximum of ten feet between fence posts.
(2) Fences made of wood shall be:
(a) A minimum of five feet, and a maximum of eight feet high;
(b) Constructed with a minimum of four rails between fence posts;
(c) With the distance between fence posts of eight feet maximum:
(d) With wood rails a minimum of two inches thick and six inches wide.
C. Fencing for small livestock. For small livestock a wire chainlink fence shall be used, and shall be a minimum of
four feet in height.
D. Other fencing. All other types of fencing shall be so constructed as to ensure the containment of the livestock to
the owners premises, and shall be approved by the animal warden and building inspector.
(1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-37.
Cross reference – See also sec. 3-9, fences.
Sec. 2-39. Permit application omissions or falsifications.
If an owner has withheld or falsified any information on an application or rabies certificate the animal warden may refuse to issue
a permit or tag/license or may revoke any permit or tag/license issued in connection with such application. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-38.
Sec. 2-40. Keeping of livestock or fowl near food establishment.
The keeping on any premises in the city of any fowl or livestock is prohibited unless the pens, stalls or other facilities for keeping
the same shall be so located that the livestock or fowl cannot come within 100 feet of any dwelling or business building owned,
used or maintained by any person as a food service establishment or food processing establishment, regardless of ownership or
occupancy of such establishment. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-39.
Sec. 2-41. Prior convictions of cruelty to animals.
No person who has been convicted within the preceding 60 months of cruelty to animals under this chapter or any other animal
cruelty law of this state or any other jurisdiction in the United States shall be issued a permit or license. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-40.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/448
Sec. 2-42. Reapplication for permit after denial.
Any person having been denied a license or permit for any reasons other than the previous section, may not apply for a period of
30 days after such denial. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-41.
Sec. 2-43. Compliance not relief from other regulations.
Compliance with this chapter is not relief from compliance with other regulations. The keeping of any animal in accordance with
this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the keeping of the same in violation of the zoning ordinance or any other
ordinance of the city. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-42.
Sec. 2-44. Variances.
The city council shall have the authority to grant variances, and revoke variances to this chapter. The application for a variance
must be made in writing, give the reason for the variance, and the address or location of the requested variance. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-43.
Sec. 2-45. Enforcement.
The animal warden of the city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any animal warden shall have the authority to issue
citations for any violation of this chapter. If the person being cited is not present, the animal warden may send the citation to the
alleged offender by registered mail, return receipt requested. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-44.
Sec. 2-46. Abatement of conditions not in compliance.
Whenever any premises where animals are kept are in an unsanitary condition, or the facilities are not in keeping with the
provisions of this chapter or any other regulations, or if any health ordinance or law is not observed, the animal warden, by
written notice to the owner of the animals, may order abatement of the conditions which are not in accordance with this chapter
or other regulations or conditions which constitute a nuisance. Failure to comply with such order shall, in addition to any criminal
or administrative proceedings, be grounds for and entitle the city to obtain relief by injunction. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-45.
Sec. 2-47. Pursuit of animals by animal warden.
For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter, or other applicable laws, and to enforce the
same, the animal warden may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law, which shall include but not be
limited to entry upon private unfenced property, except dwellings located thereon, when in pursuit of any animal which he/she
has reason to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws. (1988 Code)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-46.
Sec. 2-48. Penalty.
Any person violating any portion or provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
therefor, shall be punished by the assessment of a fine as provided for in chapter 1, section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. If any person is
found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, they may be liable for denial, suspension or revocation of a license variance
and/or permit provided by this chapter and issued by the animal warden. Upon denial, suspension or revocation the animal's
owner shall have ten working days to correct the violation or remove the animal from the city. If the violation is not corrected and
the animal is not removed from the city within the ten working days then the animal warden shall remove the animal and impound
it. After impoundment the owner shall have ten more working days to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the
violation then the animal will be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with this chapter, and the animal's owner
shall reimburse the city for all costs of impoundment. (Ordinance 526 adopted 12/1/86)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-47.
Sec. 2-49. Animal shelter advisory committee.
A. Appointment of animal shelter advisory committee. The City Council of the City of Sachse shall appoint an advisory
committee to assist in complying with the requirements of the Texas Department of Health and Safety Code Standards Chapter
8-23.
B. Composition of the animal shelter advisory committee. The advisory committee must be composed of at least one licensed
veterinarian, one municipal elected official, City of Sachse Animal Control Officer, and one representative from an animal welfare
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/448
organization.
C. Meetings of the animal shelter advisory committee. The advisory committee shall meet at least three times a year. The
municipal elected official shall serve as the chairman of the committee.
(Ordinance 1056 adopted 12/7/92)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-48.
Sec. 2-50. Animal shelter board.
A. Statement of purpose. The animal shelter board is hereby created to act as an advisory board to assist the city in
communicating awareness to the city's citizens regarding the services and procedures of the animal shelter. The board will
consider and make recommendations regarding the animal shelter and its operations, policies and procedures, the need to
establish new programs and improve existing programs. The board shall be advisory in nature and shall not have any
responsibility or authority over any board, commission, public officer or employee of the City of Sachse.
B. Membership. The animal shelter board shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. Terms of office are for
a period of two years, and shall expire on a staggering basis on October 31 of each year. The membership shall be composed of
citizens of the city that are registered voters.
C. Officers. The animal shelter board shall have a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary elected by its members for a
one-year term. The secretary shall keep a record of all meetings of the board.
D. Meetings; quorum. The animal shelter board shall hold monthly meetings and may meet more or less frequently as needed
for the conduct of its business. A majority of board members shall constitute a quorum. However, a vacancy on the board shall
not be considered for this purpose. A vote of the simple majority of the quorum shall be required for any action taken by the
board.
E. Removal of members; attendance. All members of the animal shelter board are subject to removal in accordance with the
city council's current policy concerning required attendance at city board, commission, and committee meetings. In addition, the
members of the animal shelter board may be removed at any time by the city council without cause. If a member of the board is
absent from three of five consecutive regular meetings, without explanation acceptable to the majority of the city council
members, his/her office shall be declared vacant at the next regular meeting of the city council by resolution. In addition, any
member of the board who has been absent for four consecutive regular meetings due to any reason shall have his/her seat
declared vacant at the next regular meeting of the city council by resolution.
F. Duties. The animal shelter board shall have the following duties:
(1) Receive suggestions and recommendations from the citizens of Sachse in regards to the developments and
improvements of the animal shelter and shelter services and make recommendations to the city council via the animal
shelter supervisor or Sachse Police Chief.
(2) Make periodic reports to the city council concerning the work of the board and such special reports as may be
requested by the city council. These will be written reports authored by the animal shelter supervisor.
(3) Carry out and perform such other reasonable regulations and requirements as may from time to time be
necessary.
(Ordinance 3142, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/09)
Note – Formerly, sec. 2-49.
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-1. International Building Code.
A. Adoption. The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is
hereby adopted and designated as the building code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full
herein.
B. Amendments to the International Building Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International Building Code,
2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/448
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Sachse, hereinafter referred to as
“this code”.
(2) Section 101.4; change to read as follows:
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.8 and referenced elsewhere in
this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent
of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each
reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to
NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted.
(3) Section [A] 101.4.8; add the following:
[A] 101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical
systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances
thereto.
(4) Section 103 and [A] 103.1 amend to insert the department name:
SECTION 103
BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT CITY OF SACHSE
[A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Building Inspection Department of the City of Sachse is hereby
created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.
(5) [A] Section 105.2 {Work exempt from building permit}; change to read as follows:
Building:
1. {delete in its entirety}
2. {delete in its entirety}
3. {delete in its entirety}
4. {delete in its entirety}
5. {delete in its entirety}
6. {delete in its entirety}
7. Add “Interior” at the beginning of the sentence.
8. {unchanged}
9. {unchanged}
10. {delete in its entirety}
11. {unchanged}
12. {delete in its entirety}
13. {unchanged}
(6) Section 109; add Section 109.7 to read as follows:
[A] 109.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when:
1. The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives;
2. No building address or permit card is clearly posted;
3. City approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector;
4. The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called;
5. The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item;
6. The original red tag has been removed from the job site.
7. Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/448
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site.
(7) Section 109; add Section 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows:
[A] 109.8 Work without a permit.
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced
without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such
work.
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is
subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code
or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from
compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law.
[A] 109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required inspection in
violation of section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule.
(8) Section 110.3.5; delete exception:
[A] Section 110.3.5; Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspection.
(9) Section 202; amend definition of Ambulatory Care Facility as follows:
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric,
nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by
the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following:
* Dialysis centers
* Sedation dentistry
* Surgery centers
* Colonic centers
* Psychiatric centers
(10) Section 202; add definition of Assisted Living Facility to read as follows:
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of
age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care
services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff.
(11) Section 202; amend definition of Atrium as follows:
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories... {Balance remains unchanged}
(12) Section 202; amend definition to read as follows:
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest
level of fire department vehicle access.
(13) Section 202; add definition of Repair Garage to read as follows:
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This
occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items
such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such
minor repairs.
(14) Section 202; amend definition of Special Inspector to read as follows:
[BS] SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall prove to
the satisfaction of the registered design professional in responsible charge and the Building Official as having the
competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring special inspection.
(15) Section 303.1.3; add a sentence to read as follows:
303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated
with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy. Except when applying the assembly requirements
of Chapter 10 and 11.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/448
(16) Section 304.1; add the following to the list of occupancies:
Fire stations
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less
(17) Section 307.1.1; add the following to exception 4:
4. Cleaning establishments... {text unchanged}... with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 711 or both. See also IFC Chapter 21, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions.
(18) Section 403.1, exception 3; change to read as follows:
3. The open air portion of a building... {remainder unchanged}
(19) Section 403.3, exception; delete item 2.
(20) Section 403.3.2; change to read as follows:
[F] 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (36.5 m) in building
height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different
streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each
connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and
pressure required for the pumps to operate.
Exception: {No change to exception.}
(21) Section 404.5; delete exception.
(22) Section 406.3.5.1 Carport Separation; add sentence to read as follows:
A fire separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on
all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm).
(23) Section 506.2.2; add a sentence to read as follows:
506.2.2 Open space limits. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public use and shall
be accessed from a street or approved fire lane. In order to be considered as accessible, if not in direct contact with a
street or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or approved fire
lane shall be provided.
(24) Section 712.1.9, change item 4 to read as follows:
4. Is not open to a corridor in Group I and RH occupancies.
(25) Section 901.6.1; add Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows:
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA
25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be back flushed when
foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system.
Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of
standpipe systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing
water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as
approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to
verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to
introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check
valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of
NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as
required by the fire code official.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire
Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in
the building. The tag shall be check-marked as “Fifth Year” for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag
shall read “5 Year Standpipe Test” at a minimum.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/448
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and
Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority
Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as
required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during
freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions.
9. Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe
systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose
valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove
hose by the fire code official.
(26) Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904
shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as
approved by the fire code official.
(27) Section 903.2; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be
provided in the locations described in Section 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in
elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers
would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the
elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating
“ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED.”
(28) Section 903.2; delete the exception.
(29) Section 903.2.9; add Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows:
[F] 903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all selfservice
storage facilities.
(30) Section 903.2.11; amend 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 as follows:
[F] 903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International
Building Code, located 35 feet (10 668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access,
measured to the finished floor.
Exceptions:
1. Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no
other occupancies above the subject garage.
2. {delete exception}
[F] 903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572
mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply.
[F] 903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected
by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
[F] 903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 6,000 square feet (557.5 m 2). An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout all buildings with a building area 6,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be
6,000 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings.
Exception:
1. Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code.
(31) Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required
in the following rooms or areas where such... {text unchanged}...because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated
construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/448
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents,
when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder
of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
2 hours.
4. {delete}
5. Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would
not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances.
6. {delete}
(32) Section 903.3.1.2.3; add section to read as follows:
[F] Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such
buildings two or more stories in height, in accordance with NFPA 13 and or NFPA 13R requirements, and attached
garages.
(33) Section 903.3.1.3; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family
dwellings; Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in
accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law.
(34) Section 903.3.1.4; add to read as follows:
[F] 903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be
allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining
the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA
standard, and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at
the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire
code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.
(35) Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
[F] Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of
the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety
factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements.
(36) Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
[F] Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system
and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler
and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a
supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering.
(37) Section 903.4.2; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
[F] The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification
appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department
connection.
(38) Section 905.2; change to read as follows:
[F] 905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA
14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air
pressure with a high/low alarm.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/448
(39) Section 905.3; add Section 905.3.9 with exception to read as follows:
[F] 905.3.9 Buildings exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and
where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally,
from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be
provided.
Exceptions:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.
(40) Section 905.4, change item 1, 3 and 5 and add item 7 to read as follows:
[F] 1. In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below
grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise
approved by the fire code official.
2. {No change.}
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an interior exit stairway
hose connection by a...... {No change to rest.}
4. {No change.}
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each
standpipe shall be provided with a two-way a hose connection shall be located to serve the roof or at the highest
landing of an interior exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12.
6. {No change.}
7. When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the
structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by
the fire code official.
(41) Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
[F] Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system
and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler
and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a
supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering.
(42) Section 907.1; add Section 907.1.4 to read as follows:
[F] 907.1.4 Design standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire
alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices.
(43) Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance
with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies where the having an occupant load due to the assembly
occupancy is of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.
Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International
Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group
E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E
occupancy.
Exception: {No change.}
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking
surface level, and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
(44) Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/448
[F] 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an
emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in
accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler
systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm
system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated
by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered
one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems.
Exceptions:
1. {No change.}
1.1. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station
detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section
907.2.6.)
{No change to remainder of exceptions.}
(45) Section 907.2.13, exception 3; change to read as follows:
3. Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the
International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited
to sky boxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas.
(46) Section 907.4.2; add Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
[F] 907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.
(47) Section 907.6.1; add Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows:
[F] 907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any
single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of
other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere
with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation
horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a
signaling line circuit interface device may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the
initiating device is ten feet or less.
(48) Section 907.6.3; delete all four exceptions.
(49) Section 907.6.6; add sentence at end of paragraph to read as follows:
[F] See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.
(50) Section 909.22; add to read as follows:
[F] 909.22 Stairway or ramp pressurization alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for
compliance with Building Code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be
pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft
relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated
conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a
separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from
the Fire Department as per Section 105.7.
[F] 909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp
pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the
entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule
doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the
required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3.
[F] 909.22.1.1 Ventilation systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of
other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply
with one of the following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building
and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to the smokeproof enclosure by
ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of
the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the
Building Code, or both.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/448
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smokeproof
enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not
less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if
separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than
2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a
fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
[F] 909.22.1.2 Standby power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems
and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section
2702 of the Building Code.
[F] 909.22.1.3 Acceptance and testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system
shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance
with these requirements.
(51) Section 910.2; change exception 2 and 3 to read as follows:
[F] 2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with early
suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
3. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with control
mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are listed to control a
fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
(52) Section 910.2; add Section 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows:
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1394 m2)
in single floor area.
Exceptions: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials.
2. In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3 and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and
unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 waterreactive
materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification.
Exceptions: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials.
(53) Section 910.3; add Section 910.3.4 to read as follows:
[F] 910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and
manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1
through 910.3.2.3.
[F] 910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically.
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at
least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers
installed.
Exception: Manual only system per 910.2
[F] 910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive
device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/448
(54) Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 910.4.3.1 Makeup air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level.
Operation of makeup air openings shall be manual or automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall
be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust.
(55) Section 910.4.4; change to read as follows:
[F] 910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated by manual controls only
automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls
shall also be provided.
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2.
(56) Section 912.2; add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows:
[F] 912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of the fire
department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.
(57) Section 913.2.1; add second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
[F] When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire
department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors
that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor
leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance
as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key
box as required by Section 506.1.
(58) Section 1006.2.2.6; add a new Section 1006.2.2.6 as follows:
1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the
electrical code as adopted.
(59) Section 1009.1; add the following exception 4:
Exceptions:
{previous exceptions unchanged}
4. Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any
variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of
Section 1009.
(60) Section 1010.1.9.4 Bolt Locks; amend exceptions 3 and 4 as follows:
Exceptions:
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy.
{Remainder unchanged}
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy {Remainder unchanged}
(61) Section 1015.8 Window Openings. Revise text as follows:
1. Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) 55 feet
(16 764 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention
devices that comply with ASTM F 2006.
(62) Section 1020.1 Construction; add exception 6 to read as follows:
6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single
tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The
actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke
detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided.
(63) Section 1029.1.1.1 delete this section.
(64) Section 1101.1 Scope. Add exception to Section 1101.1 as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/448
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division of Texas
Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be incompliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(65) Section 1203.1; amend to read as follows:
1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with Section 1203.4, or
mechanical ventilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a blower door at a
pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section 402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code,
the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the International
Mechanical Code.
(66) Table 1505.1; delete footnote c. and replace footnote b. with the following:
b. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more than 120
sq. ft. of protected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area, buildings of U occupancies may
use non-rated non-combustible roof coverings.
c. {delete}
(67) Section 1505.7; delete the section.
(68) Section 1510.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
1510.1 General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering
shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles or shakes shall be in
compliance with the rating required by Table 1505.1.
{text of exception unchanged}
(69) Section 1704.2, Special Inspections and Tests, is amended to read as follows:
1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the Building Official for construction as
specified in Section 105, the owner or the owner's authorized agent, or the registered design professional in
responsible charge, other than the contractor, shall employ one or more approved agencies to provide special
inspections and tests during construction on the types of work listed under Section 1705 and identify the approved
agencies to the Building Official. The special inspector shall not be employed by the contractor. These special
inspections and tests are in addition to the inspections identified by the Building Official that are identified in Section
110.
(70) Section 1704.2.1, Special Inspector Qualifications, is amended to read as follows:
1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of construction and or upon request, the approved
agencies shall provide written documentation to the registered design professional in responsible charge and the
building official demonstrating the competence and relevant experience or training of the special inspectors who will
perform the special inspections and tests during construction. {Remainder unchanged}
(71) Section 1704.2.4, Report Requirement, is amended to read as follows:
1704.2.4 Report requirement. Approved agencies shall keep records of special inspections and tests. The
approved agency shall submit reports of special inspections and tests to the Building Official upon request, and to the
registered design professional in responsible charge. Individual inspection reports shall indicate that work inspected
or tested was or was not completed in conformance to approved construction documents. {Remainder unchanged}
(72) Section 1704.2.5.2, Fabricator Approval, is amended to read as follows:
1704.2.5.1 Fabricator approval. Special inspections during fabrications required by Section 1704 are not required
where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved to perform such work without special
inspection. Approval shall be based upon review of the fabricator's written procedural and quality control manuals and
periodic auditing of fabrication practices by an approved agency, or a fabricator that is enrolled in a nationally
accepted inspections program. At completion of fabrication, the acceptable or approved fabricator shall submit a
certificate of compliance to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or the registered design professional in
responsible charge, stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved construction documents.
The certificate of compliance shall also be made available to the Building Official upon request.
(73) Section 2901.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
[P] 2901.1 Scope. {existing text to remain} The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with
the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters,
the Building Official shall determine which provision applies.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/448
(74) Section 2902.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
In other than E Occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 2902.1 may be lowered, if requested in
writing, by the applicant stating reasons for a reduced number and approved by the Building Official.
(75) Table 2902.1; add footnote f. to read as follows:
f. Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B Occupancies
with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments.
(76) Section 2902.1.3; add new Section 2902.1.3 to read as follows:
2902.1.3 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in this Chapter, all
food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section.
2902.1.3.1 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall be provided for use by
employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand
washing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by employees.
2902.1.3.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service sink or one
floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning
tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop
sink(s) shall be approved by the [Jurisdiction's] health department.
(77) Section 3002.1 Hoistway Enclosure Protection. Add exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. Elevators wholly located within atriums complying with Section 404 shall not require hoistway enclosure
protection.
2. Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and complying with
Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall not require hoistway enclosure protection.
(78) Section 3005.4; revise first sentence to read as follows:
Section 3005.4 Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. Elevator machine
rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in
accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.
{remainder unchanged}
(79) Section 3005.7 add a Section 3005.7 as follows:
3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces.
3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1
and as prohibited by Section 3005.7.2.1.
3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine rooms, elevator
machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoist-ways.
3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler control valve
supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor that is monitored by the
building's fire alarm system.
3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the hoistway
enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator lobby shall be provided.
3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not be installed.
(80) Section 3005.8 add Section 3005.8 as follows:
3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room, machinery spaces
and or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed locations stating: “No Storage
Allowed”.
(81) Section 3006.2, Hoistway Opening Protection Required. Revise text as follows:
5. The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) in height. The height
of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade to the highest floors served by the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/448
hoistway.
(82) Section 3109.1; change to read as follows:
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through 3109.5 and other
applicable sections of this code and complying with applicable state laws.
(Ordinance 2130, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05; Ordinance 3428, sec. 1, adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 1,
adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-1.1. International Residential Code.
A. Adoption. The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is
hereby adopted and designated as the residential code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full
herein.
B. Amendments to the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International Residential
Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section R101.1; change to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One-and Two-family Dwellings of the
City of Sachse, Texas, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to as “this code.”
(2) Section R102.4; change to read as follows:
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in
this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference
and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the
referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the
amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as
adopted.
{remainder of text unchanged}
(3) Section R104.10.1 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
(4) Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit; change to read as follows:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses,
provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m 2).
2. Fences not over 2.5 feet (762 mm) high.
3. {unchanged}
4. {unchanged}
5. {delete in its entirety}
6. {unchanged}
7. {unchanged
8. {unchanged}
9. {unchanged}
10. {delete in its entirety}
(5) Section R105.3.1.1 Determination of Substantially Improved or Substantially Damaged Existing Buildings in
Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
(6) Section R106.1.4 Information for Construction in Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
(7) Section R108.7; add Section 108.7 to read as follows:
R108.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when:
1. The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/448
2. No building address or permit card is clearly posted;
3. Approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector;
4. The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called;
5. The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item;
6. The original red tag has been removed from the job site and/or,
7. Violations exist on the property including failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection.
8. Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site.
(8) Section R109.1.3; change to read as follows:
R109.1.3 Floodplain inspections. For construction permitted in areas prone to flooding as established by Table
R301.2(1), upon... {text unchanged}... construction, the building official may require submission... {text unchanged}.
(9) Section R110 Certificate of Occupancy (R110.1 through R110.5); delete this section.
(10) Section R202; change definition of “Townhouse” to read as follows:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by
property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides.
(11) Table R301.2(1); fill in as follows:
GROUND
SNOW LOAD
WIND DESIGN SEISMIC
DESIGN
CATEGORYf
SPEEDd
(mph)
Topographic
Effectsk
Special Wind
Regionl
Windborne
Debris Zonem
5 lb/ft 2 115 (3-secgust)/
76
fastest mile
No No No A
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
Weatheringa Frost Line Depthb Termitec
moderate 6" very heavy
WINTER
DESIGN TEMPe
ICE BARRIER
UNDER-LAYMENT
REQUIREDh
FLOOD
HAZARDSg
AIR FREEZING
INDEXi
MEAN ANNUAL
TEMPj
22°F No local code 150 64.9°F
{No change to footnotes}
(12) Section R302.1; add exception #3 to read as follows:
Exceptions: {previous exceptions unchanged}
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/448
6. Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted
ordinances.
(13) Section R302.3; add exception #3 to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. {existing text unchanged}
2. {existing text unchanged}
3. Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated
as required for townhouses.
(14) Section R302.5.1; change to read as follows:
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes
shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors
not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35
mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.
(15) Section R303.3, exception; change to read as follows:
Exception: {existing text unchanged} Exhaust air from the space shall be exhaust out to the outdoors unless the
space contains only a water closet, a lavatory, or water closet and a lavatory may be ventilated with an approved
mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air.
(16) Section R313.2; delete section.
(17) Section R315.2.2 Alterations, Repairs and Additions. Amend to read as follows.
Exception:
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of electrical powered {remaining text unchanged}
(18) Section R322 Flood Resistant Construction. Delete section.
(19) Section R326 Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. Amend to read as follows.
R326.1 General. The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply with the 2015 IRC Appendix Q.
Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.
(20) Section R401.2, amended by adding a new paragraph following the existing paragraph to read as follows.
Section R401.2. Requirements. {existing text unchanged}...
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation, regulated by this code
shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer.
(21) Section 602.6.1; amend the following:
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or
interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its
width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be
fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having
a minimum length of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of
the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1.
Exception: {unchanged}
(22) Figure R602.6.1; delete the figure and insert the following figure:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/448
(23) Section R703.8.4.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows:
1. When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in (737 mm)
vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or
2. When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in (483 mm)
vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation.
(24) Section R902.1; amend and add exception #5 to read as follows:
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and
R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed. Classes A, B and C roofing required by this section... {remainder
unchanged}.
Exceptions:
1. {text unchanged}
2. {text unchanged}
3. {text unchanged}
4. {text unchanged}
5. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool
and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed (area defined by
jurisdiction).
(25) Chapter 11 [RE] - Energy Efficiency is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
N1101.1 Scope. This chapter regulates the energy efficiency for the design and construction of buildings regulated
by this code.
N1101.2 Compliance. Compliance shall be demonstrated by meeting the requirements of the residential
provisions of 2015 International Energy Conservation Code.
(26) Section M1305.1.3; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/448
M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided... {bulk of
paragraph unchanged}... sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall
be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger and large enough to allow removal of the
largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a
minimum, access to the attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lbs (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
Exceptions: {unchanged}
(27) Section M1411.3; change to read as follows:
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the
drain pan outlet to a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain. {remaining text unchanged}
(28) Section M1411.3.1, items 3 and 4; add text to read as follows:
M1411.3.1 Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. {bulk of paragraph unchanged}
1. {text unchanged}
2. {text unchanged}
3. An auxiliary drain pan... {bulk of text unchanged}... with Item 1 of this section. A water level detection
device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.
4. A water level detection device... {bulk of text unchanged}... overflow rim of such pan. A water level
detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.
(29) Section M1411.3.1.1; add text to read as follows:
M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units... {bulk of text unchanged}... installed in the
drain line. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.
(30) Section M1503.4; amend and add exception as follows:
M1503.4 Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per
minute (0.19 m3/s) shall be provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the
exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with a means of closure
and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate simultaneously with the exhaust system.
Exception: Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented, or electric, the
exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) without providing
makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be
provided with a makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic
feet per minute.
(31) Section M2005.2; change to read as follows:
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet.
Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will
not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a
solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy
Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within
an enclosure is not required.
(32) Section G2408.3 (305.5) Private Garages; delete section.
(33) Section G2412.5 (401.5); add a second paragraph to read as follows:
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an
approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be
stamped into the tag:
“WARNING
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/448
Do Not Remove”
(34) Section G2413.3 (402.3); add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EDH).
(35) Section G2415.12 (404.12); change to read as follows:
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18
inches (457 mm) below grade.
(36) Section G2417.1 (406.1); change to read as follows:
G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and
pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the
requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 2417.1.1 through
2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance
notice to the building official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor
necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be
responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests.
(37) Section G2417.4; change to read as follows:
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a
pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage
during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made.
(38) Section G2417.4.1; change to read as follows:
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or
at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six inches (152
mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm
gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3 1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound
incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a
pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3
1/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded
piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa)
(1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less
than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of
water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed
maximum working pressure.
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The
appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing
(39) Section G2417.4.2; change to read as follows:
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building
Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in
excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time
satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes.
(40) Section G2420.1 (406.1); add Section G2420.1.4 to read as follows:
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping
systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the
valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but
in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with
the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and
supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.
(41) Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); add text to read as follows:
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve... {bulk of paragraph unchanged}... in
accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet
(914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox.
(42) Section G2421.1 (410.1); add text and exception to read as follows:
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be... {bulk of paragraph unchanged}...
approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as
specified in Section M1305.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/448
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced
and removed through the required attic opening.
(43) Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3); delete exception 1 and exception 4.
(44) Section G2445.2 (621.2); add exception to read as follows:
G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of
comfort heating in a dwelling unit.
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance
with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the building official unless an unsafe condition is
determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code Section 108.7 of the Fuel Gas Code.
(45) Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1); change to read as follows:
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing,
relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code.
(46) Section P2603.5.1; change to read as follows:
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall not be less than
12 inches (304 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall not be less than
12 inches (304 mm) below grade.
(47) Section P2709.2; add exception to read as follows:
Exception: Showers designed to comply with ICC/ANSI A117.1.
(48) Section P2801.6.1; change to read as follows:
Section P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be
of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be
drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains
shall be of those materials listed in Table 2906.5.
Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative
authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions.
(49) Section P2804.6.1; change to read as follows:
Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve,
temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
2. Discharge through an air gap located in the same room as the water heater.
3. Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air
gap.
4. Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment.
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved
by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with
those instructions.
5. Discharge to the floor, to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors.
[remainder unchanged]
(50) Section P2801.7; add exception to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. Electric Water Heater.
(51) Section P2902.5.3; change to read as follows:
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected
against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check
assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/448
atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be
protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
(52) Section P3003.9.2; change to read as follows:
P3003.9.2. Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer that
conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to ASTM D 2564, CSA
B137.3, CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces.
The joint shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent cement
joints shall be permitted above or below ground.
Exception: {delete exception}
(53) Section P3111; delete.
(54) Section P3112.2; delete and replace with the following:
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be
vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drainboard height and then returning it
downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The
return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided
with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending
to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not
less than six inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all
parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the
drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain-board shall be a one piece fitting or an assembly of a
forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow
in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the
return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot
vent.
(55) Section Appendix Q Reserved; amended to read as follows:
Appendix Q. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.
SECTION AQ101 GENERAL
AQ101.1 General. The provisions of this appendix shall control the design and construction of swimming pools,
spas and hot tubs installed in or on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling.
AQ101.2 Pools in flood hazard areas. Pools that are located in flood hazard areas established by Table
R301.2(1), including above-ground pools, on-ground pools and in-ground pools that involve placement of fill, shall
comply with Section AQ101.2.1 or AQ101.2.2.
Exception: Pools located in riverine flood hazard areas which are outside of designated floodways.
AQ101.2.1 Pools located in designated floodways. Where pools are located in designated floodways,
documentation shall be submitted to the building official which demonstrates that the construction of the pool will
not increase the design flood elevation at any point within the jurisdiction.
AQ101.2.2 Pools located where floodways have not been designated. Where pools are located where
design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, the applicant shall provide a
floodway analysis that demonstrates that the proposed pool will not increase the design flood elevation more
than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdiction.
SECTION AQ102 DEFINITIONS
AQ102.1 General. For the purposes of these requirements, the terms used shall be defined as follows and as set
forth in Chapter 2.
ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”
BARRIER. A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and
obstructs access to the swimming pool.
HOT TUB. See “Swimming pool.”
IN-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”
RESIDENTIAL. That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-family dwelling, or a one-family
townhouse not more than three stories in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/448
SPA, NONPORTABLE. See “Swimming pool.”
SPA, PORTABLE. A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls, water-heating
and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product.
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water more than 24
inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all
four sides by the walls of the enclosing structure.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
SECTION AQ103 SWIMMING POOLS
AQ103.1 In-ground pools.
In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-5.
AQ103.2 Above-ground and on-ground pools.
Above-ground and on-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4.
AQ103.3 Pools in flood hazard areas.
In flood hazard areas established by Table R301.2(1), pools in coastal high-hazard areas shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with ASCE 24.
SECTION AQ104 SPAS AND HOT TUBS
AQ104.1 Permanently installed spas and hot tubs.
Permanently installed spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-3.
AQ104.2 Portable spas and hot tubs.
Portable spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6.
SECTION AQ105 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS
AQ105.1 Application.
The provisions of this appendix shall control the design of barriers for residential swimming pools, spas and hot
tubs. These design controls are intended to provide protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by
restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.
AQ105.2 Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or onground
pool, hot tub or spa shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with the following:
1. The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219mm) above grade measured on the side of the
barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the
bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier, which faces away from the
swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier
may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is
mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and
the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102mm).
2. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102mm) sphere.
3. Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations
or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
4. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of
the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the
swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm) in
width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed
1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
5. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of
the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4
inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall
not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/448
6. Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch (57 mm) square unless the fence is provided
with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
7. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening
formed by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
8. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 7, and shall be
equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool
and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a
self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches
(1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following:
8.1. The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches (76 mm)
below the top of the gate, and
8.2. The gate and barrier shall have not opening greater than 0.5 inch (13 mm) within 18 inches (457
mm) of the release mechanism.
9. Where a wall of a dwelling serves a part of the barrier one of the following conditions shall be met:
9.1. The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM F1346; or
9.2. Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which
produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be
listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. The deactivation switch (ds) shall be located at least 54
inches (1372 mm) above the threshold of the door; or
9.3. Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, which are
approved by the governing body, shall be acceptable as long as the degree of protection afforded is not
less than the protection afforded by Item 9.1 or 9.2 described above.
10. Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the
pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then:
10.1. The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or
10.2. The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of Section
AQ105.2, Items 1 through 9. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening
created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch diameter (102 mm) sphere.
AQ105.3 Indoor swimming pool. Walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool shall comply with Section AQ105.2,
Item 9.
AQ105.4 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or
similar objects from being used to climb them.
AQ105.5 Barrier exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F 1346, as listed in
Section AQ107, shall be exempt from the provisions of this appendix
SECTION AQ106 ENTRAPMENT PROTECTION FOR SWIMMING POOL AND SPA SUCTION OUTLETS
AQ106.1 General.
Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7.
SECTION AQ107 ABBREVIATIONS
AQ107.1 General.
ANSI -American National Standards Institute
11 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
APSP -Association of Pool and Spa Professionals
NSPI -National Spa and Pool Institute
2111 Eisenhower Avenue
Alexandria, VA 22314
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/448
ASCE -American Society of Civil Engineers
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, VA 98411-0700
ASTM -ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428
UL -Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
333 Pfingsten Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096
SECTION AQ108 REFERENCED STANDARDS
AQ108.1 General.
ANSI/NSP
ANSI/NSPI-3-99 Standard for Permanently Installed
Residential Spas
AQ104.1
ANSI/NSPI-4-99 Standard for Above-ground/Onground
Residential Swimming Pools
AQ103.2
ANSI/NSPI-5-03 Standard for Residential In-ground
Swimming Pools
AQ103.1
ANSI/NSPI-6-99 Standard for Residential Portable
Spas
AQ104.2
ANSI/APSP
ANSI/APSP-7-06 Standard for Suction Entrapment
Avoidance in Swimming Pools,
Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and
Catch Basins
AQ106.1
ASCE
ASCE/SEI-24-05 Flood-resistant Design and
Construction
AQ103.3
ASTM
ASTM F 1346-91
(2003)
Performance Specification for Safety
Covers and Labeling Requirements
for All Covers for Swimming Pools,
Spas and Hot Tubs
AQ105.2, AQ105.5
UL
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/448
UL 2017-2000 Standard for General-purpose
Signaling Devices and Systems-with
revisions through June 2004
AQ105.2
(Ordinance 2131, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05; Ordinance 3428, sec. 2, adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 2,
adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-1.2. International Energy Conservation Code.
A. Adoption. The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city
secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the energy code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were
copied in full herein.
B. Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International
Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1; amend Section 101.1 to read as follows:
101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Sachse, Texas,
and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as “this code”.
(2) Section C102/R102; add Section C102.1.2 and R102.1.2 to read as follows:
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency
program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency
requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States
Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered
in compliance.
R102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency
program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency
requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States
Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered
in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for
air and duct leakage as prescribed in Section R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively.
(3) Section C202 and R202; add the following definition:
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading
device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the
overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device.
(4) Section R202; add the following definition:
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it performance
properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT).
(5) Table R402.1.2 INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT; amend by changing
the WOOD FRAME WALL R-VALUE for CLIMATE ZONE 3 to read as follows:
13
(6) Table R402.1.4 EQUIVALENT U-FACTORS; amend by changing the WOOD FRAME WALL U-FACTOR for
CLIMATE ZONE 3 to read as follows;
0.082
(7) Section R402.3.2 Glazed Fenestration SHGC; amend by adding a paragraph and table following the exception
to read as follows:
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC
required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for
Permanent Projections.
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projectionsa
Projection Factor SHGC Multiplier (all Other
Orientation)
SHGC Multiplier (North
Oriented)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/448
0-0.10 1.00 1.00
>0.10-0.20 0.91 0.95
>0.20-0.30 0.82 0.91
>0.30-0.40 0.74 0.87
>0.40-0.50 0.67 0.84
>0.50-0.60 0.61 0.81
>0.60-0.70 0.56 0.78
>0.70-0.80 0.51 0.76
>0.80-0.90 0.47 0.75
>0.90-1.00 0.44 0.73
a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north.
(8) Section R402.4.1.2 Testing; modify the first paragraph to read as follows:
R402.4.1.2 Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate of not
exceeding 5 air changes per hour in Climate Zone 3. {Remainder of text unchanged}
(9) R402.4.1.2 Testing; add a last paragraph to read as follows:
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified
by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an
independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs
the structure.
(10) R403.3.3 Duct Testing (Mandatory); add a last paragraph to read as follows:
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing leakage testing
certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an
independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs
the structure.
(11) Section C402.2.7/R402.2; add Section C402.2.9 and R402.2.14 to read as follows:
Section C402.2.7/R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To ensure that insulation remains in place, insulation
installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood
structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by the building official.
(12) Section R405.6.2; add the following sentence to the end of paragraph:
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate TM, Energy
Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to
provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may
be considered by the building official.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/448
(13) TABLE R406.4 MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX; amend to read as follows:
TABLE R406.41
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 65
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019.
TABLE R406.4 2
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 63
2 The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022.
TABLE R406.4 3
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 59
3 This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022.
(Ordinance 3428, sec. 3, adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 3, adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-1.3. Residential green building program.
A. General requirements. All single-family residential, duplex residential and townhome residential development platted shall
comply with the minimum standards set forth by the residential green building program for energy efficiency, water conservation
and indoor air quality.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) Energy efficiency.
(a) The minimum standard for energy efficiency of single-family residential structures shall be the
environmental protection agency's EPA Energy Star designation as it stands or may be amended with a score of
85 or below on the Home Energy Rating Systems (“HERS”) index.
(b) Every home shall be tested by a Residential Energy Services Network (“RESNET”) HERS inspector/rater
who is accredited through a RESNET-approved HERS provider. The HERS provider must register with the city
on an annual basis. No batch testing shall be allowed.
(c) A return air path shall be provided for any room that can be closed off by a door (except for baths,
kitchens, closets, pantries, mechanical rooms and laundry rooms). The pressure differential for said room, with
doors closed and air handler operating, shall not exceed ± 3 Pascal pressure differential with respect to the main
body of the home where the central air return is located.
(d) All joints in the air distribution system shall be sealed with duct mastic or approved equivalent.
(e) Dishwashers must be Energy Star designated and labeled.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/448
(f) A minimum of one programmable thermostat is required on every story.
(2) Water conservation.
(a) Homebuilders shall display in all model homes information provided by the city concerning the benefits of
xeriscaping and water conservation practices.
(b) Irrigation systems shall include a rain and freeze sensor and shall be installed to manufacturer's
specifications.
(c) A portable drip irrigation bag or zoned bubbler system shall be installed for each required tree.
(3) Indoor air quality.
(a) The minimum standard for indoor air quality of single-family residential structures shall be the American
Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (“ASHRAE”) Standard 62.2 as it stands or may
be amended.
(b) All mechanical room walls exposed to any living area shall be insulated to R-11.
(c) All unvented fireplaces and gas logs equipped with a fan that blows any level of combustion gases into any
living space shall be prohibited.
(d) Exterior ventilation system installed per ASHRAE standards must perform at:
1. Kitchen-25 cubic feet per minute (“CFM”) (continuous) or 100 CFM (spot).
2. Bathroom-20 CFM (continuous) or 50 CFM (spot).
3. Master bedroom-20 CFM.
4. Other bedrooms-10 CFM.
(e) All ducts supplying outdoor air must be equipped with a filter inside the return.
(f) A furnace and/or duct-mounted electronic/electrostatic air cleaner option shall be provided for homebuyers.
(g) All central vacuum systems shall exhaust to the outside.
(h) HVAC plenums on the supply shall be constructed of sheet metal (duct board shall be prohibited) with
external insulation (minimum R-6, if located in unconditioned space).
(i) Vinyl wallpaper is not allowed on the inside of exterior walls or on either side of wet walls, including but not
limited to those in bathrooms, kitchen or laundry rooms.
(j) A metal drip edge shall be provided at all exposed roof decking.
(Ordinance 3042, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/08)
Sec. 3-2. International Plumbing Code.
A. Adoption. The International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is
hereby adopted and designated as the plumbing code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full
herein.
B. Amendments to the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International Plumbing Code,
2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1; change to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the City of Sachse, Texas,
hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
(2) Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 714; change to read as follows:
714 Engineered Computerized Drainage Design..... 69
(3) Section 102.8; change to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that
are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/448
provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements.
Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and
standard shall be considered to reference the adopted amendments. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National
Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted.
(4) Sections 106.6.2 and 106.6.3; change to read as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution of the governing body of
the jurisdiction.
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. {Delete
balance of section}
(5) Section 109; delete entire section and insert the following:
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
[A] 109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the
board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance.
(6) Section 305.4.1; change to read as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade.
(7) Section 305.7; change to read as follows:
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet
(914 mm) along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which they could be exposed
to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner.
(8) Section 314.2.1; change to read as follows:
[M] 314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the
drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal.... {Text unchanged}... Condensate shall not discharge into a street,
alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance.
(9) Section 409.2; change to read as follows:
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against
backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. {Remainder of section unchanged}
(10) Section 412.4; change to read as follows:
412.4 Required location for floor drains. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas.
1. In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms
containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor
area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter.
2. Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may accept floor sinks.
3. Public restrooms.
(11) Section 419.3; change to read as follows:
419.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip and 4 feet
(1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be waterproofed with a
smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material.
(12) Section 502.3; change to read as follows:
502.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing a water heater shall be provided... {bulk of paragraph unchanged}...
side of the water heater. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508
mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions be not less than 20 inches by 30 inches(508mm by 762mm) where
such dimensions are large enough to allow removal of the water heater. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a
floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/448
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building
conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced
and removed... {remainder of section unchanged}
(13) Section 502.6; add Section 502.6 to read as follows:
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater
is installed is more than eight feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a
stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in
ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and
may be reached with a portable ladder.
(14) Section 504.6; change to read as follows:
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature
relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
2. Discharge through an air gap.
3. Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air
gap.
4. Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment.
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved
by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturer's installation instructions and installed with
those instructions.
5. Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors.
6. Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage.
7. Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants.
8. Not be trapped.
9. Be installed so as to flow by gravity.
10. Terminate not more than 6 inches above and not less than two times the discharge pipe diameter above
the floor or flood level rim of the waste receptor.
11. Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping.
12. Not have valves or tee fittings.
13. Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such
use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1.
(15) Section 504.7.1; change to read as follows:
Section 504.7.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of
sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained
by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of
those materials listed in Table 605.4. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when
approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with
those instructions.
(16) Section 604.4; add Section 604.4.1 to read as follows:
604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated maximum flow rate is more restrictive than those of
this section, the State flow rate shall take precedence.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/448
(17) Section 606.1; delete items #4 and #5.
(18) Section 606.2; change to read as follows:
606.2 Location of shutoff valves. Shutoff valves shall be installed in the following locations:
1. On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture other than bathtubs and showers in one- and two-family
residential occupancies, and other than in individual sleeping units that are provided with unit shutoff valves in
hotels, motels, boarding houses and similar occupancies.
2. {delete item}
3. On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical equipment.
(19) Section 608.1; change to read as follows:
608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as
to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply
through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall
conform to applicable local regulations, Table 608.1, except and as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through
608.16.10.
(20) Section 608.16.5; change to read as follows:
608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be
protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check
assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an
atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be
protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
(21) Section 608.17; change to read as follows:
608.17 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so
as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. Installation shall be in
accordance with Sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8.
(22) Section 610.1; add exception to read as follows:
610.1 General. New or repaired potable water systems shall be purged of deleterious matter and disinfected prior
to utilization. The method to be followed shall be that prescribed by the health authority or water purveyor having
jurisdiction or, in the absence of a prescribed method, the procedure described in either AWWA C651 or AWWA
C652, or as described in this section. This requirement shall apply to “on-site” or “in-plant” fabrication of a system or
to a modular portion of a system.
1. The pipe system shall be flushed with clean, potable water until dirty water does not appear at the points of
outlet.
2. The system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 50 parts per
million (50 mg/L) of chlorine, and the system or part thereof shall be valved off and allowed to stand for 24
hours; or the system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 200 parts per
million (200 mg/L) of chlorine and allowed to stand for 3 hours.
3. Following the required standing time, the system shall be flushed with clean potable water until the chlorine
is purged from the system.
4. The procedure shall be repeated where shown by a bacteriological examination that contamination remains
present in the system.
Exception: With prior approval the Code Official may waive this requirement when deemed unnecessary.
(23) Section 703.6; delete section.
(24) Section 704.5; added to read as follows:
704.5 Single stack fittings. Single stack fittings with internal baffle, PVC schedule 40 or cast iron single stack
shall be designed by a registered engineer and comply to a national recognized standard.
(25) Section 705.11.2; change to read as follows:
705.11.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer that conforms
to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/448
CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet and
shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.
Exception: {delete}
(26) Section 712.5; add Section 712.5 to read as follows:
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any “public use” occupancy
where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function
independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see
Section 1113.
(27) Section 714, 714.1; change to read as follows:
SECTION 714
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN
714.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall designed by a
registered engineer using approved design methods.
(28) Section 804.2; added to read as follows:
804.2 Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or intended to
receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed shall be constructed of CPVC,
high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed ceramic materials.
(29) Section 903.1; change to read as follows:
903.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall terminate not less than six inches (152
mm) above the roof. Where a roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade, observation deck, sunbathing deck
or similar purposes, open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
(30) Section 917 Single Stack Vent System. Delete entire section.
(31) Section 1002.10; delete.
(32) Section 1101.8; change to read as follows:
1101.8 Cleanouts required. Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed in the storm drainage system and shall
comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts.
Exception: {delete item}
(33) Section 1106.1; change to read as follows:
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and
any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six inches (152 mm) per hour rainfall rate.
(34) Section 1108.3; change to read as follows:
1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with
Section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof
was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches
(102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system.
(35) Section 1109; delete this section.
(36) Section 1202.1; delete exception 2.
C. Cross connection control program. No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or
actual contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality, formerly known as Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, Rules and Regulations for Public
Water Systems (TCEQ Rules) and city ordinance. The water purveyor shall discontinue water service if a required backflow
prevention assembly is not installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the TCEQ rules and city ordinance.
D. Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance.
(1) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a recognized backflow assembly tester
and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide
protection against health hazards must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at least
annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/448
(2) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-
Connection Control (Manual M14), or the University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
(3) Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said
assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to
the city within five working days of the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly.
(4) No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or device
substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved from the present
location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or device shall be replaced with a backflow prevention
assembly or device that complies with this section, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice
for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, or the University of Southern
California Manual of Cross-Connection Control current edition, or the current plumbing code of the city, whichever is
more stringent.
(5) Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance
with the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection
Control (Manual M14), current edition, or the University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control,
current edition. The original calibration form must be submitted to the city within five working days after calibration.
(6) A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current endorsement from the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality.
E. Customer service inspections.
(1) A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new
construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that cross-connections or other
contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private water distribution
facilities.
(2) Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a customer service
inspection.
(a) Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that have been licensed by the Texas State
Board of Plumbing Examiners.
(b) Certified waterworks operators and members of other water related professional groups who have
completed a training course, passed an examination administered by the commission or its designated agent,
and hold a current endorsement issued by the commission.
(3) The customer service inspection must certify that:
(a) No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of contamination is
permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water system by a properly
installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly.
(b) No cross-connection between the public water system and private water source exists. Where an actual
properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an
approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and a service agreement
exists for annual inspection and testing by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.
(c) No connection exists which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water supply is permitted.
(d) No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than eight percent lead may be used for the installation or repair of
plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use.
(e) No solder or flux that contains more than 0.2 percent lead can be used for the installation or repair of plumbing
at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one lead test shall be performed for each
inspection.
F. Enforcement. If a person is convicted of one or more distinct violations, the Sachse Public Works Department shall, upon
due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services
discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, and any other costs
incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the Sachse Public Works
Department or building inspection department that the same action shall not be repeated.
G. Conflicting ordinances. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the National Electrical Code and any provision of
this section, or any other city ordinance, the provision of this section or any other city ordinance shall prevail. In the event of
conflict between ordinances, the more stringent provisions shall prevail.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/448
H. Liability of the city. Neither the city nor any of its agents, servants or employees shall have any liability to any person by
reason of permits issued, decisions made, or inspections made concerning electrical service on private property.
(Ordinance 1236, sec. I, adopted 2/20/95; Ordinance 1662 adopted 4/1/99; Ordinance 1881, sec. I, adopted 10/1/01; Ordinance
1810, sec. I, adopted 11/20/01; Ordinance 2133, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05; Ordinance 2176, sec. 2, adopted 11/21/05; Ordinance
3428, sec. 4, adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 4, adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-3. International Mechanical Code.
A. Adoption. The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is
hereby adopted and designated as the mechanical code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full
herein.
B. Amendments to the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International Mechanical
Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1; change to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Sachse, Texas, hereinafter
referred to as “this code”.
(2) Section 102.8; change to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are
listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments
have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be
considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National Electrical Code (NEC)
shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted.
(3) Section 306.3; change to read as follows:
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided... {bulk of paragraph
unchanged}... side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30
inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest
appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for
access to the attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the Code Official due to
building conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced
and removed... {Remainder of section unchanged}
(4) 306.5; change to read as follows:
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or
appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher
than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided.
Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade
or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall... {bulk
of section to read the same}... on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent
slope).... {bulk of section to read the same}.
(5) Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows:
306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed
on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an edge
more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats
spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The
level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or
maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with
guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/448
prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for
guards specified in the International Building Code.
(6) Section 306; add Section 306.6 to read as follows:
306.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed
is more than eight feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or
permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Exception: A maximum 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a layin
ceiling and the water heater installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and
may be reached with a portable ladder.
(7) Section 307.2.3; amend item 2 to read as follows:
2. A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such
overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of
the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain
connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard such as dripping over a walking surface or
other areas so as to create a nuisance.
(8) Section 403.2.1; add an item 5 to read as follows:
5. Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination thereof may
be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the
air.
(9) Section 501.3; add an exception to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. {item unchanged}
2. {item unchanged}
3. {item unchanged}
4. Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when infiltration of outside air is
present.
(10) Section 607.5.1; change to read as follows:
607.5.1 Fire Walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section 705.11 of the
International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. For
hazardous exhaust systems see Section 510.1 through 510.9 IMC.
C. Conflicting ordinances. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the International Mechanical Code and any
provision of this section, or any other city ordinance, the provisions of this section or any other city ordinance shall prevail. In the
event of conflict between ordinances, the most stringent provision shall prevail.
D. Liability of the city. Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this section shall be liable or have
any liability to reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this section.
(Ordinance 654 adopted 2/15/88; Ordinance 1661 adopted 4/19/99; Ordinance 1883, secs. I, II, adopted 10/1/01; Ordinance
2134, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05; Ordinance 3428, sec. 5, adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 5, adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-4. National Electrical Code.
A. Adoption. The National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby
adopted and designated as the electrical code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full herein.
B. Amendments to the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition. The following sections of the National Electrical Code, 2014
Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Article 100; add the following to definitions:
Engineering Supervision. Supervision by a Qualified State of Texas Licensed Professional Engineer engaged
primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations.
(2) Article 100; add the following to definitions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/448
Intersystem Bonding Termination. A device that provides a means for connecting intersystem bonding conductors
for communication systems and other systems to the grounding electrode system. Bonding conductors for other
systems shall not be larger than 6 AWG.
(3) Article 110.2; change the following to read as follows:
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be acceptable only if
approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized
Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by
the AHJ.
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is
subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third party
inspection agency approved by the AHJ.
Informational Note No. 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3, Examination, Identification,
Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed.
Informational Note No. 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment may not necessarily comply with US
product safety standards as certified by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab.
Informational Note No. 3: NFPA 790 and 791 provide an example of an approved method for qualifying a third
party inspection agency.
(4) Article 210.52(G)(1) Garages; amend to read as follows:
(1) Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power. At least one
receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space.
(5) Article 230.71(A); add the following exception:
Exception: Multi-occupant buildings. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for each occupant.
The number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six.
(6) Article 240.91; delete the article.
(7) Article 300.11; add the following exception:
Exception: Ceiling grid support wires may be used for structural supports when the associated wiring is located in
that area, not more than two raceways or cables supported per wire, with a maximum nominal metric designation 16
(trade size 1/2").
(8) Article 310.15(B)(7); change to read as follows:
(7) This Article shall not be used in conjunction with 220.82.
(9) Article 500.8(A)(3); change to read as follows:
(A) Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the following:
1. {text unchanged}
2. {text unchanged}
3. Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's self-evaluation or an
engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of
Texas.
{remainder of text unchanged}
(10) Article 505.7(A) changed to read as follows:
505.7 Special Precaution. Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures safe
performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with
regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in hazardous (classified) locations.
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical equipment depending on
the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -20°C (-4°F)
unless they are identified for use at lower temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/448
concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified Class I, Zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient
temperature.
(A) Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design, selection
of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by a qualified persons
Registered Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas.
(11) Article 517.30 Essential Electrical Systems for Hospitals; create a new (H) and add the following language:
(G) Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the equipment branch of the essential electrical
system shall be coordinated for the period of time that a fault's duration extends beyond 0.1 second.
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one
overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary.
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series.
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of
overcurrent conditions.
(H) Selective Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the life safety, and critical branches of the
essential electrical system shall be selectively coordinated with all supply-side overcurrent protective devices.
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one
overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary.
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series.
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of
overcurrent conditions.
(12) Article 680.25(A) changed to read as follows:
680.25 Feeders. These provisions shall apply to any feeder on the supply side of panelboards supplying branch
circuits for pool equipment covered in Part II of this article and on the load side of the service equipment or the source
of a separately derived system.
(A) Wiring Methods.
(1) Feeders. Feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit. The following
wiring methods shall be permitted if not subject to physical damage:
(1) Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit
(2) Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit
(3) Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit
(4) Electrical metallic tubing where installed on or in a building
(5) Electrical nonmetallic tubing where installed within a building
(6) Type MC Cable where installed within a building and if not subject to corrosive environment
(7) Nonmetallic-sheathed cable
(8) Type SE cable
Exception: {delete}
C. Conflicting ordinances. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the National Electrical Code and any provision of
this section, or any other city ordinance, the provision of this section or any other city ordinance shall prevail. In the event of
conflict between ordinances, the more stringent provisions shall prevail.
D. Liability of the city. Neither the city nor any of its agents, servants or employees shall have any liability to any person by
reason of permits issued, decisions made, or inspections made concerning electrical service on private property.
E. License required. A person commits an offense if he or she installs or repairs electrical components in a building (including
but not limited to wiring, circuit breakers, and related components), unless such person holds a current license, as issued by the
State of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, which is recognized by the city as follows:
(1) A master electrical license is required to permit electrical work done in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/448
(2) A journeyman license is required for all commercial work. A journeyman may not be issued an electrical permit
in his own name; such electrical permit can only be issued to a master electrician.
(3) A residential specialist or wireman license is limited to electrical installations in single family and multifamily
dwellings not exceeding four stories, provided that such work is inspected and approved by a journeyman electrician
prior to inspection by the building official. A residential specialist or wireman may not be issued an electrical permit in
his own name; such electrical permit can only be issued to a master electrician.
(4) Exception: The owner of a single-family home may install or repair wiring, in his or her home, of not more than
three 20-amp circuits (total 60 amps), providing such person first obtains an electrical permit from the city and the
work is inspected by the building official.
F. Registration required. A master electrician, journeyman electrician, or residential specialist or wireman electrician commits
an offense if he or she installs or repairs electrical components in a building (including but not limited to wiring, circuit breakers,
and related components), unless such person is registered as such with the city. An applicant for registration shall prepare and
file an application for such, on a form to be provided by the building official. Upon completion, in proper form, of a registration
form, and payment of the required fee, the building official shall issue a registration, which shall be valid for one year from the
date of issuance.
G. Registration fees. The building official shall charge a fee which shall be established by resolution of the city council.
H. Penalty for violations. A person commits an offense if he or she violates any provisions of this section, and upon conviction,
may be punished by a fine as provided for in section 1-7 of this Code.
(Ordinance 1497 adopted 8/18/97; Ordinance 1885, secs. I, II, adopted 10/1/01; Ordinance 2135, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05;
Ordinance 2176, sec. 2, adopted 11/21/05; Ordinance 3428, sec. 6, adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 6,
adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-5. Permit fees required under construction codes.
A person commits an offense if he or she builds, repairs or constructs any building or structure in the city without first obtaining a
building permit for such. An applicant for a permit shall prepare and file an application, on a form to be provided by the building
official. Upon proper completion of the building permit application and payment of the required fees, which said permit fees shall
be established by resolution of the city council, the building official shall issue a permit. (Ordinance 1213 adopted 12/5/94;
Ordinance 1631, adopted 11/16/98; Ordinance 1886, secs. I-III, adopted 10/1/01; Ordinance 2176, sec. 2, adopted 11/21/05)
Sec. 3-6. Reserved.
Editor's note – Ordinance 3875, sec. 1, adopted July 16, 2018, repealed sec. 3-6, which pertained to moving buildings into the city and
derived from Ordinance 171, adopted August 14, 1973.
Sec. 3-7. Dangerous buildings.
A. Abatement. Whenever the fire marshal, fire chief or building inspector of the city shall find any building or other structure, or
any portion thereof, which for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or by abandonment, is liable to endanger
persons or property, or which render such building or structure is liable to fire or fire hazard, or which building or structure is so
situated or occupied or is in such condition, either from the exterior or interior, as to endanger other buildings or property or
human life from a fire in such building, the fire marshal, fire chief or building inspector shall cause to be served written notice
upon the owner, occupant or other person responsible therefor, by certified mail, ordering them to appear before the city council
at a time and date specified in said notice, to show cause, if any they have, why the said building or structure, or any part thereof,
should not be repaired, demolished or removed. In the event the owner of such building is a nonresident, and his address is
unknown, the notice shall be given by posting a copy thereof on the building or other structure, and by publishing the said notice
one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
B. Hearing. At the time of the hearing the fire marshal, fire chief or building inspector shall present such evidence as he may
have concerning the condition of said building or structure, and make such recommendations as he may feel proper to the city
council. The owner or other person ordered to appear may offer such evidence concerning the condition of the building or
structure as he may desire to do. At the conclusion of the hearing the city council may order the building or structure repaired,
demolished or removed as the council may deem necessary. In no event, however, shall the time fixed for such repairs,
demolition or removal be less than 30 days from the date of the council order.
C. Failure to comply with city order. If the owner, occupant or other person responsible for such building or structure shall fail
or refuse to comply with the order of the city council, the council may order the fire marshal, fire chief or building inspector to
close said building or structure, or to demolish and remove the same.
D. Expense of removal assessed against owner. Whenever the city council shall have ordered the building or structure
removed by the city, the expenses of the demolition or removal shall be assessed against the property owner. Notice of the
amount of the assessment shall be given the owner, and upon his failure to pay the same within 30 days after notice, the city
may proceed to collect the same in a court of competent jurisdiction as in other cases involving a debt owed to the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/448
E. Sale of salvage. In the event the city demolishes or removes such building or structure, the city may sell the same or the
materials salvaged therefrom, and if the amount exceeds the expense or removal or demolition, the balance shall be paid over to
the owner thereof.
F. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation or occupant of the building or other structure who shall keep or maintain the same,
when, from want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire and which is
so situated as to endanger buildings or property to others, or is especially liable to fire, and which is so occupied that fire would
endanger other persons or their property therein, or which shall refuse to comply with the order of the city council mentioned
above, shall be punished by fine as provided for in chapter 1, section 7 of this Code of Ordinances for each offense, and each
day such condition shall exist shall constitute a separate offense.
G. Injunction. In addition to the penalties provided for herein, the city shall have the power to authorize the city attorney to file
suit in a court of competent jurisdiction against the owner or other person responsible for any such building or structure, and who
shall have failed to comply with the order of the city council, and obtain the necessary orders for an injunction of said court to
enforce the actions and orders of the city council, either directing the owner or person responsible therefor to repair the said
building or structure or remove or demolish the same from the premises, and also for an order of the court requiring the owner or
person responsible therefor to destroy the said building or structure.
(Ordinance 183 adopted 2/26/74)
Sec. 3-8. Mobile homes.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
subsection:
House trailer: A trailer or semi-trailer which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping
place, either permanently or temporarily, and which is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways. The term
house trailer shall include any vehicle, the chassis and exterior shell of which is designed and constructed for use as a house
trailer, but which is used instead permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sale, display or promotion of merchandise or
services, or for any other commercial purpose, except the transportation of property for hire, or the transportation of property for
distribution by a private carrier, and shall include a vehicle without automotive power designed for human habitation and for
carrying persons and property upon its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
Mobile home: A vehicular, portable structure, capable of being transported over the highways, and containing sleeping
accommodations and exceeding eight feet in width or 22 feet in length. Such term may be used interchangeably with house
trailer. Any portable, vehicular structure with living or sleeping accommodations in excess of the length and width herein stated,
regardless of the design and use thereof, for the purpose of this section shall be classed as a mobile home.
Recreational vehicle: A vehicular, portable structure, capable of being transported over the highways, and containing living or
sleeping accommodations, such structure begin designed and actually used as a temporary dwelling during travel for recreation
and pleasure purposes, and not exceeding eight feet in width and not exceeding 22 feet in length. The term recreational vehicle
may include the terms travel trailer, camper, motor home or any other term given such vehicle if the same is within the definition
of recreational vehicle.
B. Rendering mobile home immovable does not alter status. The fact that a mobile home, house trailer or recreational vehicle,
or any other vehicle defined in subsection A is placed on blocks or altered in such a way as to no longer be portable or movable,
without material alteration or removal of the foundation or blocks, shall not alter the status of such vehicle as a mobile home,
house trailer or recreational vehicle, for the purposes of this section.
C. Occupancy prohibited except in mobile home park. Except as otherwise provided in subsection D, it shall be unlawful for
any person to occupy any recreational vehicle, mobile home or house trailer within the city, which is not then and there within an
approved mobile home park. This section shall not apply to recreational vehicles while they are being driven within the city.
D. Temporary use as office permitted. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park a mobile home or house trailer,
whether occupied or not, upon any property or tract of land within the city not designated as a mobile home park under the
zoning ordinance; provided, however, that the city council may grant a special permit for a temporary period, not to exceed one
year, to authorize the placement of a house trailer or mobile home, for office purposes only, in areas zoned for commercial or
business purposes under the zoning ordinance, for use as a temporary construction office; or the temporary use not to exceed
the period of one year, or a house trailer or mobile home as a highway construction office in any district. Application for such
permit shall be made to the city secretary, shall designate the period desired to be granted under such permit, shall state the
purpose for which the house trailer or mobile home is to be used and shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $25.00. In no
event shall any person holding any permit under the provisions of this subsection permit the occupancy of such house trailer or
mobile home at any time by any person for other than office purposes.
(Ordinance 240 adopted 7/10/78)
Sec. 3-9. Residential fences.
A. General requirements.
(1) Permits and inspections.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/448
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair a fence not in compliance with the regulations
contained herein.
(b) Fence construction, alterations, additions, or repair permit requirements: A permit shall not be required for
repairs if the work does not exceed 25 percent of the total length of the fence. If a cumulative effect of a series of
repairs over a 12-month period exceeds 25 percent, a permit is required. Repairs, even ones not requiring a
permit, must be completed in compliance with the regulations herein.
(c) Fees shall apply as shown on the Master Fee Schedule of the city.
(d) All fence installers are required to be registered with the city.
(e) Adequate plans and specifications, which may include a plot plan showing exact materials, easements,
location, height, dimensions from property lines, sidewalks, curbs, and location of gates, as determined by the
building official, must accompany a completed application form.
(f) Once complete, a final inspection is required and must be scheduled by the installer within one week (five
business days) of completion.
(2) Maintenance.
(a) All fences shall be perpetually maintained, repaired, or replaced by the owner. Fences not required by a
city ordinance, screening regulation, or other standard shall be either maintained or removed.
(b) Fences that fail inspection through a rental registration and inspection program shall be repaired or
replaced accordingly.
(c) It shall be unlawful to maintain a fence in such a manner to allow the following:
i. Any fence to lean, fall, become unstable, or to cause damage to other property.
ii. Fences to be aided in support by anything other than the fence post.
iii. Missing or loose pickets, broken or missing parts, decayed members.
(3) Materials.
(a) Permitted materials include stone, masonry, brick, wood, decorative tubular steel (i.e., powder coated
ornamental iron), chain link, split rail, or composite.
(b) Sheet metal, corrugated or enhanced metal panels, plywood, fiberglass, vinyl, and other materials shall be
prohibited.
(c) Chain link and wooden fences are prohibited on non-residential and multi-family properties. Masonry walls
or decorative metal fencing are allowed and should be used instead.
(d) Barbed wire, electric, and/or other injurious material is prohibited, unless the property is used for
agricultural purposes and over one acre in size, legitimately needed for industrial purposes, or otherwise
approved by the director.
(e) Existing non-conforming fences may make repairs with like material.
(4) Regulations.
(a) Fences shall not be over eight feet in height, excluding allowance for ground clearances, decorative gate
embellishments, and/or any decorative cap.
(b) Fences and walls are allowed in front yards up to 36 inches in height and must be either split rail, chain
link, composite, wrought iron, pipe, picket fence, or decorative masonry wall. Lots over one acre in size may
construct up to a maximum height of four feet in the front yard. All front yard fences should generally be 50
percent open, except for walls, when allowed and if in compliance with the regulations herein.
(c) All fences installed adjacent to a floodplain, creek, park, or dedicated open space shall be black tubular
steel (not to be misconstrued as pipe fencing).
(d) No fence shall be erected on or encroaching upon public right-of-way or within any drainage or other
easement, unless otherwise authorized by the director with prior written approval from the agency controlling
said easement. All fences must be maintained in a plane so as not to overhang public property.
(e) No trees, berms, or other obstructions shall be planted or maintained within such distances of street
intersections unless the foliage line is maintained at sufficient height to prevent obstruction of sight lines. Sight
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/448
visibility obstructions, whether plant or structure, shall be removed or cured, as determined by staff field
inspection.
(f) On corner lots where the rear lot line is adjacent to a side lot line of an adjoining lot, the fence may be
constructed to the property line to a full height in all locations, except a 15-foot site angle shall be required
adjacent to the abutting front yard.
(g) At a driveway to alley intersection, no fence will be allowed in a triangle formed by measuring from the
point of intersection of a driveway and alley a distance of ten feet along the driveway and alley and connecting
the points so established, from edge of pavement, to form a triangle on the area.
(h) At a street to alley intersection, no fence will be allowed in a triangle formed by measuring from the point of
intersection of property lines at the street and alley a distance of 15 feet along the intersecting property lines and
connecting the points so established to form a triangle on the area.
(i) Properties may not install side yard gates intended for vehicular use nor install additional drive cuts on
corner lots. Lots greater than one acre in size are exempt.
(j) Retaining walls greater than four feet in height shall require a permit, engineered drawings, and
inspections.
(k) All swimming pool fences shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable state and local regulations.
(l) Properties that have exterior fences improved by the city through a neighborhood partnership program
shall maintain, repair, and replace the fence to the same standard as it was installed by the city.
B. Wooden fence standards.
(1) All vertical posts shall be galvanized steel (with a minimum two and three-eighths inch diameter, a minimum CS
20 (.095) thickness) or may also be a minimum 4×4 wooden post, and set in a concrete footing.
(2) Concrete footings shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter.
(3) For fences less than seven feet in height, posts shall be spaced at a maximum of eight feet on center and set in
a concrete footing of no less than 24 inches deep.
(4) For fences that are seven feet or greater in height, posts shall be spaced at a maximum of six feet on center
and set in a concrete footing of no less than 36 inches deep.
(5) Wood material shall be cedar or white wood.
(6) All materials shall be securely fastened, vertical boards to horizontal stringers and stringers to vertical posts, to
ensure an ongoing attractive appearance and safe condition, free from rot, rust, vandalism, and other sources of
decay.
(7) The bottom of the fence may be designed to prevent ground to wood contact. This can be achieved through the
use of a concrete mow strip poured between the fence supports or by installing a 2×6 pressure treated kick board to
cover the gap between the bottom of pickets and the ground. This kick board may have ground contact.
(8) Perimeter walls adjacent to a subdivision. A fence that is parallel to, perpendicular to, approximately parallel to,
or approximately perpendicular to such wall shall not exceed the height of the adjacent subdivision wall. A fence that
is separated from the subdivision screening wall by a public alley or right-of-way is deemed to not be approximately
parallel to, or approximately perpendicular to such wall shall not exceed the height of the adjacent subdivision wall. A
fence that is separated from the subdivision screening wall by a public alley or right-of-way is deemed to not be
adjacent to the subdivision screening wall. If abutting, the height of the fence may be allowed to transition or increase
in height from the height of the subdivision screening wall to the maximum allowable height of the fence, provided that
the transition does not exceed an even or smooth rate of increase over a span of not less than 16 feet in length.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Dog runs, swimming pool fences, and other similar situations within the interior of a back yard can be
constructed of alternate materials, as long as all exterior and shared fence lines are built to compliance and the
alternate interior materials are shorter than the exterior fence and not visible to the public. If such fence is less than 48
inches in height, no permit is required.
(2) Estate properties greater than one acre in size that front onto a right-of-way of sixty feet or more in width may
install decorative entrances.
(3) Valid government related facilities, including sports related facilities, with director approval, may build to industry
standard and utilize alternate materials and methods.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/448
(Ordinance 475 adopted 3/17/86; Ordinance 1283 adopted 8/7/95; Ordinance 1389 adopted 8/5/96; Ordinance 1734 adopted
5/15/00; Ordinance 2176, sec. 2, adopted 11/21/05; Ordinance 3069, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/08; Ordinance 3546, sec. 1, adopted
11/18/13; Ordinance 3806, sec. 1, adopted 8/7/17)
Sec. 3-10. Signs.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply, unless clearly indicated to the contrary.
Alter shall mean to change the size, shape or outline, or type of sign. Changing the copy, nature of the message, or intent of the
sign does not alter the sign and does not make it subject to the permit and/or fee requirements of this Code.
Building inspector shall mean the officer within the City of Sachse charged with the administration and enforcement of this
section.
Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) shall mean a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently
or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including an illuminated sign on which such
illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light
emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the
right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard.
Erect shall mean to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of signs on the
exterior surface of a building or structure.
Facing or surface shall mean the surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on
the sign.
Gross surface area of sign is the entire area within a single continuous perimeter forming a rectangle enclosing the extreme limits
of each sign. In the event two or more signs share a single structure, each sign or panel may be considered separately for
square footage purposes, provided that each sign or panel has no relationship to the other, except that the combined footage of
such signs cannot exceed the total square footage allowed for the sign.
Incombustible material shall mean any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1200° F, and will not continue to
burn or glow at that temperature.
Logo is any formalized design or insignia of a company or product which is commonly used in advertising to identify that
company or product.
Marquee is a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building.
Person shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Projecting structures shall mean covered structures of a permanent nature which are constructed of approved building material,
specifically excluding canvas or fabric material, and where such structures are an integral part of the main building or
permanently attached to a main building and do not extend over public property. Projecting structures are defined to include
marquee, canopy and fixed awning type of structures.
Roof line shall mean the height which is defined by the intersection of the roof of the building and the wall of the building.
Exception: For mansard-type roofs, the roof line shall be defined as the top of the lower slope of the roof. Roofs with parapet
walls completely around the building and not exceeding four feet in height may be considered as the roof line.
Sign shall mean and include every sign, name, number, identification, description, device, display, flag, banner, pennant,
illustration, beacon, light or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building
or outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land, which directs attention to any object, product, service, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business. Any interior illuminated or moving sign or light which is visible from the
exterior may be determined as being erected on the exterior of the building or structure.
Sign, advertising is any sign which promotes or advertises commodities or services not limited to being offered on the premises
on which such signs are located.
Sign, apartment is any sign identifying an apartment building or complex of apartment buildings.
Sign, bulletin board is any sign of professional appearance containing information of a public interest nature where a portion of
such information may be periodically changed providing that such change shall be effected by the replacement or interchange of
letters, numbers or other graphic symbols by insertion, attachment or similar means. The use of slate, chalkboard, cardboard or
similar material with pencil, chalk, crayon or similar types of marking is prohibited.
Sign, construction is any temporary sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape architect,
decorator or mortgagee engaged in the design, construction or improvement of the premises on which the sign is located.
Sign, development is any temporary, on-site promotional sign pertaining to the development of land or construction of buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/448
Sign, directional is any sign temporarily used in directing traffic to a residential section of the city, other than directional kiosk
signs as defined herein.
Sign, directional kiosk is a sign located within the city right-of-way, providing directions to subdivisions, homebuilders, and city
facilities, installed and maintained by the city or a contractor authorized by the city.
Sign, director is a sign listing the occupants within shopping centers, industrial sites, retail districts, office districts and
commercial sites.
Sign, flashing is a sign which has illumination that is alternately turned on and off at a rate equivalent to, or greater than, twice an
hour, excluding time and temperature signs.
Sign, general business is any sign which is used to identify a business, profession, service, product or activity conducted, sold or
offered on the premises where such sign is located.
Sign, ground is any sign which is erected on a vertical framework consisting of two uprights or a single pedestal supported by the
ground.
Sign, identification is any sign which is used to identify shopping centers, industrial sites, retail districts and commercial sites.
Sign, illuminated is any sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting, either by lights on the sign or directed toward the sign.
Sign, institutional is any sign used to identify schools, churches, hospitals and similar public or quasipublic institutions.
Sign, marquee is any sign erected on a marquee or fixed awning.
Sign, monument is any sign having a low profile, either made of or contained within stone, concrete, metal, brick or similar
material and having a stone, brick or masonry base concealing all supports or poles.
Sign, multi-purpose is an identification sign with a combination of any one or two of the following:
(a) A directory sign;
(b) A marquee sign.
Sign, model home is any temporary sign, identifying a new home, either furnished or unfurnished, as being the builder or
contractor's model open to the public for inspection.
Sign, nameplate is any sign showing only the name and address of the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is erected
or placed.
Sign, obsolete is any sign which no longer serves a bona fide use or purpose.
Sign, parapet wall is any sign erected on the top surface of a parapet wall.
Sign, pole is any sign supported by a single freestanding pole, and having no guys or braces to the ground or to any structure
other than the pole.
Sign, projecting is any sign which projects from a building and which has one end attached to a building or other permanent
structure.
Sign, ranchette identification is a sign identifying a farm or ranch in residential areas where the average lot size is one acre or
greater.
Sign, real estate is any temporary sign pertaining to the sale or rental of property and advertising property only for use for which it
is legally zoned.
Sign, roof is any sign erected on a vertical framework supported and located so that no part of the sign shall be located within six
feet of any outside wall nor within seven feet of the surface below.
Sign, wall is any sign erected flat against a wall, supported by the wall, and having the sign face parallel to and not more than 12
inches from the wall surface. Neon tubing attached directly to a wall surface shall be considered a wall sign.
Sign, window shall mean any sign painted on the external or internal surface of the window of any establishment in commercial
or retail areas with water durable paint advertising services, products of sales available within said establishment or which
announce opening of said establishment. A window sign is also any banner, poster, decoration or display attached to the external
surface of a window of a retail or commercial establishment, if of water durable paint or of incombustible material, and signs
attached to the internal surface of a window which define the name, proprietor, telephone number or address of said retail or
commercial establishment.
Structural trim shall mean the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms which are attached to the sign
structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/448
Vehicle shall mean any automobile, truck, camper, tractor, van, trailer or any device capable of being transported and shall be
considered a vehicle in both moving and stationary modes, irrespective of state of repair or condition.
B. Administration.
(1) Sign permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, replace, alter or relocate any sign within the
city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the building inspector and making payment of the fee required,
except as may be hereinafter provided.
(2) Permit required to repair. It shall be unlawful to repair any sign requiring a permit, as defined in paragraph (1)
above, without first obtaining a repair permit from the building inspector and making payment of the fee required.
(3) Nonconforming existing signs. Every sign lawfully in existence on the date of passage of this section may be
repaired without applying for a permit as noted in subsection B(2). No sign lawfully in existence on the date of
passage of this section shall be altered or moved unless a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
Temporary permits granted prior to the passage of this section shall be renewed only if the applicant complies with all
provisions of this section.
(4) Application for sign permit/repair permit.
(a) Application for a permit required by this section shall be made upon forms provided by the building
inspector and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
(i) Sign use classification.
(ii) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(iii) Name, address and telephone number of owner.
(iv) Name, address and telephone number of person or firm erecting the sign.
(v) Location of the building, structure or tract to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or
erected.
(vi) Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures or other related signs.
(vii) Such other information as the building inspector may require to show full compliance with this
section and all other laws and ordinances of the city and state.
(b) Application for a permit to repair shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
(i) Name, address and telephone number of the sign owner.
(ii) Name, address and telephone number of person, firm, corporation or association providing the repair
service.
(iii) Location of the building, structure or lot upon which the sign is located.
(iv) A description of the repair activity to be performed.
(v) Such other information as the building inspector shall require to show full compliance with this
section and all other laws and ordinances of the city.
(5) Exemptions from application for permit. Application for a permit shall not be required for the following signs;
provided however, such signs shall otherwise comply with all other application provisions of this section.
(a) Signs not exceeding eight square feet in area, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises on
which such signs are located.
(b) Nameplates not exceeding one square foot in area.
(c) Temporary political signs erected on public easements and private property with the owner's consent for a
maximum of six weeks. The individual and/or group denoted on said sign is responsible for removal of the sign
within seven days of election and/or political activity's completion.
(d) Signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area for public, charitable or religious organizations when the same
are located on the premises of the institution. Signs promoting the city when not used for commercial advertising
in any way.
(e) Temporary construction signs, not exceeding 16 square feet in area, denoting the architect, engineer or
contractor when placed upon premises under construction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/448
(f) Occupational signs, not exceeding two square feet in area, denoting only the name and professions of an
occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building.
(g) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface, or
when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials.
(h) Flags, emblems and insignia of any governmental body and decorative displays for holidays or public
demonstrations which do not contain advertising and are not used as such.
(i) Directional signs not exceeding eight square feet, provided such signs do not contain advertising and are
not used as such.
(j) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such emergency,
temporary or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the city council or the city manager or his authorized
representative.
(k) Window signs, for use on establishments in commercial or retail areas. In no event may signs be located
on the window surface internally or externally in any manner to obscure more than 50 percent of the visible
window area available in the absence of any signs. Where multiple windows exist fronting on a single street or
sidewalk, the 50 percent visibility shall be maintained for the total window area on said street or sidewalk.
(l) Temporary banner signs announcing the grand opening of a business may be put up for a maximum of 90
days.
(6) Signs requiring electrical inspection. The primary alternating current wiring on all signs shall comply with the
National Electrical Code Specifications. All secondary transformed power shall be self contained within the sign
structure. Individual lighted letters are to be mounted on a common metal channel and all secondary wiring and
components shall be contained within the common metal channel. Both channel and letters must contain weep holes
to drain water.
(7) Fees. Every applicant, before being granted a sign permit hereunder, shall pay to the City of Sachse a permit
fee which shall be established by resolution of the city council.
A fee for a permit to repair, as noted in subsection B(2) shall be $10.00.
When a permit is required by this section and construction and repair is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining
said permit, the fees above specified shall be doubled. The payment of such fees shall not relieve any person from
fully complying with the regulation described by this section.
(8) Issuance of permit. Providing that the applicant has complied with all provisions of this section, and that the
proposed sign complies with all provisions of this section, the building inspector shall issue the sign permit to the
applicant.
(9) Not to issue to persons previously failing to pay fees. The building inspector shall not issue a permit under the
provisions of this section to any person who has previously failed or refused to pay any fees or costs assessed
against him under the provision of this section.
(10) Permit valid only for 60 days. If the work authorized by a permit issued under this section has not been
commenced within 60 days after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
(11) Permit revocable. The building inspector may suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this
section whenever he shall determine that the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or false information
supplied, or whenever such permit be issued in violation of any of the provisions of this section or any other ordinance
of this city or laws of this state or the federal government. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective when
communicated in writing to the person to whom the permit is issued, the owner of the sign or the owner of the
premises upon which the sign is located.
(12) Inspection. The building inspector shall inspect annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each
sign regulated by this section for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure, whether it still
serves a useful purpose and whether it is in need of removal or repair.
(13) Removal of obsolete signs. Any sign which the building inspector determines no longer serves a bona fide use
conforming to this section, shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the land,
buildings or structure upon which such sign is located within ten days after written notification to do so from the
building inspector. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the building inspector is hereby authorized to cause the
removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the land, building or structure to
which such sign is attached or upon which it is erected.
(14) Removal or repair of unsafe signs. If the building inspector shall determine that any sign is unsafe or insecure,
or is a menace to the public, he shall give written notice of the person or persons responsible for such sign. If the
permittee, owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises fails to remove or repair the sign within
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/448
ten days after such notice, such sign may be removed by the building inspector at the expense of the permittee or
owner of the property upon which it is located. The building inspector may cause any sign which is an immediate peril
to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
(15) Variance fee and notification. An application for a variation to the conditions of this section shall be
accompanied by a variance application fee in the amount of $25.00. Such application for variance may cover more
than one sign, but shall apply to only one applicant and one location. The notification for a variance application must
appear in the local newspaper(s) of the city at least seven days prior to the date on which the request is heard by the
city council. The variation application must contain the following information:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign(s) is to be attached or erected.
(c) Position of the sign(s) in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other signs.
(d) The zoning classification of the property on which the sign(s) is to be located. Also the zoning
classification of all property within 250 feet of the sign(s) location.
(e) The specific variation(s) requested and the reasons and justification for such requests.
(f) Ten copies of the signage and site plans shall be required.
C. Specific limitation provisions.
(1) General sign provisions. All signs located or to be located within the city shall conform to the general provisions
set forth in Table 1, entitled General Provisions at the end of this section.
(2) Additional requirements for attached signs.
(a) Projecting signs. The horizontal portion of any projecting sign shall not be more than six feet, six inches in
length measured from the building face and shall not be closer than two feet from the back of the curbline. The
height of the sign shall not exceed two feet. Such signs shall be an integral part of the architectural design of the
building. Vertical clearance shall be subject to the requirements of subsections C(2)(d) and C(2)(e) of this
section.
(b) Marquee signs. Marquee signs erected on the face of a marquee shall be built as an integral part of the
marquee and shall be constructed of incombustible material. Such signs shall not exceed 40 feet or the product
of two times the lineal footage of the building or store frontage for which such sign is intended, whichever is
greater. Such signs shall not have a vertical height of more than six feet nor exceed 75 percent of the width of
such building or store frontage. Further, the height shall not exceed the building roof line by more than four feet.
Vertical clearance shall be subject to the requirements or subsections C(2)(d) and C(2)(e) of this section.
(c) Wall signs. Wall signs shall not exceed 40 square feet or the product of two times the lineal footage of the
building or store frontage for which such signs are intended, whichever is greater. Such signs shall not have a
vertical height of more than six feet nor exceed 75 percent of the width of such building or store frontage.
Vertical clearance shall be subject to the requirements of subsections C(2)(d) and C(2)(e) of this section.
(d) Roof signs. Roof signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area or the product of two times the lineal
footage of the building or store frontage for which such signs are intended, whichever is greater. Such signs, for
commercial and industrial districts only, shall not extend above the roof line of a mansard-type roof or more than
four feet above the roof line of a non mansard-type roof. No part of the sign shall be located within six feet of any
outside wall, nor within seven feet of the surface below. Such signs shall be constructed of incombustible
material or, in the case of plastic, inserts and/or faces, slow burning material. The roof of any building on which a
sign is erected shall be covered with fire-retardant material.
(e) Projection over public property. If the vertical clearance above the surface is less than eight feet, no
projection is permitted. If the vertical clearance above the surface exceeds eight feet, a projection is permitted
for each inch of clearance over and above the required eight feet, provided that no projection shall exceed four
feet or one-third the width of the sidewalk below, whichever is less.
(f) Projection over private property. Projection of signs over private property shall be allowed over pedestrian
sidewalks, walkways and corridors, but not to exceed the following:
Vertical Clearance Maximum Projection
7 feet or less 3 inches
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/448
7 or 8 feet 12 inches
8 feet or more 4 feet
(3) Freestanding identification signs, general business signs, multi-purpose signs.
(a) All freestanding identification signs, general business signs and multi-purpose signs shall be monument
signs.
(b) The entire sign must be located a minimum of eight feet behind the property line.
(c) Any projecting or overhanging portion of the sign must be a minimum of ten feet above any walkway and
14 feet above driveway.
(d) Maximum height above grade of an identification sign, general business sign or multi-purpose sign is ten
feet with the following exception:
(i) Property having direct frontage on the President George Bush Turnpike, Highway 78 or along the
north side of the Kansas City Southern Railroad, which runs parallel to Highway 78, shall have a maximum
height above grade of 20 feet.
(e) Maximum area for a general business sign is 60 square feet and maximum area for identification sign is
100 square feet.
(f) Such signs shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from adjoining private property lines, excluding shared
property lines within a single retail center, office park or industrial park, and a minimum of 60 feet from any other
freestanding sign.
(g) Such signs shall be constructed of materials that are incombustible or slow burning in the case of plastic
inserts and faces. Such signs are to be supported by incombustible supports finished in a presentable manner
(wood or unfinished steel not allowed).
(h) No advertising matter shall be displayed on or attached to any freestanding sign. No guys, braces,
attachments, banners, flags or similar devices shall be attached to any sign.
(i) Such signs shall be protected by wheel or bumper guards when required by the building official.
(j) A multi-purpose sign is an identification sign with a combination of any one or two of the following:
(i) A directory sign.
(ii) A marquee sign.
(k) The identification portion of a multi-purpose sign shall not exceed 75 square feet; directory portion shall
not exceed 36 square feet with a single tenant or 72 square feet with multi-tenants.
(4) Advertising signs. No advertising signs allowed except by variance granted by the city council.
(5) Temporary signs.
(a) Temporary subdivision development signs and “for sale” signs of undeveloped tracts may be erected,
provided such signs relate only to the property on which they are located. Each such subdivision under
development may have one such sign not to exceed 100 square feet in area.
(b) Temporary model home signs may be erected by the builder or the contractor. Each builder or contractor
may have one such sign per subdivision. Model home signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in size. Permits for
model home signs shall be granted for a period of time not to exceed 12 months, at the expiration of which time
renewal applications may be filed and considered.
(c) Ground signs are prohibited as general business signs.
EXCEPTION: Anchored portable signs, balloons, flags, and/or banners may be allowed for a period not to
exceed 30 days, one per street front, per premise, during a calendar year. The sign will be removed from the
premises after the 30-day period has expired. An expiration label shall be issued to the sign.
(6) Date of erection, permit number and voltage to be displayed. Every sign erected after the passage of this
section shall have displayed in a conspicuous place thereon, in letters not less than one inch in height, the date of
erection, the number of the permit issued under this section, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in
connection therewith.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/448
(7) Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area, and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as
required by the building code of the city.
(8) Maintenance of signs. All signs and supports shall be maintained in good condition to prevent deterioration,
oxidation, rust and other unsightly conditions.
(9) Ranchette identification signs. Ranchette identification signs are allowed in residential areas of the city subject
to the following regulations:
(a) The farm or ranch identification sign must be located in a residential zoned area where the average lot
size is one acre or greater. This paragraph (9) does not apply to property in the city which is zoned AGagriculture;
(b) Two signs are allowed, but only one may be a detached sign;
(c) The gross surface areas of a sign shall not exceed 32 square feet;
(d) The detached sign in a residential zoned area may be located on or behind the property line; the attached
sign in a residential area must be set back at least 100 feet from the property line;
(e) Illuminated signs are prohibited;
(f) Content of the detached sign is limited to the name of the farm or ranch, or its owner (e.g., “Big Top” or
“John Doe Ranch”) and an identification of the principal product (e.g., “Quarter Horses”);
(g) The content of the attached sign may contain the same content of the detached sign and may contain
additional identifiers such as address, telephone number, and other particular examples of the principal product
(i.e., “Home of Sea Biscuit, Grand Champion”).
(10) Directional kiosk signs.
(a) Administration.
(i) Directional kiosk signs may be installed only pursuant to an executed concession agreement
approved by city council. All such agreements shall govern a person or company's right to design, erect,
and maintain directional kiosk signs, and provide for city council and/or city staff review and/or approval of
the location and design of proposed directional kiosk signs.
(ii) All directional kiosk signs are subject to all permitting requirements set forth in section 3-10 B.
(b) Location. All directional kiosk signs shall comply with the following regulations unless the applicable
executed concession agreement provides otherwise.
(i) Directional kiosk signs shall be located so as not to create a traffic hazard or to obstruct the visibility
of motorists, pedestrians, or traffic control signs. The director of community development shall determine
whether a proposed sign location constitutes a traffic hazard or obstructs visibility.
(ii) Directional kiosk signs shall be located so as not to interfere with the general use of and handicap
accessibility of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking trails.
(iii) Directional kiosk signs shall be located so as not to interfere with any public utilities or be located in
a utility easement.
(iv) Directional kiosk signs must not be located within a sight distance triangle, as defined in the
subdivision ordinance.
(v) Directional kiosk signs may not be placed adjacent to a lot with a residential use without the prior
written consent of the lot owner(s) as identified on current tax rolls. Proof of prior written consent must be
attached [to] permit applications for all directional kiosk signs so located. If a residential use is assigned to
a lot adjacent to a preexisting directional kiosk sign, no written consent is required.
(vi) Directional kiosk signs must be placed at least 100 feet from the nearest directional kiosk sign.
(vii) Directional kiosk signs may not be located within a median.
(viii) Directional kiosk signs must be located at least five feet from the edge of all curbs and pavement
lines, including improved surfaces and shoulders.
(c) Design. All directional kiosk signs shall comply with the following regulations unless the applicable
executed concession agreement provides otherwise:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/448
(i) Directional kiosk signs may not exceed 12 feet in height and four feet in width.
(ii) Directional kiosk signs must include breakaway design features as set forth by the Texas Department
of Transportation's Sign Mounting Details for Roadside Signs. Breakaway fittings must be installed below
grade or otherwise concealed from public view.
(iii) The font and color of all directional kiosk signs must be uniform throughout the entire sign.
(iv) Directional kiosk signs may not be illuminated.
(v) Each directional kiosk sign must include at the top of the sign an identification panel displaying only
the name and official city logo.
(vi) No signs, pennants, flags, streamers, balloons or other devices or appurtenances used for visual
attention may be attached to directional kiosk signs.
(11) Garage sale signs. A garage sale sign is any temporary, promotional sign for the sale of personal household
goods in a residential zoned district or on the property of a nonprofit organization. The following restrictions shall
apply to garage sale signs:
(a) No permit required for the installation of garage sale signs.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be four square feet.
(c) The contents of the sign shall include only the following information:
- Garage sale
- Address
- Hours of operation
(d) The number of signs shall be restricted to one on site and six off site signs.
(e) Garage sale signs shall be posted for no longer than 72 hours. It shall be the responsibility of the
individual conducting the sale to remove all signs prior to the expiration of the time period.
(f) Posting of garage sale signs is prohibited on any utility pole, public fence or structure.
D. Prohibited signs.
(1) Obscene, indecent and immoral matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any
obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
(2) Obstructing doors, windows or fire escapes. It shall be unlawful to erect, relocate or maintain a sign to prevent
free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
(3) Attachment to standpipe or fire escape. It shall be unlawful to attach any sign to a standpipe or fire escape.
(4) Interference with traffic. It shall be unlawful to erect, relocate or maintain any sign in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision at any location where, by reason of position, size, movement, shape, color, flashing,
manner or intensity of illumination, such sign may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Further, it shall be
unlawful to erect or maintain any sign in such a manner as to interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with,
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign shall make use of the words “stop,” “go,” “look,”
“slow,” “danger,” or any other similar word, phrase, symbol or character or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or
other colored lamp or light in such a manner as to cause confusion to or otherwise interfere with, vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(5) Mobile or portable signs.
(a) It shall be unlawful to attach any sign to a trailer, skid, or similar mobile structure, where the primary use of
such structure is to provide a base for such sign or constitute the sign itself. This provision does not restrict the
identification signs on vehicles used for any bona fide transportation activity.
(b) Signs attached to or upon any vehicle shall be prohibited where any such vehicle is allowed to remain
parked in the same location, or in the same vicinity, at frequent or extended periods of time, where the intent is
apparent to be one of using the vehicle and signs for purposes of advertising an establishment, service or
product. Vehicles operating under a city franchise shall be excluded from this provision.
(c) A-frame signs and sandwich board signs are prohibited and unlawful.
(6) Advertising matter placed on or suspended from buildings, poles, sidewalks, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/448
(a) No person shall place on or suspend from, any building, pole, structure, sidewalk, parkway, driveway or
parking area, any goods, wares, merchandise or other advertising object or structure for the purpose of
advertising such items other than a sign, as defined, regulated and prescribed by this section, except as
otherwise allowed by ordinance.
(b) No cloth, paper, banner, flag, device or other similar advertising matter shall be permitted to be attached
to, suspended from, or be allowed to hang from, any sign, building or structure, when the same shall create a
public nuisance or danger.
(7) Painting, marking, etc., streets, sidewalks, utility poles, etc. No person shall attach any sign, paper or other
material or paint, stencil or write any name, number (except house numbers) or otherwise mark on any sidewalk,
curb, gutter, street utility pole, public building, fence or structure except as otherwise allowed by ordinance.
(8) Attaching advertising matter to fences, utility poles, etc.; and scattering advertising matter on streets and
sidewalks.
(a) No person, firm, corporation or association of persons, shall paste, stick, tack, nail or otherwise place any
advertisement, handbill, placard or printed, pictured or written matter or thing for political advertising purposes
upon any fence, railing, sidewalk or public telephone, electric or other utility pole, or any other public property,
including trees thereon, or to knowingly cause or to permit the same to be done for his benefit.
(b) It shall also be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw any handbills, circulars, cards, tear sheets or
any other advertising device of any description, along or upon any street or sidewalk in the city.
(c) The city's building inspector may at his own discretion remove and impound any signs, advertisements,
handbills, placard or printed, pictured or written matter or thing for political advertising purposes when illegally
posted upon any tree, fence, railing, sidewalk or public telephone, electric or other utility pole or any other public
property, right-of-way, parkway or median.
(d) Impounded signs may be recovered by the owner within 15 days of the date of impoundment by paying a
fee as prescribed by the city council. Signs not recovered within 15 days may be disposed of in any manner the
building inspector shall elect.
(9) Pole or ground signs prohibited on or over public property. No portion of any pole or ground sign shall be
erected on or over public property, unless the same be erected by the city, or with the permission of the city, for public
purposes.
(10) Moving, flashing and certain illuminated signs prohibited.
(a) No sign shall be illuminated to such an intensity or in such a manner, as to cause a glare or brightness to a
degree that it constitutes a hazard or nuisance.
Moving, flashing, intermittently lighted, changing color, beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs shall
not be allowed. Alternating electronic data control components showing time, temperature and similar data may
be allowed.
Changeable electronic variable message signs and other moving, flashing, intermittently lighted, changing
color, beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs shall not be allowed. Alternating electronic data control
components showing time, temperature and similar data may be allowed.
(b) No lighted sign shall be erected within 150 feet of a residential district unless the lighting is shielded from
view of the residential district.
(11) Balloons and other floating devices used for advertising purposes. No person shall erect, maintain or permit
the erection of, for advertising purposes, any balloons, flags, or other floating devices anchored to the ground or to
any other structure within the city, except as provided under exception, subsection C(5) of this section.
(12) Signs prohibited in street medians. It shall be unlawful to erect or install any sign in the median of any street,
road, thoroughfare or highway within the city limits of the City of Sachse.
(13) Directional signs prohibited. Directional signs, other than directional kiosk signs, shall be prohibited.
E. Penalty provisions.
(1) Persons responsible. The permittee, owner, agent, person or persons having the beneficial use of the ground or
a sign, the owner of the land or structure on which the sign is located, and the person in charge of erecting the sign
are all subject to the provisions of this section and are subject to the penalty provided for violation.
(2) Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine as provided for
in chapter 1, section 7 of this Code of Ordinances for each offense, and each and every day that the violation of this
section shall be permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/448
F. Preserving rights and violations under existing ordinances. By the passage of this section, no presently illegal use of signs
shall be deemed to have been legalized, and no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal,
incurred prior to the time existing sign ordinance or regulations were repealed and this section adopted, shall be discharged or
affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted, or
causes presently pending proceeded with, in all respects as if such prior ordinance, or portion of such ordinance, had not been
repealed.
TABLE 1
GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS
Sign Use Zone
Permitted
Maximum
Area Sq.
Ft.
Maximum
Height
Type
Construction
Setback
Required
Permitted
Spacing Maximum
Duration
Additional
Requirement
Nameplates All Zones 2 3 feet Projecting
Ground Wall
None None Permanent Maximum
Height Would
Not Apply
Real Estate All Zones 32 15 feet Ground Wall
Pole
30 feet 1 Per
Street
Front Per
Block
2 year Removal Upon
Sale of
Property
Construction All Zones 32 15 feet Ground Wall
Pole
30 feet 1 Per
Street
Front Per
Block
After
Issuance of
Certificate
of
Occupancy
Removal Upon
Completion of
Construction
Development All Zones 100 20 feet
8 feet from
ground
Ground Wall
Pole
30 feet 1 For
Each 50
Acres
When
Project is
90 Percent
Complete
Permitted on
Development
Site Only
Subsection
C(5)
Apartment C2 & PD 25 12 feet Wall Marquee 15 feet 1 For
Each
Street
Front
Permanent
Identification
Sign
C1, C2, I1,
I2, PD
100 10 feet
20 feet for
lots on 78
or PGBT
Monument 8 feet 30 feet
From
Property
Line
60 Feet
Between
Signs
Permanent Subsection
C(3)
General
Business
C1, C2, I1,
I2, PD
Subsection
C(2) (b, c,
d)
Wall Marques
Roof
Permanent
60 10 feet
20 feet for
lots on 78
Monument 8 feet 30 feet
from
Property
Line
Subsection
C(3)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/448
or PGBT 60 feet
Between
Signs
Agricultural AG 50 15 feet Ground Wall
Pole
30 feet 200 feet Permanent Permitted for
Advertising
Produce,
Crops or
Animals on
Farm
Institutional All Zones 32 10 feet Ground 15 feet 1 Per
Street
Front
Permanent
Wall
Subsection
C(2)(c)
Multi-Purpose C1, C2, I1,
I2, PD
100 10 feet
20 feet for
lots on 78
or PGBT
Monument 30 feet 1 Per
Street
Front
Permanent Subsection
C(3)(i)
(Ordinance 391 adopted 7/16/84; Ordinance 436 adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 799 adopted 6/5/89; Ordinance 946 adopted
5/6/91; Ordinance 391 adopted 7/16/91; Ordinance 986 adopted 10/7/91; Ordinance 994 adopted 11/4/91; Ordinance 1460
adopted 4/7/97; Ordinance 2176, sec. 2, adopted 11/21/05; Ordinance 3058, sec. 1, adopted 5/19/08; Ordinance 3110, sec. 1,
adopted 2/16/09; Ordinance 3278, sec. 1, adopted 2/15/11)
Sec. 3-11. Construction of stock tanks.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to construct or build a stock tank within the city without
first receiving a permit from the building inspector.
B. Size of tract.
(1) No stock tanks may be constructed upon any tract of land having an area less than one and one-half acres.
(2) A stock tank may be constructed on any tract of land having an area of between one and one-half and three
acres of land, but shall not cover more than 15 percent of the total tract of land.
(3) A stock tank may be constructed on any tract of land having an area of between three and five acres of land, but
shall not cover more than 20 percent of the total tract of land.
(4) There shall be no restriction upon the size of stock tanks upon any tract of land having an area of between five
and ten acres.
C. Location on tract. No stock tank shall be constructed within 150 feet of the front property line or within 20 feet of the side
property line of any tract of land.
(Ordinance 105 adopted 10/28/69)
Sec. 3-12. Radio and television antennas for private use.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, an antenna is defined as either antenna, mast or tower or any two of these
combined to constitute a structure designed for radio and television reception or transmission.
B. When permit not required for construction. Antennas and mast/tower may be erected without benefit of a building permit in
any district, regardless of whether the antenna and mast/tower is mounted atop a structure and attached thereto, or whether
freestanding, as long as the antenna and mast/tower, and any other appurtenances thereto, including but not limited to, guy wires
are positioned entirely within the buildable area as defined in subsection E(4), and measure no more than 40 feet from ground to
top of antenna, mast/tower, or 30 feet if freestanding. No antenna, mast/tower may exceed in height the distance from the base
of the tower to the nearest lot line and/or exceed 40 feet in height from ground level unless a building permit is obtained.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/448
C. When permit required for construction. If any instance where the structure sought to be erected shall not fall within the
limitations hereinabove set out, the permittee shall make written application to the building inspection department for a permit to
erect an antenna and mast/tower. Sufficient plans and specifications, reviewed by a registered professional engineer and
stamped as such, must accompany each application. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to erect, or cause to be
erected, such antenna, mast/tower without first having obtained a permit. It shall be the duty of the permittee to request a final
inspection upon completion of the antenna system.
D. Inspections. It shall be the duty of the city building inspection department to inspect all antenna, mast/towers which require
a permit to determine that this section is complied with. For such inspection and the issuance of the permit, a fee in an amount as
may be from time to time established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the building inspection department prior to
the issuance of such permit.
E. Construction and maintenance. All antenna, mast/towers and antenna supports used for television and radio reception or
transmission shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) All electrical specifications of such antenna, mast/towers and supports shall comply with the electrical code of
the city, the building code of the city, and the manufacturer's recommendations for installation.
(2) Should the conflict arise between the manufacturer's recommendations and the building and electrical codes of
this city as they may exist at the time of the proposed installation, a variance to allow the manufacturer's
recommendations to control must be obtained from the board of adjustments prior to commencement of installation.
(3) No such antenna system shall be more than 99 feet in height.
(4) The location of the lot of such an antenna system shall comply with the requirements of the comprehensive
zoning ordinance of the city insofar as the front building line and side yard building line requirements are concerned.
No portion of an antenna system shall extend beyond the front building line on any lot, and on corner lots the side
yard setback requirements shall be adhered to on the side adjacent to a public street, and where the front and side
yard requirements are applicable, all portions of such structures shall be within the limits fixed by such requirements.
(5) All antenna systems constructed under the provisions of this section shall be maintained so as to at all times
comply with the requirements of this section. (1988 Code)
Sec. 3-13. Standards for construction of public facilities.
A. North Central Texas Council of Governments standard specifications adopted.
(1) The “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas”, published by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments are hereby adopted as the specifications for materials and construction
methods for use in connection with future public works, water utility, and private development projects for the city.
(2) As official addendums to the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas” are
published, they are automatically adopted as addendums to the specifications for use in connection with future public
works, water utility and private development projects for the city.
(3) As future editions to the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas” are
published, the most recent edition will hereby be adopted as the specifications for use in connection with future public
works, water utility, and private development projects for the city.
(4) As future editions to the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas” are
published, the edition of the specifications in effect at the time that the next edition is published shall be in effect for all
public works, water utility and private development projects advertised, bid upon or under contract prior to the
effective date of the next edition; and remain in effect for these projects until their final acceptance by the city.
(5) As future editions to the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas” are
published, the edition of the specifications in effect at the time that the next edition is published be rescinded upon the
final acceptance of all public works, water utility and private development projects advertised, bid upon, or under
contract prior to the effective date of the next edition of the specifications.
(6) The effective date of addendums and the second and all other future editions of the “Standard Specifications for
Public Works Construction, North Central Texas” be set for three months from the day that the city receives official
notification about the existence of the addendum or the newest edition to be published.
(7) The city secretary is hereby directed to place a copy of the specifications hereby adopted or any future
addendums of or editions to the specifications that will be hereby adopted in the permanent files for public inspection.
B. Standard construction details adopted.
(1) Adoption of standard construction details for pavement of streets, roads and alleys, storm drainage, water
system and sanitary sewer facilities, appurtenances and structures thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/448
(a) There is hereby adopted that certain code known as “standard construction details” which is on file in the
office of the city secretary and made apart hereof for all purposes. From and after the adoption of this
subsection all drainage facilities, water system facilities, sanitary sewer system facilities, and pavement of public
streets, highways, alleys or other public places and appurtenances and structures thereto, constructed within the
City of Sachse or within the jurisdiction of the City of Sachse, shall comply with all the construction details herein
adopted.
(b) These Standard Construction Details shall be considered a compliment to the “Standard Specifications for
Public Works Construction” adopted in subsection A. If a conflict is determined between the “Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction” and the “Standard Construction Details”, the Standard
Construction Details will prevail.
(2) Standards for the permitted uses of asphalt pavements facilities.
(a) The use of asphalt pavement products for any facility or roadway surface in the City of Sachse, Texas,
shall conform to the “Standard Construction Detail” and the “Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction,” North Central Texas Council of Governments publications both adopted as standards for the City
of Sachse.
(b) The permitted use, location, and placement of asphalt pavement shall only occur after approval by the city
council of a project conforming to the following criteria conditions:
(i) The project is an extension of an existing county or city asphalt street and is a joint county/city
improvements project, approved and/or funded by the city, or
(ii) The project is a reconstruction of an existing asphalt surfaced street and road, or
(iii) The project is a state department of highway and public transportation system improvements
designed in accordance with “Standard Engineering Practices” for such facilities and approved by the city,
or
(iv) The project is a public facility parking lot located at or adjacent to the public school, park facility,
municipal service or administrative center and is constructed with concrete curb and gutter with lime
stabilized subgrade base materials and with asphalt pavement surface.
(c) All construction of streets, roads, or alleys which are located in a subdivision platted for residential lots
other than ranch estates or for any commercial or industrial tracts shall be improved with reinforced concrete.
(d) The provisions of this subsection and of the standards adopted hereby shall be enforced by the city
manager of the City of Sachse or any other duly appointed and authorized officer, agent, or employee of the city
and no building or other permit authorized by ordinance of the city shall be issued unless the official responsible
for the issuance thereof is satisfied that all the provisions of this subsection and the standards adopted hereby
have been complied satisfactorily. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection or failing to
comply with the requirements of the standards adopted hereby, including all detailed sketches, cross-sections,
and diagrams or any plan or sketch submitted and approved by the appropriate official of the city, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the municipal court of the City of Sachse, Texas, shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) Standards for the permitted uses of sidewalks, driveways, curb and gutter or drainage facilities.
(a) Work permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, build or construct any sidewalk, driveway, curb,
gutter, or drainage facilities upon any of the streets, public right-of-way or easement without first securing a
permit from the city. Before any such permit shall be granted, it shall be the duty of the person contemplating
such work to make application to the city manager or his designated appointee for such permit, giving the
location of the property where the work is to be done, a description of the work and the materials to be used.
(b) Costs. All costs associated with the development of plans, and the construction of the sidewalk, driveway,
curb and gutter, or drainage facilities shall be paid by the property owner.
(c) Sidewalks. Unless a different width is specially authorized by the city council, all sidewalks shall conform to
the following:
(i) Along business establishments, schools, or commercial land use areas, a minimum width of five feet
shall be installed with barrier free ramps conforming to the standard construction details of the city.
(ii) Along residential areas, a minimum width of four feet shall be installed with barrier free ramps
conforming to the standard construction details of the city.
(iii) The placement of the standard four foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be with one side at one foot
from and parallel to the right-of-way line or property line. Where the sidewalk is constructed adjacent to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/448
back of curb line, a minimum width of five feet shall be used. If the proposed installation of curb line mail
boxes restrict the clear width of the walk to less than four feet, then an additional width sidewalk section
will be required in order to provide the minimum barrier free width of four feet.
(d) Driveway. Private driveways shall have a minimum overall width of ten feet and conform with the standard
construction details. The driveway plan shall show the details of drainage, curb and gutter, materials, grades,
etc., and the details of how the facility will be constructed. All construction costs of a new private driveway
including any drainage pipe, shall be paid for by the property owner for the initial construction. Replacement cost
of driveway or drainage pipe under the driveway area which may be reconstructed to a similar standard may be
paid by the city. The reconstruction of a driveway facility to a standard greater than the existing condition at the
time of any new construction improvement may require a cost sharing between the city and the property owner.
The shared cost will be determined by the city.
(e) Curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter which is constructed within a public right-of-way shall conform
to the standard construction details. The property owner shall furnish plans and specifications to the city to
identify the location, grades and types of any curb and gutter proposed for construction. The alignment and
grade of any proposed improvements shall conform with the city's current plans for street and thoroughfare
plans. All costs associated with the construction of curb and gutter improvements shall be paid by the property
owner.
(f) Drainage. Drainage facilities improvements requested by property owner shall conform with the standard
construction details. Any improvements related to private driveway shall be designed to a size which will
accommodate the anticipated hydraulic flows passing through the structure. The proposed construction shall
conform to the future plans of the city on street and thoroughfare alignments. The proposed profile grades must
allow for drainage flow to pass without creating hazards to the public safety and health. The cost of drainage
improvements shall be paid by the property owner upon which the improvements benefit. If the city does elect to
participate in the cost of reconstruction or improvements to an existing facility, specific approval must be given
by the city.
(g) Enforcement and penalty. The provisions of this subsection and of the standards adopted hereby shall be
enforced by the city manager of the City of Sachse or any other duly appointed and authorized officer, agent or
employee of the city and no building or other permit authorized by ordinance of the city shall be issued unless
the official responsible for the issuance thereof is satisfied that all the provisions of this subsection and the
standards adopted hereby have been complied satisfactorily. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
subsection or failing to comply with the requirements of the standards adopted hereby, including all detailed
sketches, cross-sections, and diagrams or any plan or sketch submitted and approved by the appropriate official
of the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the municipal court of the City of Sachse,
Texas, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day
such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Inspection requirements.
(1) All drainage facilities, water facilities, sewer facilities, streets, sidewalks, alleys and thoroughfares in private
development projects shall be inspected while under construction by the city engineer or his designee.
(2) Any individual, corporation, partnership or entity constructing any drainage facilities, water facilities or sewer
facilities in private development projects shall provide 24 hours notice to the city engineer or his designee before
covering any underground drainage facilities, water facilities or sewer facilities.
(3) Any individual, corporation, partnership or entity constructing any streets, sidewalks, alleys or thoroughfares in
private development projects or any pavement within dedicated street rights-of-way within the city shall notify the city
engineer or his designee 24 hours before the start of each stage of subgrade preparation if work has been interrupted
or delayed for any reason.
(4) Any individual, corporation, partnership or entity constructing any streets, sidewalks, alleys or thoroughfares in
private development projects or any pavement within dedicated street rights-of-way within the city shall notify the city
engineer or his designee 24 hours before the start of placement of pavement and 24 hours before continuation of
placement of pavement if work has been interrupted or delayed for any reason.
(5) The city engineer or his designee shall have the authority to disapprove materials or construction methods if
such materials or construction methods do not comply with the standard specifications for public works in effect for the
city at the time the work is performed. Upon such disapproval, the individual, corporation, partnership or entity
responsible shall discontinue work involving the disapproved materials or construction methods until such materials or
construction methods are brought into compliance with the standard specifications for public works in effect at the
time.
(6) The city engineer or his designee shall be furnished with proposed batch designs and test results from an
approved laboratory by each supplier of concrete to be used in any drainage facilities, water facilities, sewer facilities,
streets, sidewalks, alleys or thoroughfares not more than 30 days nor less than seven days prior to the date that such
concrete is to be supplied.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/448
(7) In the event any of the foregoing provisions are undisclosed to the city engineer or his designee as herein
required, the individual, corporation, partnership or entity responsible for reporting said items shall be subject to a fine
as provided for in chapter 1, section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances.
(8) A fee to defray the cost of inspection shall be collected by the city when the final plat for a private development
or the final plat for any phase of a private development is accepted by the city council and the plat shall not be filed
until the fee has been paid to the city. The fee shall be in the amount of $0.60 per square yard of pavement for streets,
alleys, thoroughfares and concrete lined drainage channels.
(Ordinance 405 adopted 9/26/84; Ordinance 407 adopted 9/26/84; Ordinance 496 adopted 9/8/86; Ordinance 925 adopted
11/19/90; Ordinance 935 adopted 2/4/91; Ordinance 963 adopted 7/15/91)
Sec. 3-14. Inspection of duplex and multi-family residence.
A. Inspection required. It shall be unlawful for any duplex or multi-family dwelling which has been vacated by a tenant to be
occupied until after it has been inspected by the city's building official or his designated representative and payment of an
inspection fee of $15.00.
B. Repairs and maintenance standards.
(1) All duplex and multi-family units shall be maintained in a safe and clean living condition.
(2) All exterior and interior paint shall be maintained in an acceptable condition.
(3) All deteriorated siding shall be replaced and repainted to match.
(4) All outside lot area shall be maintained free of weeds, trash, and debris.
(5) Each unit shall be inspected and all repairs shall be made before utilities will be released.
(6) Each unit shall be inspected to ensure compliance with the building, fire, electrical, mechanical and health
codes of the City of Sachse.
(Ordinance 1260 adopted 4/17/95)
Sec. 3-15. Flood hazard area regulations.
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of Texas has in Section 16.315 of the Flood Control Insurance Act,
Texas Water Code, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses. Therefore, the City Council of Sachse, Texas does ordain as follows:
B. Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures
for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase
in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and
hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood
damage.
C. Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense
of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a
manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/448
D. Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this section uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive
increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved
in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
E. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex
and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable
flow paths.
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan
becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appeal board means the City Council of the City of Sachse.
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the
use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-
year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate
making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30,
AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying
flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting
from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood.
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and
construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
City means City of Sachse, Texas.
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection
provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above
ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may
also be referred to as “existing structures.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/448
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related
erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See “flood elevation study.”
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of
flooding).
Floodplain administrator means the city engineer or his designee.
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and
expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a
community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically
includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
Floodway. See “regulatory floodway.”
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
High intensity land use means a land use which is likely to include the storage, use, sale, and/or purchase of waste materials,
chemicals, paints, solvents, fuels, food processing/manufacturing, and drive through services.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior)
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance
of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/448
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure
and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home”
does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Private drainage facility means any drainage easement, floodway, flood zone, surface or subsurface pathway, channel, or pipe,
natural or man-made which conveys stormwater runoff, located on private property, and not located on public property.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See “area of special flood hazard.”
Start of construction means (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources
Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structural stormwater controls means stormwater structures or engineered facilities intended to treat stormwater runoff and/or
mitigate the effects of increased stormwater runoff peak rate, volume, and velocity due to urbanization, as identified in the North
Central Texas Council of Government's iSWM Technical Manual, latest edition. This information is available at the office of the
city engineer.
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that
is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/448
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements
see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.)
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 (or other datum,
where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
F. General provisions.
(1) Lands to which these provisions apply. These provisions shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the city.
(2) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Collin County, Texas And Incorporated Areas,” dated June 2, 2009, with accompanying
flood insurance rate maps dated June 2, 2009; “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Dallas County, Texas And
Incorporated Areas,” dated June 16, 2005, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps, (Map Number
48113CIND0C) dated June 16, 2005, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this section, with said copies on file and maintained by the city secretary.
(3) Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this section.
(4) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations.
(5) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(6) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements;
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(7) Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This section
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
G. Administration.
(1) Designation of the floodplain administrator. The city engineer or his designee is hereby appointed the floodplain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this section and other appropriate Sections of 44 CFR
(Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
(2) Duties of floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
(a) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/448
(b) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including
the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(c) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this section.
(d) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(e) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(f) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas
Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(g) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained.
(h) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection F.(2), the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of subsection H.
(i) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones
A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(j) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM
which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the
community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
(3) Permit procedures.
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the
placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
(i) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(ii) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(iii) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection H.(2)(b);
(iv) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as
a result of proposed development; and
(v) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection G.(2)(a).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all
of the provisions of this section and the following relevant factors:
(i) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(ii) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(iii) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(iv) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(v) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/448
(vi) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(vii) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and
the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(viii) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and
(ix) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed
use.
(4) Variance procedures.
(a) The appeal board, as established by the city council, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this section.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this section.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of onehalf
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in paragraph (3)(b) of this section have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this section, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
subsection C. of this section.
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(i) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(ii) Variances shall only be issued upon: (1) showing a good and sufficient cause; (2) a determination
that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (3) a
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(iii) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in
subsections G.(4)(a)-(i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
H. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/448
(1) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(a) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(b) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
(c) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage;
(d) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(e) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
(f) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(g) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding.
(2) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as
set forth in subsection F.(2), subsection G.(2)(h), or subsection H.(3)(d), the following provisions are required:
(a) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that
the standards as proposed in subsection G.(3)(a)(i) are satisfied.
(b) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial
or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet
above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the
base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification
which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(c) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(i) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(d) Manufactured homes.
(i) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM
shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(ii) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/448
or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
(iii) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are
not subject to the provisions of subsections H.(2)(d)(i) and H.(2)(d)(ii) of this section be elevated so that
either:
(1) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two feet above the base flood elevation, or
(2) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements
of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
(e) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE
on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed
and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection G.(3)(a), and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(3) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with subsections B., C. and D. of this section.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of subsection F.(3), G(3) and H of this
section.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to subsection F.(2) or G.(2)(h) of this section.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A areas, within
100 feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the
community's FIRM.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(f) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(g) All subdivision proposals shall be subject to the drainage design, stormwater detention, and stormwater
quality requirements identified in section 3-17.
(4) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in subsection F.(2), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(i) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation or the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified), or
(ii) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified
flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/448
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(c) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator
that the standards of this section, as proposed in subsection G.(3)(a)(i) are satisfied.
(d) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(5) Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection F.(2), are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which
carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(b) If subsection H.(5)(a) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection H.
(c) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in
an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required
by Section 65.12.
(Ordinance 600 adopted 6/15/87; Ordinance 1733 adopted 5/15/00; Ordinance 1864, sec. 1, adopted 7/16/01; Ordinance 3007,
sec. 1, adopted 10/1/07; Ordinance 3133, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/09; Ordinance 3818, sec. 1, adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 3-16. Swimming pools.
A building permit shall be required for the construction of any swimming pool within the city limits. A building permit shall not be
issued until a permit fee is paid by the applicant. The permit fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. Plans for
each swimming pool shall show compliance with the requirements of swimming pool fences (subsection 3-9 K.), discharge of
swimming pool water, (section 10-5), and other applicable city codes. Final inspection of swimming pools shall be withheld until
compliance with requirements of this section has been obtained. (Ordinance 215 adopted 2/24/76; Ordinance 2176, sec. 2,
adopted 11/21/05)
Sec. 3-17. Drainage and stormwater control.
A. Adoption-Title. This section is hereby adopted and shall be known as the “Official Drainage and Stormwater Control
Ordinance” of the City of Sachse.
B. Purpose and scope. The purpose set forth herein is to insure adequate stormwater drainage and flood control within the
City of Sachse, and to protect public health and safety, to minimize property damage due to flooding, to limit runoff rates to
equitably distribute the cost of necessary drainage improvements, and to minimize the maintenance cost of drainage facilities
constructed. Any development of property affecting storm drainage and flood control in the City of Sachse is subject to the
provisions of this section and the Flood Hazard Prevention Ordinance (Ordinance No. 600, codified as chapter 3, section 15 of
this Code of Ordinances). It also applies to individual building structures, subdivisions, excavation and fill operations.
C. Standard provisions. All construction for storm drainage in the development or improvement of property within the City of
Sachse shall conform to the following standards and requirements:
(1) Storm sewer inlets shall be provided along paved streets at such intervals as are necessary to limit the depth of
flow as follows:
(a) Residential streets. Based on parkway slopes of one-quarter inch per foot behind the curb, the 100-year
design frequency flows shall not exceed a depth of one and one-half inches over the top of curb. A maximum
flow of 45 cfs will be allowed in the street.
(b) Collector streets. Based on parkway slopes of one-quarter inch per foot behind the curb, in industrial and
commercial areas, the 100-year design frequency flows shall not exceed a dept of one-half inch over the top of
curb. A maximum flow of 45 cfs will be allowed in the street.
(c) Major thoroughfares. Based on a cross slope of one-quarter inch per foot on the pavement, the 100-year
design frequency flow shall not exceed the elevation of the lowest top of curb. A maximum of 45 cfs will be
allowed in the street.
(d) Alleys. The 100-year design frequency flows shall not exceed the capacity of the alley sections. A
maximum of 45 cfs will be allowed for an alley with curbs, and 25 cfs for alleys without curbs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/448
(e) Positive overflow. The approved drainage system shall provide for positive overflow at all low points. The
term “positive overflow” means that when the inlets do not function properly, or when the design capacity of the
conduit is exceeded, the excess flow can be conveyed over land along a paved course. Normally, this would
mean along a street or alley, but can require the dedications of special drainage easements or private property.
(2) A closed storm sewer system shall be required to accommodate a runoff exceeding the street capacity, as
provided above, up to and including the design capacity of a 72-inch concrete pipe. The following are recommended
maximum design velocities:
Culverts 15.0 fps
Inlet Laterals 10.0 fps
Storm Sewer 12.5 fps
Discharge velocities cannot exceed the permitted velocity of the channel or conduit at the outfall.
(3) An open channel may be permitted to accommodate runoff exceeding the design capacity of a 72-inch pipe, as
provided below:
(a) Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor (coefficient to runoff and drainage area, as used in the
hereinafter described “rational formula”) of less than 600 shall be concrete lined to the design depth plus six inch
freeboard except that a closed system as provided above may be used. A 20-foot wide access easement shall
be provided along at least one side parallel to channel. The top width of the channel at the design depth must
not exceed 50 feet unless specifically approved by the city engineer.
(b) Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor between 600 and 1,000 shall be improved to a capacity of
the 100-year design discharge by excavation, straightening and realignment. The construction of the concrete
lined channel shall have a width of no less than the bottom width with concrete lined to a depth of at least three
feet on the banks. Earthen side slopes shall be no steeper than 4:1, horizontal to vertical, and shall have
approved ground cover to prevent erosion.
Where drainage conditions or velocities of water will exceed that condition which would create erosion,
provisions shall be made for the placement of riprap, gabion, etc., along the stream, and channel banks by the
developer.
(c) Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor over 1,000 shall be designed to carry the capacity of a 100-
year flood frequency storm. The specific design and type of construction improvements for this drainage facility
shall have specific approval by the city engineer after review of the maintenance, erosion and site conditions.
(d) All areas of an earth channel section shall be improved by the developer with a low maintenance
vegetation as approved by the city engineer, prior to planting. The selection of materials shall comply with the
current ground cover listing for North Central Texas furnished through the Texas agricultural extension service.
(e) The setback for the building line shall be as follows:
(i) A maintenance strip shall be provided with a 20 foot width along each side of the top of the channel
unless approved otherwise by the city engineer and shown on the file plat.
(ii) A drainage flume section which provides for limited flow of storm water shall be located within a
drainage easement of sufficient width which permits further maintenance accessibility.
(4) A drainage feature which is to remain in its natural state of native growth may be accepted by the city to remain
as an unimproved facility so long as the water conveyance capacity of the area is adequate to handle the future
drainage requirements.
(5) In lieu of the improvements of a channel draining as area with a “CA” factor in excess of 600, the city council
may elect to accept the dedication of all land within the 100-year floodway of the existing drainage channel as a
permanent drainage right-of-way.
(6) The criteria for drainage improvements as hereinabove set forth in paragraphs (1) through (4) of this subsection
shall be applicable to publicly owned lands solely at the discretion of the City of Sachse.
(7) Excavation, fill and grading operations within the city limits shall be undertaken only after a proper permit has
been obtained from the city engineer. Failure to obtain the proper permit shall result in the requirement for the
developer to replace the soils, as required by the most current edition of the uniform building code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/448
(8) Easements. Drainage and floodway easements shall be provided for all open channels. Easements shall
encompass all areas beneath a ground elevation defined as being the highest elevation of the following:
(a) One foot above a design storm having a recurrence interval of 100 years, calculated by the city's criteria.
(b) The top of the high bank.
(c) Maintenance access.
(9) Ground cover. Any ground cover or vegetation which is planted and is a part of the improvement project will not
be accepted by the city until the growth has been established and maintained by the developer for a one-year time
period.
D. Responsibility of owner or developer for storm drainage.
(1) The owner or developer of property to be developed shall be responsible for all storm drainage flowing through
or abutting such property. This responsibility includes the drainage directed to that property by ultimate development
as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography. It is the intent of this section
that provision be made for storm drainage in accordance with subsection C above, at such time as any property
affected is proposed for development, use or modification.
(2) Where the improvement or construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a property line common to
two or more owners, the owner hereafter proposing developments at the time of development, shall provide the storm
drainage facility including the dedication of all necessary right-of-way or easements, to accommodate the
improvements.
(3) Where a property owner proposed development or use of only a portion of his property, provision for storm
drainage in accordance with subsection C above shall only be required in that portion of the property proposed for
immediate development, except as construction or improvements of a drainage facility outside that designated portion
of the property is deemed essential to the development of that designated portion.
(4) When a property owner proposes a development, provisions shall be made in the development plan for control
of excess siltation and downstream erosion.
(5) In the event that a property owner or developer desires to modify an existing pond or lake or desires to impound
storm water by excavation, filling or construction of a dam within a property, for retention or detention, thereby creating
a lake, pond, lagoon or basin as a part of the planned development of that property, the standard provisions for storm
drainage as established in subsection C above shall be applicable, and shall also provide:
(a) That an engineering plan for such construction, accompanied by complete drainage design information,
prepared by a registered professional engineer, and shall have been approved by the City of Sachse;
(b) That the owner or developer shall have agreed to retain under private ownership the lake, pond, lagoon or
basin constructed, and to assume full responsibility for the protection of the general public from any health or
safety hazards related to the lake, pond, lagoon or basin constructed;
(c) That the owner or developer shall have agreed to assume full responsibility for the maintenance of the
lake, pond, lagoon or basin constructed;
(d) That the obligations herein shall run with the land and shall be a continuing obligation of the owner or
owners of such land;
(e) That all Federal, state, and county laws pertaining to impoundment of surface water are complied with,
including the design construction and safety of the impounding structure. Any existing structure which is
included in a project development area shall be improved to comply with the applicable Federal, state, and
county and city safety requirements for structures. The design flows shall be based upon the urbanized drainage
flows which can result from a 100-year flood. All improvements shall be made to the dam structure at the
expense of the developer, prior to acceptance of the adjacent street, utilities and drainage improvements as
provided for under the subdivision ordinance;
(f) On any existing structure, the owner will furnish a study by a professional engineer to the city for approval
prior to any proposed alteration. Compensatory storage shall be provided in some manner such that equal or
comparable flood retention capacity is maintained.
(6) The maintenance of private drainage facilities shall be provided for by the property owner or assigned agent.
The city shall reserve the right to enter into any drainage easement or utility easement filed of record with the county
and/or city, to perform maintenance work and to construct capital improvements as required to preserve and protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Said maintenance and/or capital drainage improvement projects shall be
completed at the discretion of the city, based upon available funding, the recommendation of the city engineer, and
approval by the city council through the annual budget process.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/448
(7) All existing water seepage springs, or flowing water shall be connected into an underground storm sewer
system, or they shall be discharged into an appropriate facility which is intended to carry storm water runoff. Such flow
will not be permitted to discharge directly into the street gutter line.
(8) Fences (private and public screening) shall be constructed such that blockage of surface water flow does not
occur. This includes the requirement that erosive conditions shall not be created around, under or near a fence
structure.
(9) The developer shall provide detail offsite drainage plans for the proper transition to natural ground or stream
elevations. Criteria for onsite development shall apply to offsite improvements as required by the city engineer.
(10) When developing land for a high intensity land use, the owner shall be responsible for the
construction/installation, and maintenance of structural stormwater controls for water quality. Said structural
stormwater controls shall be shown on the engineering plans, and reviewed and approved by the city engineer prior to
construction. Structural stormwater controls include but are not limited to those as identified in the North Central
Texas Council of Government's iSWM Technical Manual, latest edition. This information is available at the office of the
city engineer. The city engineer shall review and approve or deny the selection and use of structural stormwater
controls.
E. Engineering design.
(1) Each storm drainage facility, including street capacities, shall be designed to convey the runoff which results
from a certain prescribed design storm.
Drainage design requirements for open and closed systems shall provide protection for property during a storm
having a 100-year recurrence interval with this projected flow carried in the streets and closed drainage systems in
accordance with the following:
Drainage Facility Design Recurrence Interval
Closed Storm Sewer Systems 10 year with emergency
100 year overflow
Closed Storm Sewer Systems at Street Low
Point or Sag
100 year which may include emergency
overflow
Culverts and Bridges 100 year (unless otherwise directed)
Concrete Lined Channels 50 year with emergency
100 year overflow
Earthen Channels 100 year
(2) Computation of stormwater runoff for drainage areas less than 200 acres shall be by the “Rational Method,”
which is based on the principle that a maximum rate of runoff from a given drainage area for an assumed rainfall
intensity occurs when all parts of the area are contributing to the flow at the point of discharge. The formula for
calculation of runoff by the “Rational Method” is:
Q = CIA, where:
Q = The maximum rate of discharge expressed in cubic feet per second (fps).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/448
C = A runoff coefficient which varies with the topography, soil, soil cover, land
use and moisture content of the soil at the time the runoff producing rainfall
occurs. This runoff coefficient shall be based on the ultimate use of the land
as recommended by the land use plan for the city, and shall be selected from
Table I herein on the basis of the use shown on land use and zoning map of
the comprehensive zoning ordinance for the city. If an area has had a change
of zoning to give the area land use for which the “C” in Table I is higher than
the use shown on land use and zoning maps, the higher “C” factor shall be
used.
I = Rainfall intensity in inches per hour from the applicable curves of Figure 1.
Time of concentration or duration of rainfall for use in Figure 1 shall be
calculated by velocity data shown in Table II.
A = The drainage area, expressed in acres, contributing to the runoff at the point
in question. Calculation of the drainage area shall be made from an accurate
topographic map, a copy of which shall be submitted with the engineering
plans for approval.
For drainage areas in excess of 200 acres, where the use of “Rational Method” does not provide reliable data, the
use of unit hydrograph flow determination shall be made. The use of a unit hydrograph calculation will be based upon
standard and accepted engineering principles normally used in the professional subject to the approval of the city
engineer. The Soil Conservation Service Technical Release Number 55 is an acceptable method.
Computation of stormwater runoff shall be based on a fully developed drainage area, or watershed, in accordance
with the land use projected in the then current comprehensive land use plan for the city.
For any development other than single-family development as identified in the zoning ordinance, the stormwater
runoff rate which will exit the development shall be no greater than the stormwater runoff rate prior to the development
for both the two-year and the 100-year frequency storms. This requirement may require the design and construction
of detention or retention facilities.
For development of a portion of a larger undeveloped tract of land, the owner shall provide for a community
detention or retention facility for the entire tract of land when the design of detention or retention facilities is required.
The preliminary engineering of the community detention or retention facility shall be submitted for city review at the
time of preliminary platting in accordance with chapter 8, subdivisions, of this Code. The city engineer may waive the
requirement of a community detention or retention facility based on pre-development site conditions.
Engineering design for any property which is located within the land area described by metes and bounds and
identified in Exhibit A shall conform to the requirement that no stormwater drainage runoff greater than that amount
which exists at the time of passage of this section amendment dated September 18, 1995 will be permitted. The
engineering drainage design prepared for any proposed development which occurs within or on property contained in
the land area described in Exhibit A shall make provisions to include either retention, detention or some other method
of control where the stormwater discharge is limited as specified herein.
Editor's note – Exhibit A is on file in the office of the city secretary.
For any single-family dwelling development as identified in the zoning ordinance two acres or larger with at least
three single-family dwellings, the stormwater runoff rate which will exit the development shall be no greater than the
stormwater runoff rate prior to development for both the two-year frequency and the 100-year frequency storm. For
any single-family dwelling development as identified in the zoning ordinance platted prior to the adoption of this
section and not more than two acres in size with not more than two single-family dwellings, the post development
stormwater runoff rate may increase provided the proposed stormwater runoff rate increase will not adversely affect
adjoining property owners or public health, safety, and welfare as determined by the city engineer.
When the development of any land use classification can, or does provide direct drainage outlet works into Lake
Ray Hubbard or Rowlett Creek, consideration may be given to allow the design of storm runoff to occur without
detention, or retention within the project limits.
All development plans, including site plans and file plats which have a drainage outlet works or outfall line with
drainage into Lake Ray Hubbard, Rowlett Creek, Muddy Creek, or the city's stormwater system, or any other locations
which may be proposed for drainage outfall shall be submitted to the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/448
The presentation and design of a comprehensive drainage plan submitted by the developer or their engineer to the
city for all plats will be reviewed. The plan, after review and/or proposed modification, shall be approved by the city's
engineer. If the plan is not adequate, the city's engineer will report the concerns to the city manager for action to be
considered by the city, or changes to be made by the developer/owner.
(3) The two basic methods suggested for predicting the volume of runoff with time and the peak flow rate are the
Rational Method and the Unit Hydrograph Method. The Rational Method may be used for drainage areas less than or
equal to 200 acres. Drainage basins that exceed 200 acres must use the Unit Hydrograph Method. The Soil
Conservation Service Technical Release Number 55 is an acceptable Unit Hydrograph Method.
When the Rational Method is used and detention is required, the volume of water supplied by the design storm
may be calculated by converting the runoff rate, during a specific duration, to volume. The inflow volume should be
determined for a period of at least twice the time of concentration for the site.
Retention and detention are two generalized types of storm runoff storage used to control the rate of runoff.
Additional control methods may be considered, including but not limited to the stormwater controls listed in the North
Central Texas Council of Government's iSWM Technical Manual, latest edition. This information is available at the
office of the city engineer. All detention ponds should be designed to empty within a 24-hour period.
TABLE I
VALUES OF “C” FOR USE IN “RATIONAL METHOD” FORMULA Q = CIA
Slope Land Use from Land Use
Plan
Value of “C” (Runoff
Coefficient)
Flat Terrain Park Areas-No Developable
Land
0.20
0% to 1% Park and School Land Tract 0.30
Single-Family Residential 0.45
Duplex 0.50
Multiple Family 0.55
Local Business 0.65
Central Business 0.80
Commercial 0.80
Industrial 0.75
Moderate Terrain Park Areas-No Developable
Land
0.30
1% to 3.5% Park and School Land Tract 0.40
Single-Family Residential 0.50
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/448
Duplex 0.55
Multiple Family 0.60
Local Business 0.70
Central Business 0.85
Commercial 0.85
Industrial 0.80
Steep Terrain Park Areas-No Developable
Land
0.35
3.5% and over Park and School Land Tract 0.45
Single-Family Residential 0.65
Duplex 0.70
Multiple Family 0.75
Local Business 0.80
Central Business 0.85
Commercial 0.85
Industrial 0.85
TABLE II
AVERAGE VELOCITY FOR USE IN DETERMINING TIME OF CONCENTRATION
Description of
Water Course
0% to 3% V. in
fps
4% to 7% V. in
fps
8% to 11% V. in
fps
Over 12% V. in
fps
Surface Drainage 5 9 13 15
Channels Determine V. by Mannings Formula
Storm Sewers Determine V. by Mannings Formula
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/448
The data shown in Table II are average velocity of the runoff for calculating time of concentration or duration of
rainfall for use in Figure 1. These average velocities in this table shall be used unless the designer shows calculation
of velocities by streets and/or storm sewers, or overland flows.
Using the average velocities from this table, the designer shall calculate the time of concentration by the following
formula unless more data is shown on the plans for calculating time of concentration.
“Inlet Time” = Five minutes for property zoned for multiple family, local business, central business, commercial or
industrial; ten minutes for property zoned for parks, schools, single-family residential and duplex.
T = “Inlet Time” + D / V x 60, Where:
T = Time of concentration in minutes for use in Figure 1.
D = Distance in feet from point of concentration to upper end of drainage area
under consideration.
V = Velocity in feet per second from this table or velocity calculated by designer by
streets and/or storm sewers.
The existing soils are such that erosive conditions are created at certain velocities. The following velocities are considered to be
maximum acceptable design conditions:
Earth (with no concrete protection) 0 to 5 feet per second
Shale 5 to 6 feet per second
Rock 6 to 10 feet per second
Editor's note – Figures are on file in the office of the city secretary.
(4) The minimum curb inlet size shall be eight feet in length with a capacity of eight cfs.
(5) The construction of all improvements shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in the current Paving
and Drainage Specifications Handbook, and Design Standards of the City of Sachse. The frequency chart in years
(Figure 1), the Inlet Capacity for low points Inlets (Figure 2), the drainage capacity road sections (Figure 3), and the
city criteria are hereby adopted as a part of this section.
(6) Complete engineering plans for storm drainage facilities shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered
in the State of Texas and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and
specifications shall be borne by the owner or the developer and shall be furnished to the city engineer for his review
and approval.
(7) In any development, alteration, or improvement of property, the owner may be required to provide, at his
expense, a preliminary drainage study for the total area to be ultimately developed. This study shall be submitted to
the city engineer as a part of the submitted data for consideration of preliminary plat, or site plan approval.
F. Construction in areas subject to flooding.
(1) In all areas subject to flooding, the finished floor elevation shall be a minimum of two feet above the high water
elevation calculated for the runoff from a rainfall having a recurrence interval of 100 years, in a completely developed
watershed. The owner/developer shall furnish, at his expense, to the city engineer, sufficient engineering information
to confirm that the minimum floor elevations proposed are as required by this paragraph. Residential construction
permits will not be issued until lots and/or sites are elevated from the flood plain in accordance with F.E.M.A.
approved revision.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/448
(2) No building or structure, excavation, filling, or construction of embankment or landscaping shall be permitted
within a flood plain or channel which will increase water surface elevations or obstruct natural flow of water within that
flood plain or channel, unless sufficient engineering design information is furnished to the city engineer in order that
he may determine the same will not adversely affect flow characteristics within that flood plain or channel, resulting in
damage to that or any other property nearby.
(3) The provisions of the city's current flood hazard prevention ordinance (F.E.M.A. criteria) shall be observed in
preparing land development plans.
(4) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, plus two feet.
G. Building or structure set-back requirement. No building or structure, including fences, shall hereafter be constructed,
reconstructed, or relocated within 20 feet of any open drainage channel. It is the intent of this section to insure that an
unobstructed width of at least 20 feet is maintained between the top of the high bank of any such drainage channel and any
building or structure. (See also subsection C)
H. Minimum lot and floor elevations. Minimum lot and floor elevations shall be established as follows:
(1) Lots abutting a natural or excavated channel shall have a minimum elevation for the buildable area of the lot at
least equal to the highest elevation of the drainage floodway easement, and a finished floor elevation at least two feet
above the 100-year design storm or F.E.M.A. floodway elevation, whichever is greater. The minimum finished floor
elevation shall be set at an elevation of two feet above the top of curb elevation, except when the terrain feature
slopes, such that drainage is not a critical element to the project.
(2) Where lots do not abut a natural or excavated channel, minimum floor elevations shall be a minimum of one foot
above the street curb or edge of alley, whichever is lower, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Where a lot
is adjacent to a drainage flume or channel, the finished floor shall be a minimum of two feet above the high water
elevation. Where the structure is below a street or alley, the builder shall grade and construct facilities such that a
positive drainage system of swales are capable of discharging the resultant flows which may flow across the yard
area into the structure.
(3) The minimum finished floor elevation shall be shown on the final file plat for record purposes. Prior to final
acceptance of utilities and street construction by the city, a certified statement shall be prepared by a registered
professional land surveyor showing all lot elevations, as developed within the subject project, meet or exceed the
required minimum finished floor elevations. This certification shall be filed with the City of Sachse.
(4) Existing platted property which is subject to flooding or carries a specified or recorded minimum finished floor
elevation shall be surveyed by a registered professional land surveyor prior to obtaining a building permit. The
certified survey data shall be furnished to the City of Sachse for approval. Certificate of compliance with the provisions
of this ordinance pertaining to specified finished floor levels shall be required.
I. Building permits, plat and site approval to be withheld. No building permit shall be issued, nor plat or site plan approval, nor
certificate of occupancy approved for any construction, reconstruction, or development upon any land where such construction,
reconstruction or development is not in conformity with the requirements and intent of this section. Anyone who violates any of
the terms and provisions of this section shall be denied a building permit until the violations are corrected. Residential
construction permits will not be issued until lots and/or sites are elevated from the flood plain by F.E.M.A. approved revisions.
J. Maintenance guarantee. The contractor shall guarantee the work which he does against defective workmanship and
materials for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance by the city.
Where defective workmanship and/or materials are discovered requiring repairs to be made under this guarantee, all such repair
work shall be done by the contractor. If contractor fails to make repair or correct such defective workmanship and/or materials
within five days after being notified, the city may make the necessary repairs and charge the contractor with the actual cost of all
labor and materials required.
The contractor shall provide a performance bond for a period of one year after the date of acceptance of the work to cover his
guarantee as set forth above.
(Ordinance 1165, secs. I–X, adopted 3/21/94; Ordinance 1299 adopted 9/18/95; Ordinance 3188, sec. 1, adopted 1/4/10;
Ordinance 3818, sec. 1, adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 3-18. Bonding requirements for sidewalks and approaches.
No person, firm or corporation, or any of their agents, servants or employees, shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk
or approach in the City of Sachse without executing and delivering to the City of Sachse, a bond in the sum of $2,000.00 payable
to the City of Sachse, at Sachse, Dallas, County, of whom shall be an approved surety company, which bond shall be
conditioned as follows:
Said bond shall be conditioned that all work done in the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk shall be done in a
good and workmanlike manner, and that such person, firm or corporation shall faithfully and strictly comply with the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/448
specifications, and with the terms of the city Code and such ordinances, resolution or regulations that may be passed by the
governing body, governing and relating to the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, and that the City of Sachse
shall be fully indemnified and be held whole and harmless from any and all costs, expense or damage whether real or asserted,
on account of any injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of said work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned
by the performance of said work; said bond shall be conditioned further that the said persons, firm or corporation shall, without
additional cost to the person for whom the work was done, maintain all sidewalks or approaches so constructed, reconstructed or
repaired by said person, firm or corporation for a period of two years from the date of such construction, reconstruction or repair
to the satisfaction of the city inspection department of the City of Sachse at any time within two years after the construction,
reconstruction or repair of such sidewalk and after ten days notice from the city inspection department to construct or repair the
same, the opinion of the city inspection department of the City of Sachse as to the necessity of such reconstruction or repair shall
be binding on the parties thereto: which bond shall for such purpose be in force for two years after the construction,
reconstruction or repair of such sidewalk or approach and after ten days' notice from the city inspection department to
reconstruct or repair the same, and the opinion of the city inspection department of the City of Sachse as to the necessity of such
reconstruction or repair shall be binding on the parties thereto which bond shall for such purpose be in force for two years after
any sidewalk is constructed, reconstructed or repaired and one recovery shall not exhaust said bond, but such bond shall be a
continuing obligation against the sureties thereon until the entire amount therein provided for shall have been exhausted. That is
in case the bond herein provided for shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be obtained arising out of the
violation of any condition of the same, the governing body shall require, upon notice to it of such fact, an additional bond to be
given by any person, firm or corporation in accordance with this section in an amount sufficient when added to the exhausted
amount of the original bond to be at all times equal to the sum of $2,000.00. The City of Sachse may for itself or for the use and
benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of any defective construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk by any
person, firm or corporation, maintain suit on said bond in any court having jurisdiction thereof, or suit may be maintained thereon
by any person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of any person, firm or corporation, who shall construct, reconstruct or
repair any sidewalk or approach in the City of Sachse, to observe the conditions of said bond; provided however, that nothing in
this section shall affect the bond of any person, firm or corporation now engaged in construction, reconstructing or repairing
sidewalks or approaches, which have already been executed in accordance with the terms of the existing city ordinance, nor
shall this section be construed to in any manner diminish the liability of any surety or principal on said bond. No person, firm or
corporation having a bond to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace sidewalks or approaches on public property
within the City of Sachse shall be permitted to take out a permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair of any sidewalk or
approach on any public property within the City of Sachse and allow any person other than the bona fide holder of such
reconstruction, alteration or repair of any sidewalk or approach on any public property within the City of Sachse shall be granted
unless the two year maintenance bond provided for herein shall be in full force and effect at the time of request for such permit
and the doing of the work.
(Ordinance 1005, sec. 1, adopted 1/6/92)
Sec. 3-19. Erosion control.
A. Owner responsibility. It is the responsibility of each property owner within the municipal limits of the City of Sachse, Texas to
take appropriate measures to control the erosion and siltation of soil materials from the owner's property. The owner shall not
allow water runoff to transport silt, earth, topsoil, etc., from the owner's property to others properties or on to city streets, drainage
easements, drainage facilities or storm drains. The property owner shall be responsible for damages to others created by the
actions of builders, contractors, developers and others performing construction or other activities on the owner's property which
create conditions that cause or aggravate erosion.
B. Contractor responsibility. Plans and specifications prepared for construction of improvements shall address suggested
erosion/siltation control measures and techniques to assist the contractor in implementing a suitable program to control erosion.
The City of Sachse, Texas shall not be required to approve and may, in the city's discretion, deny approval of plans and
specifications based upon the city's opinion as to the suitability of erosion measures submitted. The contractor shall take
whatever measures are necessary to control and limit the transport of silt, earth, topsoil, etc., from the site of construction,
including, but not limited to, the erosion/siltation control measurers and techniques provided on the plans and specifications. The
contractor shall, upon completion of his/her work, leave the owner's property in a condition that minimizes the transportation of
the owner's silt, earth, topsoil, etc.
C. City approval. The City of Sachse, Texas, through its building officials, city engineers and inspectors, may refuse to issue
approval or permits, including plats, drainage studies, plans and specifications, building permits, interim inspections; acceptance
of maintenance of completed construction of public streets or storm drainage facilities or certificates of occupancy if, at the time
the approval or permit is sought, the owner, developer and/or contractor does not have in place adequate erosion/siltation control
measures.
(Ordinance 1099 adopted 7/19/93)
Sec. 3-20. Regulation of wireless telecommunication facilities.
Facilities, including antennas, used in conjunction with wireless telecommunication facilities, shall be governed by the applicable
provisions of this ordinance in compliance with the following standards. For the purposes of this section, the term “antenna”
means one or more wireless telecommunication antennas mounted on a monopole tower.
A. Existing structures. Roof-mounted wireless telecommunication antennas are allowed on nonresidential buildings
in all zoning districts provided the antenna does not exceed the height of the building by more than 15 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/448
Associated equipment shall be placed either within the same building or in a separate building which matches the
existing building in character and building materials.
Wireless telecommunication antennas are allowed on existing utility structures exceeding 75 feet in height
(including power or telephone poles, water storage facilities, and similar buildings and structures) operated by the city
or public utility companies provided that the antenna does not exceed the height of the structure by more than 15 feet.
B. Freestanding towers. Wireless telecommunication antennas are allowed in industrial (I-1) and industrial (I-2)
districts. An SUP, as otherwise provided by this ordinance, for wireless telecommunication antennas is required for
commercial and freeway districts (unless otherwise allowed by right under an incentive provided below).
Freestanding wireless telecommunication antennas must be a minimum of three to one height to distance ratio
from single-family residential district boundary lines.
Freestanding wireless telecommunication antennas must be a minimum distance of 5,000 feet from another
wireless telecommunication antenna (unless excepted by reason of an incentive provided below).
Equipment buildings must be similar in color and character to the main or adjoining building or structure and
screened by a chain link fence, a wrought iron fence with evergreen hedge, or masonry wall.
C. Incentives. Wireless telecommunication antennas located on existing buildings or utility structures are not
subject to the 5,000 foot separation requirement.
A wireless telecommunication antenna may be located less than 5,000 feet but not less than 3,000 feet from
another wireless telecommunication antenna provided that (i) the antenna will be used for two or more wireless
communication providers; or (ii) the antenna is designed and built so as to be capable of use by two or more wireless
communications providers and the owner of the antenna certifies to the city that the antenna is available for use by
another wireless communications provider on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis and at a cost not exceeding
the actual prorated share of the design, construction and maintenance costs of the facilities.
(Ordinance 1449 adopted 3/3/97)
Sec. 3-21. Regulation of residential and commercial alarms.
A. Definitions. In this article:
Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under the
control of one owner.
Alarm system means a device or system that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably
be expected to summon, police department services, fire department services, or emergency medical services including but not
limited to, local alarms. “Alarm system” does not include:
(1) An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; nor
(2) An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises which does not have a local alarm.
Burglary means an offense as defined in the Texas Penal Code, chapter 30.
Burglar alarm notification means a notification intended to summon the police which is initiated or triggered manually or by an
alarm system designed to respond to a stimulus characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion.
Communications center means the designated unit of the Sachse police and fire departments that has the responsibility of
answering incoming phone calls and dispatching police and fire units.
Emergency medical assistance alarm notification means a notification intended to summon emergency medical assistance from
the Sachse fire department or local ambulance service.
False burglar alarm notification means a burglar alarm notification to police when the responding officer(s) find no evidence of a
burglary or attempted burglary.
False emergency medical assistance alarm means an emergency medical assistance notification to the fire department or local
ambulance service, when responding personnel finds no evidence of a need for emergency medical assistance.
False fire alarm notification means a fire alarm notification to the fire department when the responding personnel find no
evidence of a fire having occurred or of a need for fire department services.
False robbery alarm notification means a robbery alarm notification to the police when the responding officer(s) find no evidence
of a robbery.
Fire alarm notification means a notification to the fire department intended to summon units of the fire department which is
initiated or triggered manually or mechanically by an alarm system designed to react to any of the visual or physical
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/448
characteristics of a fire.
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of the alarm
site.
Permit holder means the person designated in the required application.
Person means a natural person, corporation, partnership, association or unit of government.
Robbery means an offense as defined in the Texas Penal Code, chapter 29.
Robbery alarm notification means a notification by means of an alarm system designated to be activated by an intentional act so
that police will be notified when a robbery occurs.
B. Permit required.
(1) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without an alarm permit
issued by the chief of police or his designee. A separate permit is required for each type of alarm system at each
alarm site.
(2) Any person owning, possessing, or operating an alarm system on the effective date of this article shall apply for
a permit within 180 days after the enforcement date.
(3) Upon receipt of a completed application form, the chief of police or his designee shall issue a permit unless:
(a) The applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under this article; or
(b) The applicant has outstanding fines or violations of this article; or
(c) The applicant has had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked and the violation causing revocation has
not been corrected.
(4) Each permit application shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, home address and home telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and
responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees and fines
assessed under this article.
(b) Classification of the alarm site as residential or commercial.
(c) For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system, that is, burglary,
robbery, fire, water flow or medical emergency.
(d) The names, home addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons in addition to the permit
holder, who have key access to the alarm site and who can respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes when
notified by the police or fire departments.
(e) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm company that maintains or services each alarm
system at the alarm site.
(f) The type of alarm announcer, whether audible or silent, at the alarm site.
(5) Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit or
renewal, or while making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause for refusal to grant, or for suspension of a permit.
(6) An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. However, the person(s) designated to respond to an
alarm may be changed. The permit holder shall inform the chief of police or his designee of any change that alters
any information listed on the permit application within two business days. No fee shall be assessed for such changes.
(7) All fees or fines owed by an applicant shall be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed.
(8) Persons operating an alarm system without a permit will be given one written warning, each subsequent
violation will be assessed a $250.00 fee per occurrence.
C. Permit fee, duration and renewal. A fee of $10.00 shall be assessed for a permit or the renewal of a permit. A permit is valid
for a period of two years from the date of issuance. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to renew the permit prior to
expiration.
D. Proper alarm system operation and maintenance.
(1) A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/448
(a) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm
system;
(b) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications;
(c) Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when notified by the
chief of police or his designee to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the
premises, or to provide security for the premises; and
(d) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system
was intended to report.
(2) A permit holder or person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated.
(3) A permit holder shall display or cause to be displayed street address numbers in a prominent exterior location at
both the front and rear of the alarm site. The address number(s) shall not be less than three inches in height and of a
color contrasting to its background. Nonresidential alarm sites shall display, in a prominent exterior location, in
English, the name of the business at the front of the alarm site.
(4) A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to
be adjusted in order to suppress false indications of force so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses
due to:
(a) Transient pressure changes in water pipes;
(b) Flashes of light;
(c) Wind noise caused by the rattling or vibration of doors or windows;
(d) Vehicle noise adjacent to the alarm site; or
(e) Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies.
E. Manual reset required. A permit holder or person in control of a local alarm or alarm system that causes an alarm
notification to be sent directly to the police or fire departments shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that, upon activation, the system will not transmit another alarm signal without first being manually reset.
F. Reporting of alarm signals. A permit holder shall not report alarm signals through a relaying intermediary that does not meet
the requirements of this article and the rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police or his designee.
G. Other types of alarms.
(1) A person shall not install or maintain an alarm system except for the purpose of eliciting responses to burglaries,
robberies, fires, or requests for emergency medical services, unless specifically authorized by the chief of police or his
designee.
(2) If innovations in alarm systems or other types of alarm devices adversely affect emergency services of the city,
the chief of police or his designee may promulgate rules and regulations in order to protect the emergency services of
the city.
H. Indirect alarm reporting. A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarms to the police or fire department shall:
(1) Send notification of an alarm to the police or fire department by a human operator only;
(2) Send alarm notifications to the police or fire departments in a manner and form determined by the chief of police
or his designee; and
(3) Send alarm notifications only on special trunk lines designated by the chief of police or his designee.
I. Automatic dialing prohibited. No permit holder and no person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic dialing
service which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone line leading into the
police or fire department communications center and then transmit any prerecorded message or signal.
J. Protection of financial institutions.
(1) A financial institution required to have an alarm system pursuant to the provisions of the Bank Protection Act of
1968 (12 U.S.C., section 1882) may install, with the permission of the chief of police or his designee, a signal line
directly to the police department for the purpose of reporting burglaries and robberies. If such an arrangement is
made, all other requirements of this chapter must be met. The financial institution shall execute a letter of agreement
with the city permitting the installation of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel monitored in the
communications center of the police department. The installation must be accomplished at the institution's expense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/448
(2) The financial institution shall pay an annual fee of $50.00 for each indicator. The chief of police or his designee,
shall have the right, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to inspect the alarm system at the alarm site and
require necessary repairs or improvements.
If the chief of police or his designee finds that the alarm system continually fails to operate properly or be operated
properly, the chief of police or his designee may terminate the privilege to have equipment and indicators in the
communications center of the police department and require prompt removal of the equipment at the expense of the
financial institution.
(3) The financial institution, at its expense, shall make arrangements to provide service for the alarm system at the
request of the financial institution or the chief of police or his designee on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week. In no
event may the city become liable for charges for repairs and maintenance.
(4) The financial institution may cancel its agreement with the city at any time by giving the city written notice
through the chief of police or his designee and, at its own expense, remove its equipment and indicators from the
monitor panel in the communications center.
(5) The chief of police or his designee may require any change, modernization, or consolidation of alarm signaling
equipment that the chief of police or his designee deems advisable. In no event may the city become liable for
charges for these changes.
(6) Instead of a direct line, a financial institution may report burglaries and robberies by transmission through an
alarm reporting service using a special trunkline designated by the chief of police or his designee.
K. Alarm systems in apartment complexes.
(1) A tenant of an apartment complex shall obtain an alarm permit from the chief of police or his designee before
operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.
(2) The owner or property manager of an apartment complex in which an alarm system is installed in one or more
individual residential units shall obtain a master alarm permit from the chief of police or his designee.
(3) For purposes of assessing service fees and enforcing this article against an individual residential unit of an
apartment complex:
(a) The tenant is responsible for payment of all service fees for any false alarm notification emitted from the
alarm system in the tenant's residential unit; and
(b) The master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of all service fees for any false alarm
notification emitted from an alarm system in any unoccupied residential unit in the apartment complex.
(4) The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm
system operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant
areas and office, storage, and equipment areas.
L. System performance reviews. If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner
that ensures proper operation to suppress false alarms, the chief of police or his designee may require a conference to review
the circumstances of each false alarm with the alarm permit holder and the alarm company under contract with the alarm permit
holder. A persons alarm permit may be suspended for failing to attend a system performance review if they fail to appear after
receiving two separate requests attend the conference.
M. Inspection.
(1) Upon reasonable notification, the chief of police, fire chief or fire marshal or their designated representative may
inspect an alarm site and alarm system of a permit holder.
(2) An inspection does not constitute a warranty or representation that a system will work, is appropriate, or will
otherwise ensure safety.
N. Alarm system operating instructions. A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm
site, a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations or passwords shall not
be included in these instructions. These instructions shall be available during an inspection of the alarm site.
O. Service fees-New installations-Exemptions.
(1) If, within any 12-month period, five false burglar alarm notifications are emitted from an alarm site, the chief of
police or his designee may assess the permit holder of that alarm site a fee in the amount of $25.00 for the 6th
occurrence, $50.00 for the 7th occurrence and $100.00 + suspension of the permit on the 8th occurrence within a 12-
month period.
(2) If, within any 12-month period, two false fire alarm notifications are emitted from an alarm site, the chief of police
or his designee may assess the permit holder of that alarm site a fee in the amount of $100.00 for each subsequent
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/448
false alarm notification emitted from the site, following the third false notification within the same 12-month period.
(3) If, within any 12-month period, two false robbery alarm notifications are emitted from an alarm site, the chief of
police or his designee may assess the permit holder of that alarm site a fee in the amount of $100.00 for each
subsequent false alarm notification emitted from the site, following the third false notification within the same 12-
month period.
(4) If, within any 12-month period, five false emergency medical assistance alarms are emitted from an alarm site,
the chief of police or his designee may assess the permit holder of that alarm site a fee in the amount of $100.00 for
each subsequent false alarm notification emitted from the site, following the sixth false notification within the same 12-
month period.
(5) If a person notifies the chief of police or his designee and applies for an alarm permit before the installation of a
new alarm system, no service fee shall be assessed during the first 180 days after the installation, and alarm
notifications during that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed, providing the
permit holder has met the requirements of this article.
(6) If the responding police or fire department personnel determine that the alarm notification was caused by:
(a) A natural or man-made catastrophe;
(b) Severe weather that causes physical damage to the alarm system or alarm site;
(c) Telephone line outage; or
(d) A criminal offense;
a service fee will not be assessed. The determination of the chief of police or his designee in classifying an alarm
notification as false or actual is final.
(7) A permit holder shall pay a fee assessed under this section within 60 days after receipt of notice that it has been
assessed.
(8) Alarm systems operated by the police department or the City of Sachse shall be exempt from the provisions of
this article.
P. Suspension of permit-Offense to operate.
(1) The chief of police or his designee may suspend an alarm permit if is determined that there is a false statement
of a material matter in the application for a permit.
(2) The chief of police or his designee may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm permit for any violation of this
article.
(3) The chief of police or his designee may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm permit if an alarm system
generates an excessive number of false alarm notifications in a 12-month period. In each respective category, an
excessive number shall be:
(a) Eight false burglary notifications;
(b) Five false robbery alarm notifications;
(c) Eight false emergency medical assistance alarm notifications; and
(d) Five false fire alarm notifications.
(4) See reason for suspension under system performance review.
(5) The chief of police or his designee may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm permit if the permit holder fails to
pay any assessed service fees within 60 days from the date of notice that fees had been assessed.
(6) A suspension may be lifted or a permit renewed upon sufficient showing that the conditions which caused the
action have been corrected and if the chief of police or his designee determines that the alarm system is likely to be
maintained and operated in a responsible manner in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(7) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during a period of suspension or after the chief of
police or his designee has refused to renew a permit for the alarm system. A fee of $250.00 will be assessed against
the permit holder for each alarm signal received during the suspension period.
Q. Appeal from denial or suspension of permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/448
(1) If the chief of police or his designee refuses to issue or renew a permit or suspends a permit, he shall send to
the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and a statement of
the right to appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief of police or his designee to the
city manager or designee by filing a written response for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten
days after the receipt of the notice from the chief of police or his designee. The filing of a request for an appeal
hearing with the city manager or designee stays an action of the chief of police or his designee in suspending a permit
until the city manager or designee makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the
ten-day period, the action of the chief of police or his designee is final.
(2) The city manager or his designee shall serve as hearing officer at appeal hearings and consider evidence
offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. The hearing officer
shall make a decision based on a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer shall
render a decision within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer may affirm,
reverse or modify the action of the chief of police or his designee, and that decision is final.
R. Alarm dispatch records.
(1) The police or fire department personnel responding to a dispatch resulting from a burglary, robbery, fire or
emergency medical assistance alarm notification shall record such information as necessary to permit the chief of
police or his designee to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following information:
(a) Exact address of alarm site;
(b) Dispatch time and date;
(c) Event or incident number;
(d) Permit number;
(e) Primary responding unit and officer;
(f) Apparent cause for alarm; and the
(g) Name of representative of the permit holder on premises, if any.
(2) The responding police or fire personnel shall leave notice at the alarm site that the police department has
responded to a false alarm notification.
(Ordinance 1554 adopted 2/16/98)
Sec. 3-22. International Fuel Gas Code.
A. Adoption. The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is
hereby adopted and designated as the fuel gas code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full
herein.
B. Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code,
2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1; change to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Sachse, Texas, hereinafter
referred to as “this code”.
(2) Section 102.2; add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2.
(3) Section 102.8; change to read as follows:
[A] 102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those
that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments
have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be
considered to reference the amendments as well.
(4) Section 306.3; change to read as follows:
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided... {bulk of paragraph unchanged}...
side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm
by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/448
walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the
attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building
conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced
and removed through the required opening.
2. Where the passageway is not less than... {bulk of section to read the same}.
(5) Section 306.5; change to read as follows:
[M] 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or
appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher
than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided.
Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 8 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade
or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall... {bulk
of section to read the same}... on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent
slope).... {bulk of section to read the same}.
(6) Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows:
[M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are
installed on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an
edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial
cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the
appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service,
repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be
provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be
constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading
requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code.
(7) Section 306; add Section 306.7 with exception and subsection 306.7.1 to read as follows:
306.7 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater
is installed is more than eight feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a
stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger when approved by the code official) is capable of being
accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the
ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder.
306.7.1. Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately
lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet
shall be provided in accordance with Section 306.3.1.
(8) Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an
approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be
stamped into the tag:
“WARNING
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
Do Not Remove”
(9) Section 402.3; add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EHD).
(10) Section 404.12; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/448
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (458
mm) top of pipe below grade.
(11) Section 406.1; change to read as follows:
406.1 General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure
tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of
this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to
determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the
code official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the
inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining
that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests.
(12) Section 406.4; change to read as follows:
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressuremeasuring
device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the
pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made.
(13) Section 406.4.1; change to read as follows:
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the
discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six inches (152 mm) of
mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges
shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3 1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound
incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a
pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3
1/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded
piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa)
(1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less
than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of
water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed
maximum working pressure.
(14) Section 406.4.2; change to read as follows:
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no
case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of
fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory
to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes.
{Delete remainder of section}
(15) Section 409.1; add Section 409.1.4 to read as follows:
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping
systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the
valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but
in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with
the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and
supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.
(16) Section 410.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section 306.
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced
and removed through the required attic opening.
(17) Section 614.8; add a sentence to read as follows:
[M] 614.8 Domestic clothes dryer exhaust ducts. Exhaust ducts for domestic clothes dryers shall conform to the
requirements of Sections 614.8.1 through 614.8.6. The size of duct shall not be reduced along its developed length
nor at the point of termination.
(18) Section 621.2; add exception as follows:
621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort
heating in a dwelling unit.
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the
code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Code Official unless an unsafe condition is determined
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/448
to exist as described in Section 108.7.
(Ordinance 1882, sec. I, adopted 10/1/01; Ordinance 2136, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05; Ordinance 3428, sec. 7, adopted 10/15/12,
eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 7, adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-23. International Property Maintenance Code.
A. Adoption. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition with amendments, including Appendix A “Boarding
Standard,” a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the property
maintenance code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full herein.
B. Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1; change to read as follows:
[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Sachse, Texas, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
(2) Section 103.5; change to read as follows:
[A] 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities
under this code shall be as indicated in the City of Sachse's Master Fee Schedule.
(3) Section 112.4; change to read as follows:
[A] 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be
criminally liable for such offense in a fine amount not to exceed the sum of Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000).
(4) Section 302.4; delete the section in its entirety.
(5) Section 304.14; change to read as follows:
304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens
of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition.
Exception: {text unchanged}
(6) Section 602.3; change to read as follows:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units
or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, shall supply heat to the occupants thereof to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68°.
Exception:
1. {text unchanged}
2. {text unchanged}
(7) Section 602.4; change to read as follows:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68° during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exception:
1. {text unchanged}
2. {text unchanged}
(Ordinance 2137, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05; Ordinance 3428, sec. 8, adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 8,
adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 3-24. Standard construction details for paving, storm drainage, water system and sanitary sewer facilities
adopted by reference.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/448
Ordinance No. 456 of the City of Sachse, Texas is hereby amended by amending the “Standard Construction details for paving,
storm drainage, water system and sanitary sewer facilities” by replacing the standard construction detail sheets attached hereto
as Exhibit “A”* with the following replacement sheets:
(1) Sheet 22: Standard construction details-Sanitary sewer (manhole-cleanout connections).
(2) Sheet 23: Standard construction details-Sanitary sewer.
(3) Sheet 3: Standard construction details-Paving.
(4) Sheet 19: Standard construction details-Water (fire hydrant).
(5) Sheet 21: Standard construction details-Water (water pipe details).
(Ordinance 3127, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/09)
*Exhibit “A” is hereby adopted by reference for the city and made part hereof for all purposes, the same as if fully copied herein.
Cross reference – Utilities, Ch. 10.
Sec. 3-25. Flatwork requirements.
The following restrictions apply to all impervious surface, concrete, grading and other similar installations:
(1) All flatwork and grading require a permit.
(2) All new parking and drives shall be constructed with concrete to the city's engineering design criteria. Where
residential drives exceed 150 feet in length, an all-weather, dust-free surface is permitted starting 20 feet beyond the
property line so that the drive approach plus 20 feet is concrete.
(3) Nothing within this section allows the creation of a drainage hazard/issue, and all flatwork must be
sloped/graded to drain.
(4) No flatwork is allowed within one foot of any property line, except for required driveways.
(5) Paving is limited to ten percent of total lot coverage and should be limited in application. Pools and decking,
required driveways for the garage, and patios are exempt.
(6) A residential property shall continue to maintain the majority of each of its yards in living landscape or an
alternative allowed by the landscape ordinance.
(Ordinance 3875, sec. 1, adopted 7/16/18)
Secs. 3-26–3–40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED*
Secs. 3-41–3–53. Reserved.
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Sec. 4–1. Taxicabs and limousine service.
A. Definitions.
(1) Taxicab means a for hire, chauffeured motor vehicle, used to transport persons, with a rated passenger capacity
of eight or less, that typically operates on irregular routes, irregular schedules, and on a call and demand basis, but
not including limousines as defined in this section.
(2) Limousine means a vehicle that has a manufacturer's rated capacity of not more than 15 passengers and that is
used for the transportation of persons.
B. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive or operate any taxicab or limousine service
having a local base of operations within the City of Sachse upon or over any street in the City of Sachse without first having
obtained a permit from the City of Sachse issued under the terms and provisions of this section.
C. Application for permit. An applicant for a permit under the provisions of this section shall file with the police department of
the City of Sachse a written application signed by the applicant. The following information is required in the application:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/448
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, including the trade name (Assumed Name Certificate)
by which applicant does business; the street address of the business, and if incorporated, the name and address of
the corporate officers registered with the secretary of state;
(2) Name, local address and telephone number of the business to be permitted;
(3) Proof of insurance as required in subsection E hereof;
(4) A description of the business services which the applicant intends to offer including the number and
identification number of all vehicles for which a permit is sought.
D. Nature of permit. A permit issued under this section:
(1) Is an annual permit which expires 12 months after the date of issuance;
(2) Is effective for a single place of business only;
(3) Vests no property right in the permittee except to operate a taxicab or limousine service within the city in
accordance the terms and conditions of this section;
(4) Permit must be openly displayed in vehicle at all times;
(5) Is nontransferable and nonassignable;
(6) Is subject to a fee of $200.00 per vehicle per year.
E. Insurance required. Before any permit is issued to conduct a taxicab business, the applicant shall file with the police
department of the City of Sachse a public liability insurance policy covering at least the period for which the permit is to be
issued, and shall keep the same in full force and effect during the term of such permit. Such policy shall be written by an
insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state, shall be performable in Collin County and Dallas County, and
shall insure the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of a taxicab. The
maximum amount of recovery provided for in such policy shall not be less than the following sums:
(1) $50,000.00 for the injury and destruction of property.
(2) $100,000.00 for injury and death of any one person.
(3) $300,000.00 for injury or death of any two or more persons in any one accident.
Insurance companies issuing such policies of insurance shall, at the time of issuance of such policies, issue a certificate to the
city, specifically providing that the insurance policy will not be cancelled without notice first being given to the City of Sachse. The
city shall not be deemed to have assumed any responsibility for the solvency of any insurance company, or in any manner to
have become liable for any sum on account of any such claims or on account of any act or omission of any officer or employee of
the city in connection with any matter relating to such taxicabs and/or limousines, nor shall the lawful liability of the owner or
operator be in any manner limited or enlarged by anything in connection with this section, or such insurance policies, but persons
having any cause or action secured thereby shall be authorized to sue upon such insurance policies without impeding the city.
F. Disqualification of applicants and drivers. No person shall be eligible for a taxicab permit who, within ten years preceding the
date of the application or employment, has been finally convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following
offenses:
(1) Prostitution or related offenses;
(2) Driving while intoxicated; or
(3) Driving while under the influence of drugs, and no such person, firm or corporation to whom a permit has been
issued shall employ anyone as a driver who has been finally convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of the same
offenses.
G. Maximum rates of fares. No person operating a taxicab or limousine within the city shall charge any amount of money for
transporting service plus waiting time in an amount greater than the schedule of fares established in this section. Rates shall be
established by the city council. The following shall be the maximum lawful rates for taxicab service:
Number of
Passengers
Rate for 1st Mile
or Fraction of
Mile
Rate for each
Additional 1/4
Mile
Waiting Time
Per Hour
Each Additional
Passenger
1 $2.50 $0.25 $8.00 Within Sachse
$0.50 Outside
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/448
Sachse $1.00
As a part of its rate schedule, each permittee is encouraged to offer a senior citizen discount to those persons 55 years of age or
older.
H. Meters. All taxicabs operating within the city limits shall be equipped with meters which shall register the following:
(1) The mileage traveled from the time a passenger enters the taxicab until the passenger reaches his destination
or the service of the taxicab is otherwise terminated.
(2) The amount of money which is to be charged for the transporting service, plus any waiting time, such amount
not to exceed the amounts displayed on the meter herein required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab within the city limits without a working meter, which performs the function
hereinabove listed. All taxi meters required in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be maintained in good
operating condition and shall be tested and sealed at least once each year in accordance with state weights and measures laws.
The city may order a taxi meter to be tested at any time, and the holder of a permit, issued in accordance with the provision of
this section, shall make the taxicab available for testing when so ordered. The holder of such permit shall pay the cost of testing
taxi meters.
I. Parking on streets; driving through alleys. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit issued under the terms of this
section, or the agent, servant or employee of such permittee to park or leave standing any taxicab on the streets of the city,
except while loading and unloading passengers into and from such taxicab, or to drive through the alleyways instead of streets,
except to deliver passengers to a point in an alley.
J. Cruising prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab to drive or cruise about on the streets of the city seeking
passengers who have not therefore ordered or called for a taxicab.
K. Increasing number of cabs after issuance. If at any time the holder of a permit under this section desires to use an
additional taxicab under the existing permit, he may do so only after he has made application to the police department and has
been granted by the police department a permit to use such additional taxicab, and he shall furnish the police department the
same information regarding such additional vehicle as required regarding those covered by the original permit.
(Ordinance 507 adopted 10/20/86)
Sec. 4-2. Massage establishments.
A. Licenses required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment or perform massages without first
having obtained a license from the Texas state department of health as a registered massage therapist.
(2) All persons performing massages must be licensed by the Texas state department of health as registered
massage therapists.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment or perform massages with an expired,
revoked, or terminated license.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without first having obtained a permit or
license from the City of Sachse, in accordance with the provisions set forth in these sections.
B. Application for license from city. Any person making application for permit or license from the City of Sachse shall submit to
the following procedures:
(1) Any person desiring to obtain a permit or license to operate a massage establishment shall make application to
the city manager or his appointed designee, submitting a nonrefundable fee of $400.00.
(2) Furnish to the City of Sachse proof that all employees of such establishment have secured from the Texas state
department of health a license as a registered massage therapist.
(3) Permit or license is valid for 12 months only. Permit or license is subject to review and renewal every 12
months. Application for permit is $400.00 per year. Renewals may not be issued prior to the payment of this fee.
C. Inspections. Inspections of massage establishments shall be conducted each year by the City of Sachse and the Dallas
County department of health to ensure compliance with this section, and any other applicable ordinance and statutes. A permit or
license from the City of Sachse to operate a massage establishment must be renewed every 12 months and is subject to review
and inspection by the City of Sachse building, code enforcement, and fire departments, in addition to review and inspection by
the Dallas County health department.
D. Unlawful in residential zone. It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to be operated in any section of the city
which is zoned for residential purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/448
(Ordinance 193 adopted 9/10/74; Ordinance 1767 adopted 8/21/00; Ordinance 1771 adopted 9/5/00)
Editor's note – Section 1 of Ordinance 1767 of August 21, 2000 repealed in its entirety the former section 4-2 A., which pertained to
definitions relating to massage establishments. Sections 2-4 of the same ordinance amended sections 4-2 B.-D., and renumbered them as
sections 4-2 A.-C. Accordingly, at the editor's discretion, section 4-2 E. was renumbered as section 4-2 D. Sections 5-10 of Ordinance 1767
repealed former sections 4-2 F.-K., which pertained to terms of license, unlawful activities, sanitation requirements, standards of operation,
revocation and suspension of license, and appeal from refusal to grant or renew from decision to revoke or suspend license.
Editor's note – Responsibility for administration of the massage establishment regulations was changed from the mayor to the city manager
with the adoption of the Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 4-3. Occasional (garage) sales.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions are adopted:
(1) Occasional sales shall mean intermittent sales of household goods, furniture or furnishings of a used, damaged
or discarded nature by an individual resident of the City of Sachse upon his premises.
(2) Permit shall mean the permit or license secured by the individual from the city secretary for the holding of an
occasional sale under the provisions of this section.
(3) Permit holder shall mean the individual who has secured a permit from the city secretary under the provisions of
this section for the holding of an occasional sale of personal property belonging to him and on his own residential
premises.
B. Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the holding of occasional sales as defined herein.
(1) An occasional sale, which is also known as a garage sale, may be held by any permit holder for a continuous
period of time, not to exceed four consecutive days for each sale.
(2) Any person desiring to hold an occasional sale shall secure from the city secretary of the City of Sachse, a
permit for such sale, which permit shall be good for one period not exceeding four consecutive days. The application
for the permit shall include the name and address of the applicant, the date of the sale and a description of the
personal property to be offered at the sale. The application shall state that the applicant agrees not to conduct such
sale for a period in excess of four consecutive days from the date given in the application, and that the applicant has
not previously held more than one occasional sale during the previous one-year period.
(3) No person shall hold an occasional sale on his or other residential premises within the city in excess of two
times in any one-year period.
(4) The city secretary is directed to review the application for permit for an occasional sale and to refuse the same
if:
(a) The applicant has held two sales within the past year; or
(b) If the applicant has held an occasional sale of longer than a four consecutive day period, after the effective
date of this section and within one year of the latest application; or
(c) If the applicant has been convicted in the municipal court of the City of Sachse within the past year for any
violation of the terms of this section.
(Ordinance 192 adopted 8/27/74)
Sec. 4-4. Outdoor retail sales and commercial promotions.
A. Definitions.
(1) Public right-of-way shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of any real property owned or
maintained by the state, county, city or other political subdivision of the state of which all or any part thereof is open to
the use of the public for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or travel.
(2) Occasional sales shall mean an intermittent sale of household goods, furniture or furnishings of a used,
damaged or discarded nature by an individual resident of the City of Sachse upon his premises.
B. Sales and promotions on public right-of-ways prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct
an outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion of any public right-of-way as defined herein.
C. Permit required on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct an outdoor
retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion without first having obtained a permit from the city.
D. Application for permit. The applicant for a permit to conduct an outdoor retail sale and/or commercial promotion shall file an
application for such permit with the city manager, or city official designated by him, containing such information as required by the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/448
city manager.
E. Building permit required. Any outdoor retail sale and/or outdoor commercial promotion shall obtain all necessary building
permits for any structures or electrical devices used in connection with such outdoor sale or commercial promotion as required by
the building code and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Sachse.
F. Compliance with zoning ordinance required. Any person, firm or corporation conducting an outdoor sale and/or commercial
promotion shall comply with all zoning ordinance requirements applicable to the use district in which such outdoor sale and/or
commercial promotion shall occur and this section shall not be interpreted to create an exception or repeal of any zoning
ordinance requirement heretofore passed by the city.
G. Occasional sales and temporary produce stands excepted from permit requirements. Permits for occasional sales as
defined herein shall be governed by the terms of section 4-3 of this chapter and are not subject to the permit requirements
contained in this section. The operation of a temporary produce stand shall not require the issuance of a permit pursuant to this
section, but shall require a special use permit as set out in the city zoning ordinance.
(Ordinance 338 adopted 6/6/83)
Sec. 4-5. Fair housing regulations.
A. Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Sachse to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures
the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to his race, color, sex, religion or national origin.
It is further declared that this policy is based upon a recognition of the right of every person to have access to adequate housing
of his own choice without regard to race, color, sex, religion or national origin; and further that the denial of such right through
consideration based on race, color, sex, religion, or national origin is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City of Sachse and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such rights which is within the power and
proper responsibility of government to prevent.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words so used in the present tense include the future, words in
the masculine gender include the feminine, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number
include the plural.
(1) Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under subsections C, D, and E.
(2) Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
(3) Family includes a single individual.
(4) Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries,
and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
(5) To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
C. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. Except as exempted by subsection F, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or
otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin;
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin;
(3) Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement, or advertisement
regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race,
color, sex, religion, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
(4) Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
(5) For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce, or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of any person or persons
of a particular race, color, sex, religion, or national origin; and
(6) For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts, or
failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord, or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially
segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/448
D. Discrimination in the financing of housing. It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of
commercial or residential real estate loans to discriminate in denying a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or to discriminate against
any such person the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions because of:
(1) The race, color, sex, religion, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or
(2) The race, color, sex, religion or national origin of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is made or given.
E. Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to
the business of selling or rented dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or particular
on account of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin.
F. Exemptions and exclusions.
(1) There shall be exempted from the application of subsections C through E hereof, all transactions involving:
(a) The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more
than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such
units as his residence;
(b) The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by
no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the
remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four such rooms are offered;
(c) The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that:
(i) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or
rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person
in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent,
salesman, or person;
(ii) The sale is made without the publication, posting, or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in
violation of subsection C(3) (This shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title
companies, or other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer of title);
(iii) The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at one time;
(iv) The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of more than three such single-family houses at one time; and
(v) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of
such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one
such sale within any 24-month period.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association, or society from
limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, sex, or national origin.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting
the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(4) Nothing in this section shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a
room or rooms are leased, subleased, or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen, or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing
accommodation.
G. Fair housing administrator. The city manager shall serve as the city's fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as
“administrator”), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this section. The administrator may delegate his authority to
investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction.
H. Complaints.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/448
(1) Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes he will be
irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereafter referred to as
“person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify
the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state
the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare
complaint forms and furnish them to any person, upon request.
(2) All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing
practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by
furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person or persons named therein who allegedly committed or were
threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint
within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint.
(3) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths.
I. Investigation.
(1) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt
and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint.
(2) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of the complaint, the administrator
shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal
endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and
adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this section. Nothing said or done in the
course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party
to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned.
(3) Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within 30
days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary
compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing
practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violation be prosecuted
in the Municipal Court of the City of Sachse. With such recommendation, the administrator shall refer his entire file to
the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within 30 days after such referral make a determination as to whether to
proceed with prosecution of such complaint in Municipal Court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall
institute a complaint and prosecute the same to conclusion within 30 days after such determination or as soon
thereafter as practicable.
J. Unlawful intimidation. It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize any
individual, group, or business because he or they complied with the provisions of this section, because he or they have exercised
his or their rights under this section, or enjoyed the benefits of this section, or because he or they have made a charge, testified,
or assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or have made any report to the administrator.
K. Education and public information. In order to further the objectives of this section, the administrator may conduct
educational and public information programs.
(Ordinance 797 adopted 6/5/89)
Sec. 4-6. Solicitors and canvassers.
A. Definitions.
(1) Canvasser means a person who attempts to make personal contact with a person at a residence without prior
specific invitation or appointment from the residence for the primary purpose of attempting to enlist support for or
against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose
the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause.
(2) Charitable purpose means philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor,
needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the
benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic organization,
or the benefit of any educational institution. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include the direct benefit of
the individual making the solicitation. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include the benefit of any political
group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
(3) Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Sachse, or designee.
(4) Consumer means an individual who seeks or acquires real or personal property, services, money or credit for
personal, family or household purposes.
(5) Consumer transaction means a sales transaction in which one or more of the parties is a consumer.
(6) Goods means property of any kind.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/448
(7) Home solicitation transaction means a consumer transaction for the purchase of goods, services or realty,
payable in installments or in cash, in which the merchant engages in a personal solicitation of the sale to the
consumer at a residence, and the consumer's agreement or offer to purchase is given at the residence to the
merchant. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant to a preexisting revolving charge
account or retail charge agreement; or a sale made pursuant to prior negotiations between the parties at a business
establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale; or a sale of realty in which
transaction the purchaser is represented by a licensed attorney or in which the transaction is being negotiated by a
licensed real estate broker.
(8) Public property means:
(a) Any property open or devoted to public use or owned by the city; and
(b) Any area dedicated to the public use for sidewalk, street, highway, or other transportation purposes,
including, but not limited to, any curb, median, parkway, shoulder, sidewalk, alley, drive, or public right-of-way.
(9) Residence means any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons contained
within any type of building or structure.
(10) Roadway. As defined in Chapter 541, Texas Transportation Code.
(11) Services means any work done for the benefit of another person.
(12) Solicit or solicitation means to ask, beg or plead, whether orally or in a written or printed manner for the
purpose of receiving contributions, alms, charity, or gifts of items of value for oneself or another person.
(13) Solicit funds or solicitation of funds means any request for money, property or anything of value; or the pledge
of future money, property or anything of value; or the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or personal,
tangible or intangible, whether of value or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets,
publications or subscriptions to publications. Expressly excluded from the meaning of “solicit funds” or “solicitation of
funds” is any offer of membership in any organization. A solicitation of funds is complete when the solicitation is
communicated to any individual then located within the corporate limits of the city.
(14) Vehicle. As defined in Chapter 541, Texas Transportation Code.
B. Hours of solicitation. Solicitation shall occur only during the time that is one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour before
sunset. This provision does not apply where the solicitor is on the property by express, prior invitation of the owner of the
property or a person residing on the premises.
C. Solicitation and handbill distribution on private property.
(1) A person desiring that no person conduct solicitation, home solicitation transaction, charitable solicitation,
solicitation of funds, the placement of handbills or other advertisements, or canvassing for any cause at such person's
residence shall exhibit in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence a weatherproof card,
not less than three inches by four inches in size, containing the words “NO SOLICITORS” or similar language. The
letters shall not be less than two-thirds of an inch in height.
(2) Every merchant going onto any premises upon which a residence is located shall first examine the residence to
determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited upon or near the main entrance to the residence. If notice
prohibiting soliciting is exhibited, the merchant shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the
occupant, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock
upon the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for
the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a solicitation,
home solicitation transaction, charitable solicitation, placement of handbills, or other advertisement, solicit funds, or to
canvass for any cause, if a card as described in subsection (1) is exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or near the
main entrance to the residence, unless the visit is a result of a request by the occupant.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person, handbill distributor, or sponsor, to distribute or cause to be distributed,
deposited, placed, thrown, scattered, or cast any handbill or other advertisement upon any residential property or
motor vehicles except by handing or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person
then present in or upon such private premises or by placing or depositing the same in a manner to secure and prevent
such handbills from being blown or drifting about the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach handbills
to the door of any residence in any manner except by the use of rubber bands. No handbills may be tacked, glued or
taped to the premise of the residence. No handbills may be attached or place on any motor vehicles on private or
public property.
(5) The name of the commercial handbill distributor or sponsor shall be clearly printed on each handbill or other
advertisement that is distributed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/448
D. Permits.
(1) No person, directly or through an agent, shall solicit funds, engage in a home solicitation transaction, or solicit in
person from house to house in the city to sell or attempt to sell goods, merchandise, wares, services or anything of
value or to take or attempt to take orders for the future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares or any personal
property of any nature whatsoever, or take or attempt to take orders for services to be furnished or performed in the
future, or to distribute commercial handbills or other advertisements on private property, without first having obtained a
permit.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the city without carrying the permit required by this section
on his person, in plain view, clearly displayed and recognizable, while engaged in such soliciting or selling. It shall be
unlawful for any solicitor to fail or refuse to display such permit upon the request of any person.
(3) A canvasser is not required to obtain a permit.
(4) Application and required information. Any person desiring to solicit, solicit funds, make home solicitation
transactions or distribute commercial handbills or other advertisements on private property within the city shall make
written application, on a form provided by the city to the chief of police for a permit which shall include at least the
following:
(a) The name of the person applying and desiring to make home solicitations.
(b) Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership, corporation or association; and
i. If a natural person, the business or residence address and telephone number;
ii. If a partnership, the name of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of
each partner;
iii. If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it is organized under the laws of the state
or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location, telephone number,
name of the main individual in charge of the local office of such corporation, if any, and the names of all
officers and directors or trustees of such corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of
incorporation; or
iv. If an association, then show the association's principal business address and telephone number, if
any, and show the names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of all
members of the association unless they exceed ten in number, in which case the application shall so state
and the person registering may alternatively list names and principal business or residence addresses and
telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of the association. If the association is part of a
multistate organization or association, the mailing address and business location of its central office shall
be given in addition to the mailing address and business location of its local office.
(c) The names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all individuals who will be in direct charge or
control of the solicitation of funds.
(d) The time period within which the solicitation of funds is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of
solicitation and its projected conclusion, and how often the applicant will solicit during the year.
(e) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished.
(f) Names of other communities in which the applicant has made home solicitations in the past six months.
(g) The nature of the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, or the nature of the service to be furnished.
(h) Whether such applicant, upon any such order obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment or the
deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
(i) If the applicant is unable to provide any of the foregoing information, an explanation of the reasons why
such information is not available.
(j) Name, address, telephone number and Social Security number of each adult who will be responsible for
supervising any juvenile solicitor (under 17 years of age).
(k) Whether the applicant, or any person employed by applicant to solicit, has ever been convicted of a felony
or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Signatures. The application must be signed by the applicant, if the person is an individual; if the person applying
is a partnership, by the partner charged with the disbursing of funds solicited; and if the person applying is a
corporation or an association, by its officer charged with disbursing the funds solicited. The individual signing the
application shall sign and swear before an officer authorized to administer oaths that he has carefully read the
application and that all the information contained therein is true and correct.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/448
(6) Required fee. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee of $30.00 plus an
additional $10.00 will be required for each person soliciting, making home solicitations and distributing commercial
handbills to compensate the city for the cost of administering this section. A fee is not required for charitable
solicitations or soliciting for charitable purposes.
(7) Exemptions from fee provisions. The fees required by this section shall not be required of ordinary commercial
travelers to sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to persons selling or dealing in the same within the
city, and individuals operating under licenses granted by a state agency or dealing in interstate commerce.
(8) Permit duration. A permit requested under this section shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to
exceed 90 days.
(9) Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. Should an applicant be denied a permit or have a permit revoked,
the applicant may appeal that action to the city manager or his designee by submitting a letter to the city secretary
within ten days of action complained of. A hearing on the denial will then be scheduled within seven days of receipt of
the appeal, to be held within 15 days. The city manager, or his designee, shall render a decision on the appeal within
three days of the date of the hearing. The decision of the city manager, or his designee, shall be final.
E. Charitable solicitations registration.
(1) All persons desiring to solicit for a charitable purpose or to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the city shall
obtain a permit as provided in subsection D.
(2) The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by any organization or association from its members, or the
solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by persons when such solicitation occurs on premises owned or controlled
by the person soliciting funds, or with the permission of the person who owns or controls the premises, when
previously invited to the premises for solicitation is exempt from this section.
F. Solicitations to occupants of vehicles on public roadways prohibited.
(1) Except as provided in this section, a person commits an offense if, while occupying any roadway, traffic median
or public property adjacent to any public roadway in the city, such person knowingly conducts a solicitation directed to,
or intended to attract the attention of, the occupant of any vehicle stopped or traveling on the roadway. An offense
occurs when the solicitation is made, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is
completed, or an exchange of money, goods, or services takes place.
(2) Exceptions to this section are limited to:
(a) Summoning aid or requesting assistance in an emergency situation;
(b) A law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties; or
(c) The solicitor has been granted the authority pursuant to Section 552.0071 of the Texas Transportation
Code.
G. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section or failing to observe any provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of
Ordinances by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed as a separate offense.
(Ordinance 885 adopted 6/18/90; Ordinance 3148, sec. 1, adopted 7/6/09)
Sec. 4-7. Sexually-oriented businesses.
A. Findings.
(1) The city council makes the following findings with regard to sexually-oriented establishments:
(a) Section 215.075, Local Government Code, State of Texas, authorizes home rule cities to license any
lawful business, occupation, or calling that is susceptible to the control of the police power.
(b) Section 54.004, Local Government Code, authorizes home rule cities to enforce all ordinances necessary
to protect health, life, and property, and to preserve the good government, order and security of such cities and
their inhabitants.
(c) Chapter 243, Local Government Code, authorizes cities regulate sexually-oriented businesses.
(d) The city council finds that sexually-oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities,
including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature.
(e) The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the city which demands
reasonable regulation of sexually-oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the
citizens.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/448
(f) Licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of sexuallyoriented
businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow
their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.
(g) There is convincing documented evidence that sexually-oriented businesses, because of their very nature,
have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas
adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values.
(h) It is recognized that sexually-oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable
operational characteristics particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby
contributing to urban blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent areas.
(i) The city council desires to minimize and control these adverse effects and thereby preserve the property
values and character of surrounding neighborhoods, deter the spread of urban blight, protect the citizens from
increased crime, preserve the quality of life, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry.
(j) That the secondary effects precipitated by establishment of a sexually oriented business can be
substantially mitigated by requiring separation of the sexually oriented business from residential uses and places
of public assembly and from one another.
(2) The city council makes the following findings with regard to the licensing of sexually-oriented establishments:
(a) The city council believes it is in the interest of the public safety and welfare to prohibit persons convicted of
certain crimes, defined below as specified criminal offenses, from engaging in the occupation of operating a
sexually-oriented business.
(b) The city council, in accordance with article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, has
considered the following criteria:
(i) The nature and seriousness of the crime;
(ii) The relationship of the crime to the purposes for requiring a license to engage in the occupation;
(iii) The extent to which a license might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the
same type as that in which the person previously had been involved; and
(iv) The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity, or fitness required to perform the duties and
discharge the responsibilities of the licensed occupation.
(c) The city council has determined that the specified criminal offenses, as set forth below, are serious crimes
which are directly related to the duties and responsibilities of the occupation of operating a sexually-oriented
business.
(d) The city council has determined that the very nature of the occupation of operating a sexually-oriented
business brings a person into constant contact with persons interested in sexually-oriented materials and
activities, thereby giving the person repeated opportunities to commit offenses against public order and decency
or crimes against the public health, safety, or morals, should he or she be so inclined. Thus, the city council is of
the opinion that conviction of a specified criminal offense renders a person unable, incompetent, and unfit to
perform the duties and responsibilities accompanying the operation of a sexually-oriented business in a manner
that would promote the public safety and trust.
(3) The city council has determined that no person who has been convicted of a specified criminal offense, as set
forth below, is presently fit to operate a sexually-oriented business until the respective time periods designated in that
section have expired.
(4) It is the intent of the city council to disqualify a person from being issued a sexually-oriented business license by
the City of Sachse if he or she is currently under indictment or misdemeanor information for, or has been convicted
within the designated time period of, any specified criminal offense.
(5) Pursuant to the provisions of section 243.006 (2), Local Government Code, the city council finds that, generally,
the operation of a sexually-oriented business within 1,000 feet of the following uses is inconsistent with such uses:
(a) Churches, or similar places of regular religious worship;
(b) Public or private elementary or secondary schools;
(c) Boundaries of residential districts, as defined by the Sachse Zoning Map;
(d) Public parks adjacent to residential districts, as defined by the Sachse Zoning Map;
(e) Property lines of lots devoted to residential use;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/448
(f) Child care centers, kindergartens, day care centers, and similar child-oriented businesses;
(g) Municipal public buildings, including but not limited to the Sachse city hall, fire stations, libraries, and
service centers; and
(h) Other sexually-oriented businesses.
B. Purpose and intent.
(1) It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of sexually-oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexuallyoriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexuallyoriented
materials protected by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(2) It is the intent of the city council, that to the extent possible, the provisions of this section are enacted pursuant
to the authority granted to the City of Sachse by Chapter 243, Local Government Code. Any provision of this section
which is beyond the authority granted to the City of Sachse by Chapter 243, Local Government Code, is enacted
pursuant to the Sachse city charter and the inherent and statutory powers of a Home Rule City.
C. Exempt businesses. The following are exempt from regulation under this section:
(1) A bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business is an adult bookstore, adult movie theater, or
adult video store as defined herein;
(2) A business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic
trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under the license held;
or
(3) A business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the
healing arts.
D. Definitions. In this section the following words and terms shall be interpreted as follows (unless the context indicates a
different meaning):
(1) Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically control still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per minute at anyone time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(2) Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which features more than
one day per calendar month:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
(b) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities; or
(c) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(3) Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the
public for any form of consideration, and:
(a) Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
(b) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
(c) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than
ten hours.
(4) Adult movie theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown, more than one day per calendar
month, which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/448
(5) Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which more than
one day per calendar month, features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
(6) Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Sachse or his designated agent.
(7) Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for
another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
(8) Escort agency means a person who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
(9) Establishment means and includes any of the following:
(a) The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business;
(b) The conversion of an existing business to a sexually-oriented business;
(c) The conversion of an existing sexually-oriented business to another sexually-oriented business;
(d) The addition of another sexually-oriented business to an existing sexually-oriented business; or
(e) The relocation of any sexually-oriented business.
(10) Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued,
as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
(11) Media, sexual oriented means magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CD's, DVD's or other devices
used to record computer images, or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
(12) Media store, sexually oriented means an establishment that rents and/or sells sexually oriented media, and
that meets any of the following three tests:
(a) More than 40 percent of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually-oriented media; or
(b) More than 40 percent of the stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented media; or
(c) It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a “XXX”, “adult” or “sex” business, or otherwise as a
sexually oriented business, other than adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater or adult theater.
(13) Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified
anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
(14) Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque, meaning nontranslucent, covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly aroused state. For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex,
whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered an opaque covering.
(15) Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be
found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually-oriented business whether or not that person is an owner,
part owner, or licensee of the business.
(16) Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
(17) Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and
areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
(18) Sex shop means an establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests:
(a) It offers for sale items from any two of the following categories: Sexually-oriented media; lingerie; leather
goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually-oriented
novelties; and the combination of such items constitute more than ten percent of its stock in trade or occupies
more than ten percent of its floor area;
(b) More than five percent of its stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented toys or novelties;
(c) More than five percent of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of sexually-oriented toys or
novelties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/448
(19) Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(a) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(b) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the
persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
(20) Sexually-oriented business means an inclusive term used to describe collectively the following businesses:
Adult arcade, sexually-oriented media store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult movie theater, adult theater, escort
agency, nude model studio, sex shop, sexual encounter center, or other commercial enterprise the primary business
of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices of other items intended to provide
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
(21) Specified anatomical areas include:
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or the areola or nipple of the
female breasts; and
(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; and
(c) Areas of the human anatomy included in the definition of “nudity or state of nudity”.
(22) Specified sexual activities means acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities
include, but are not limited to the following: Bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices,
acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any
person on the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether
clothed or unclothed.
(23) Specified criminal offense means:
(a) Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 4 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended:
prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling prostitution, obscenity,
sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor, sexual performance by a child, or possession of child
pornography;
(b) Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended: public
lewdness, indecent exposure, or indecency with a child;
(c) Engaging in organized criminal activity as described in Chapter 71 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended;
(d) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code, as
amended;
(e) Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal
Code, as amended;
(f) Kidnapping or aggravated kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended;
(g) Robbery or aggravated robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended;
(h) Bribery or retaliation as described in Chapter 36 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended;
(i) A violation of the Texas Controlled Substances Act or Dangerous Drugs Act punishable as a felony, class A
misdemeanor or class B misdemeanor; or
(j) Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses.
(24) Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following:
(a) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (c) above.
(25) Substantial enlargement of a sexually-oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the
business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on December 21, 1992.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/448
(26) Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business means and includes any of the following:
(a) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(b) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means; or
(c) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of
the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
E. Classification. Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Sexually-oriented media store;
(3) Sex shop;
(4) Adult cabarets;
(5) Adult motels;
(6) Adult movie theaters;
(7) Adult theaters;
(8) Escort agencies;
(9) Nude model studios;
(10) Sexual encounter centers; and
(11) Other sexually-oriented businesses.
F. License required. A person commits an offense if he or she operates a sexually-oriented business without a valid license,
issued by the city for the particular type of business.
G. Application for license.
(1) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police.
(2) The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises in
which the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business, including a statement of total floor space to be
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. Applicants who must comply with subsection W of this section shall submit a diagram meeting the
requirements of subparagraph (a) of paragraph (1) of subsection W.
(3) The application fee, provided in subsection J, must be paid at the time the application is filed with the chief of
police.
(4) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the
application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a
license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under subsection H below, and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
H. Qualifications of applicant. The applicant for a sexually-oriented business license must meet all of the following
requirements:
(1) He or she is 18 years of age or older;
(2) He or she, or his or her spouse, is not overdue in the payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties
assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually-oriented business;
(3) He or she, or his or her spouse, has not been convicted of a violation of a provision of this section, other than
the offense of operating a sexually-oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the
application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect;
(4) He or she has been employed in a sexually-oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12
months and has demonstrated that he or she is not able to operate or manage a sexually-oriented business premises
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/448
in a peaceful and law-abiding manner;
(5) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (6) of this subsection H concerning time limitations, he or she, or his or
her spouse, has not been convicted (irregardless of whether such conviction is being appealed) or is under indictment
or misdemeanor information for, a specified criminal offense;
(6) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (7) of this subsection H below, the provisions of paragraph (5) of this
subsection H shall apply if:
(a) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date or release from confinement
imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense;
(b) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement
imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for a felony offense; or
(c) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for two or more misdemeanor
offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
(7) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (6) of this subsection H, an applicant who has been convicted or
whose spouse has been convicted of a specified criminal offense, for which the required time period has elapsed
since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, may qualify for a
sexually-oriented business license only if the chief of police determines that the applicant or the applicant's spouse is
presently fit to operate a sexually-oriented business. In determining such present fitness, the chief of police shall
consider the following factors:
(a) The extent and nature of the past criminal activity;
(b) His or her age at the time of the commission of the crime;
(c) The amount of time that has elapsed since his or her last criminal activity;
(d) His or her conduct and work activity prior to and following the criminal activity;
(e) Evidence of his or her rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release;
(f) Other evidence of his or her present fitness, including letters of recommendation from: prosecution, law
enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for him or her;
the sheriff and chief of police in the community where he or she resides; and any other persons in contact with
him or her; and
(g) He or she has maintained a record of steady employment and has supported his or her dependents and
has otherwise maintained a record of good conduct and has paid all outstanding court costs, supervision fees,
fines and restitution as may have been ordered in all criminal cases in which he or she has been convicted.
(8) It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to secure and provide to the chief of police, in the
form he requires, the evidence required to determine present fitness under paragraph (7) above.
I. Issuance of license.
(1) Within 30 days after receipt of an application, the chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant if the chief of police finds that the application complies with all of the following:
(a) The applicant meets the qualifications provided in subsection H, above;
(b) The premises of the proposed sexually-oriented business meet the requirements of this section;
(c) The applicant has provided all of the information reasonably necessary for processing the application, and
has truthfully answered all questions and requests for information on the application form; and
(d) The application fee required by subsection J has been paid.
(2) After approval by the chief of police as provided above, the assessor and collector of taxes shall issue the
license.
(3) The license shall be in effect for one calendar year after issuance.
(4) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, the classification, and the address of the sexually-oriented business. The licensee shall post the
license in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the business so that it may be easily read at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/448
J. Fees. The filing fee for an application for a sexually-oriented business license, either initial or renewal, is $500.00, and is
applicable whether or not the sexually-oriented business license is issued.
K. Inspection.
(1) An applicant or licensee shall permit the city health officer and representatives of the police department, fire
department, and building inspection department, to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business for the
purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(2) A licensee or his agent or employee commits an offense if he or she violates the provision of paragraph (1) of
this subsection.
L. Expiration of license. Each license shall expire one year from the date or issuance and may be renewed only by making
application as provided in subsection G above. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
M. Suspension. The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee
or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this section;
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the premises of the sexually-oriented business;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business premises as provided in subsection K;
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually-oriented business premises; or
(5) Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually-oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner
thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
N. Revocation.
(1) The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause for suspension under subsection M occurs and the license
has been previously suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(2) The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(a) A licensee submitted false or misleading information during the application process;
(b) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed the unlawful possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the licensed premises;
(c) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the licensed premises;
(d) A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of time
when the license was suspended;
(e) Unless exempted by the provisions of paragraph (7) of subsection H, a licensee has been convicted of a
specified criminal offense for which the time period required in paragraph (6) of subsection H has not elapsed;
(f) On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, an employee of the licensee is convicted of a
specified criminal offense, such crime occurring in or on the licensed premises;
(g) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual contact” shall have the
same meaning as it is defined in section 21.01 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended; or
(h) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexuallyoriented
business or the licenses premises.
(3) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(4) Subparagraph (g) of paragraph (2) above does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license.
(5) When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not
be issued a sexually-oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent
to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the
license was revoked under subparagraph (2) above, an applicant may not be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under paragraph (6) of subsection H has elapsed since the termination of any
sentence, parole, or probation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/448
O. Appeal.
(1) If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the applicant or
licensee, as the case may be, has the right to appeal such decision to the state district court.
(2) The chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written
notice of the action, the right to appeal, and if applicable, the right to request an exemption from the location
restrictions.
(3) An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the notice of the decision of the chief of
police is mailed.
(4) The applicant or licensee, as the case may be, bears the burden or proof in court, and the substantial evidence
rule applies.
P. Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually-oriented
business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the license.
Q. Location of sexually-oriented businesses.
(1) A sexually-oriented business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of:
(a) A church or similar place of regular religious worship;
(b) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(c) A boundary of a residential district as defined by the Sachse zoning map;
(d) A public park adjacent to a residential district as defined by the Sachse zoning map;
(e) The property line of a lot devoted to residential use;
(f) A child care center, kindergarten, day care center, or similar child-oriented business;
(g) A municipal public building, including but not limited to the Sachse city hall, fire stations, libraries, and
service centers; or
(h) Another sexually-oriented business.
(2) A person commits an offense if he or she:
(a) Causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually-oriented business contrary to the location requirements specified in paragraph (1) of this
subsection Q; or
(b) Causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually-oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area or any sexually-oriented
business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually-oriented business.
(3) For the purpose of subsection Q:
(a) Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premise where a sexually-oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private elementary or secondary
school, child care center, kindergarten, day care center, or similar child-oriented business, or municipal public
building, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot; and
(b) The distance between any two sexually-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business
is located.
(4) Any sexually-oriented business lawfully operating on December 21, 1992, that is in violation of this subsection
Q, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to
exceed three years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or
more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use.
(5) A sexually-oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually-oriented business license, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, child care center, kindergarten, day care center or similar child-oriented business,
municipal public building, public park, residential district, or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually-oriented
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/448
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a
license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.
R. Exemption from location restrictions.
(1) If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexuallyoriented
business establishment is in violation of subsection Q, then the applicant may request, from the city council,
an exemption from such location restrictions.
(2) Such request shall be in writing, and must be filed with the city secretary within 15 days after the notice of the
decision of the chief of police is mailed.
(3) If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the 15 day limit, the city council shall consider the
request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the request is received.
(4) The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the location restrictions of subsection Q if it
makes the following findings:
(a) That the location of the proposed sexually-oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby
properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(b) That granting an exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this section;
(c) That the location of the proposed sexually-oriented business will not downgrade the property values or
quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;
(d) That the location of an additional sexually-oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any
program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and
(e) That all other applicable provisions of this section will be observed.
(5) The city council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result
in denial of the exemption. The decision of the city council is final.
(6) If the city council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the city council's
action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually-oriented business is in violation of the location restrictions of
subsection Q until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(7) If the city council denies the exemption, an appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days. The
applicant bears the burden of proof in court, and the substantial evidence rule applies.
(8) If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least 12 months
have elapsed since the date of the city council's action.
(9) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provision of this section.
S. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
(1) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(2) A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under
the age of 18 years.
T. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
(1) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(2) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years
was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(3) A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a
state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
(4) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that
a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
U. Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult movie theaters.
(1) A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a
state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult movie theater.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/448
(2) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or she knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or
on the premises of an adult theater or adult movie theater.
(3) It is a defense to prosecution under paragraphs (1) or (2) of this subsection that the person under 18 years was
in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
V. Additional regulations for adult motels.
(1) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel.
(2) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually-oriented business license, he or she rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he or she rents or subrents the
same sleeping room again.
(3) For purposes of paragraph (2) of this subsection, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean the act of permitting a room
to be occupied for any form of consideration.
W. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
(1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other
video reproduction or any type of sexually-oriented media which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Upon application for a sexually-oriented business license, and in addition to the information required in
subsection G., the applicant shall submit a diagram of the premises showing the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises
in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint is not required; however
each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies
that the configuration of the premises had not been altered since it was prepared.
(b) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(c) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior
approval of the chief of police.
(d) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty
and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(e) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a
manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there
is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station. No viewing area shall have a door, half-door, curtain, portal partition or other divider
unless at least one side is completely open to an adjacent public room and a manager's station so that the area
is visible to persons in the adjacent public room and a manager's station.
(f) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees in
present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subparagraph (e) of paragraph (1) of this
subsection remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times
that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has not been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to subparagraph (a) of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
(g) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at
the floor level.
(h) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and any of his agents and employees present in the
premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in
the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/448
(2) A person having a duty under subparagraphs (a) through (h) of paragraph (1) of this subsection commits an
offense if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
X. Enforcement.
(1) Except as provided by paragraph (2) of this subsection, a person commits an offense if the person violates any
provision of this section, and upon conviction, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(2) Pursuant to the provisions of section 243.010, Local Government Code, a person commits an offense if the
person violates any provision of this section adopted pursuant to Chapter 243, Local Government Code. An offense
under this subsection is a Class A misdemeanor.
(3) It is defense to prosecution under this section that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in an art,
modeling or similar class operated:
(a) By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas, a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(b) By a private college or university which maintain and operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(c) In a structure:
(i) Which has no sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of the structure that indicates a nude
person is available for viewing;
(ii) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the
class; and
(iii) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(4) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection F or subsection Q of this section that each item of descriptive,
printed, film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value.
(5) Each day that a violation occurs is a separate offense.
(6) As provided in section 243.010, Local Government Code, and section 7 of chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances,
City of Sachse, a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business without a valid license,
or is otherwise in violation of any provision of this section, is subject to a suit for injunction, as well as prosecution for
criminal violations.
(Ordinance 1082, sec. 1, adopted 4/5/93; Ordinance 1116 adopted 10/4/93; Ordinance 3114, sec. 1, adopted 3/2/09; Ordinance
3527, sec. 1, adopted 9/16/13)
Sec. 4-8. Display of sexually explicit material to minors.
(1) A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he or she displays
a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse
sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
(a) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
(b) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts;
(c) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below
the top of the areola; or
(d) Human male genitals in a discernible aroused state, whether covered or uncovered.
(2) In this section “display” means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of
the business establishment:
(a) It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
(b) The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.
(Ordinance 1082, sec. 2, adopted 4/5/93)
Sec. 4-9. Cable television rate regulations.
A. Definitions. In this section:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/448
(1) Basic cable rates means the monthly charges imposed by a cable operator for a subscription to the basic tier
and the associated equipment.
(2) Basic service tier means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any
other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all
domestic television signals other than superstations, provided by the cable operator to any subscribers, except a
signal of a television station which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of
such station, and any additional video programming signals as a service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
(3) Benchmark means a per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has
determined is reasonable.
(4) Cable Act of 1992 means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
(5) Cable operator means any person or group of persons:
(a) Who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a
significant interest in such a cable system; or
(b) Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of
such a cable system.
(6) Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming
service; and, subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service. For the purposes of this definition, “video programming” is programming provided by, or
generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and, “other
programming service” is information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally.
(7) Cable system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
(a) A facility that services only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
(b) A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership,
control or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way;
(c) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
(d) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
(8) Channel means a unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
(9) Cost of service showing means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to show, in a manner consistent
with FCC regulations, that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully
recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital.
(10) FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
(11) Initial basic cable rates means the rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including
charges for associated equipment, on the date the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent
to regulate basic cable rates.
(12) Initial date of regulation means the date on which the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification
and intent to regulate basic cable rates.
(13) Initial permitted per channel charge means the permitted per channel charge on the initial date of regulation
which shall be determined by the city council to be lawful either under the benchmark analysis or through a cost of
service showing.
(14) Maximum monthly charge means the maximum amount per month which a cable operator may charge per
subscriber for a tier of regulated programming services offered by a cable system and shall consist of a permitted per
channel charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise fees.
(15) Must-carry signal means the signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to
be carried on the cable system and for which the local broadcast station has notified the cable operator of its election
for must-carry rights.
(16) Peg channel means the channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use required by
the franchise of the cable system to be provided to subscribers, and facilities and equipment for the use of that
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/448
channel capacity.
(17) Price cap means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city,
based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business
and changes in overall inflation.
(18) Reasonable rate standard means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level.
(19) Subsequent permitted per channel charge means the permitted charge per channel after the initial date of
regulation determined pursuant to a cost-of-service showing or the prior permitted per channel charge previously
approved by the city council, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the price cap analysis.
(20) Superstation means any nonlocal broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite.
B. Review of initial basic cable rates.
(1) Notice. Upon the adoption of this section and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall immediately
notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to regulate
subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.
(2) Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall file with the city,
its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning the
reasonableness of its rates, including FCC Form 393 or any other forms prescribed by the FCC to be used by cable
operators to demonstrate the reasonableness of their rates.
(3) Expedited determination and public hearing.
(a) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the initial basic rates appear to be within the
FCC'S reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable benchmark analysis in (7) below, the city
council shall:
(i) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(ii) After consideration of the views of interested persons, either (i) act to approve the rates within 30
days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, or (ii) act to extend the review
period as provided in subsection (4) below.
(4) Extended review period.
(a) If the city council is unable to determine whether the initial basic cable rates are within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service
showing, the city council shall, within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its initial basic cable rates
with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable,
to make a final determination:
(i) Ninety days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC's reasonable
rate standard; or
(ii) One hundred fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to
justify a rate above the applicable benchmark.
(b) If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the city council shall issue a
brief written order at the end of the period directing the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the initial basic cable rates and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(5) Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the initial basic cable rates, the
city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
(6) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the initial basic cable rates may request
the city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime
before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must
provide the city secretary with the objector's name and address.
(7) Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its initial basic cable rates schedule as being in compliance
with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis in
accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the initial maximum
monthly charge shall be established as follows:
(a) The initial permitted per channel charge shall be determined as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/448
(i) If the initial basic cable rates contain a per channel charge for regulated programming services and
equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation equal to or below the benchmark per channel charge,
as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial regulation, then the
permitted per channel charge shall be the per channel charge in effect on the date of initial regulation,
adjusted for equipment.
(ii) If: (A) The initial basic cable rates contain a per channel charge for regulated programming services
and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation above the benchmark per channel charge, as
adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and: (B) The per
channel charge for regulated programming services and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was
above the benchmark per channel charge, then the initial permitted per channel charge is nine-tenths of
the per channel charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per channel
charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for
equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels.
(iii) If: (A) The initial basic cable rates contain a per channel charge for regulated programming services
and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation above the benchmark per channel charge, as
adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and: (B) The per
channel charge for regulated programming services and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was
below the benchmark per channel charge, then the initial permitted per channel charge is the benchmark
rate per channel adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for
equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on all regulated tiers.
(b) The initial maximum monthly charge shall be determined by multiplying the initial permitted per channel
charge times the number of channels on the basic service tier plus a charge for franchise fees.
(8) Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the level permitted using the
benchmark analysis, the cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt
to justify a maximum monthly charge per subscriber above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city council will
review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may
approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a
cost-of-service determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30,
1992 rates minus ten percent, will prescribe the cable operator's new rates.
(9) Decision.
(a) By formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's initial basic cable rates, the city
council shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following:
(i) If the initial basic cable rates are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or are justified by a costof-
service analysis, the city council shall approve the initial basic cable rates as the maximum monthly
charge per subscriber; or
(ii) If the initial basic cable rates are not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-ofservice
analysis, if any, does not justify such rates, the city council shall establish the maximum monthly
charge per subscriber that is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that is justified by a cost-ofservice
analysis.
(b) Rollbacks and refunds. If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed
the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of service showing justifies lower rates, the city
council may order the rates reduced in accordance with subsection (8) or (9) above, as applicable. In addition,
the city council may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers, refunds of the excessive portion of the rates
with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and
additional tax payments). The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC
regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution.
(c) Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If initial basic cable rates of a cable operator are
disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were objections made by other parties to the initial basic cable rates,
the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public notice of its decision.
Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of the city.
(10) Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be
appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
C. Review of request for increase in basic cable rates.
(1) Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated
equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator desires
the increase to take effect. This notice shall not be given more often than annually and not until at least one year after
the determination of the initial maximum monthly charge per subscriber.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/448
(2) Expedited determination and public hearing.
(a) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for
basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the
city council shall:
(i) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(ii) After consideration of the views of interested persons, either (i) act to approve the rates within 30
days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, or (ii) act to extend the review
period as provided in subsection (3) below.
(b) If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the
city, the proposed rates will go into effect.
(3) Extended review period.
(a) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate
standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city
council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to
make a final determination:
(i) Ninety days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the
FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
(ii) One hundred fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to
justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
(b) The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
(c) If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the city council shall issue a
brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(4) Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the
city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
(5) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request
the city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime
before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must
provide the city secretary with the objector's name and address.
(6) Delayed determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate
increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent
refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase.
(7) Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the
FCC's price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard
form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
(a) If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed
rates shall become the new maximum monthly charges.
(b) If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council
shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
(8) Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate
increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for cost-ofservice
review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the
necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the
cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate.
(9) Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase, shall be adopted by formal
resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were
made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision.
Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city secretary to record the objection or may
be submitted in writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.
(10) Refunds.
(a) The city council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/448
(i) The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in
subsection (3) above; and
(ii) The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and
(iii) The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or
that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council
disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
(b) The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as
directed in the city council's decision resolution.
(11) Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be
appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
D. Cable operator information.
(1) City may require:
(a) In those cases where the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds
the reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition
to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases, a
cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section.
(b) In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may
request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the
standard.
(2) Request for confidentiality.
(a) A cable operator submitting proprietary information to the city council may request in writing that the
information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and
cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies. Any such request shall be
submitted to the office of the city attorney to ensure compliance with Chapter 552, Government Code, V.T.C.A.,
the Open Records Act.
(b) If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any information
to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request
applies shall be identified.
(c) Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the
facts upon which those reasons are based.
(d) Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection, shall not be considered.
(3) City council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (2), will be acted upon by the
city council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of the evidence,
a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be
placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case
for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the city council shall take one of the following actions:
(a) If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator may
request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with this request.
Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires, will the information be made available for public
inspection.
(b) If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made available
for public inspection.
(4) Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of that
decision from the FCC within five working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the information will be
stayed pending review.
E. Automatic rate adjustments.
(1) Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base
per channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
(2) Other external costs.
(a) The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier
automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/448
exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local
taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost
of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without regard to its
relation to the GNP-PI.
(b) For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date
for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the
date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulations or February 28, 1994, whichever occurs first.
The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in
those fees incurred before October 6, 1994.
(3) Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least 30 days in advance of a rate increase
based on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or items
qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within 30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the
increase may go into effect.
F. Enforcement.
(1) Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under
the following circumstances:
(a) A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or
above the actual cost of equipment; or
(b) The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
(2) Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be
subject to a fine of $500.00 for each day the cable operator fails to comply.
(Ordinance 1160, secs. 1–6, adopted 3/7/94)
Sec. 4-10. Regulation of oil and gas wells.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined shall
have that meaning customarily attributed thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry.
Abandonment shall mean “abandonment” as defined by the railroad commission and includes the plugging of the well and
restoration of the drill site as required by this section.
Drilling shall mean any digging or boring of a new well to develop or produce oil or gas to inject gas, water, or any other fluid or
substance into the earth. Drilling means and includes the re-entry of an abandoned well and/or re-entry for the purpose of
directionally drilling to establish a new well bore. Drilling does not mean or include the re-entry of a well that has not been
abandoned.
Drill site shall mean all of the land area used in the drilling or other related operations, specifically including, but not limited to, rig
locations, portable or permanent structures, steel slush pits, storage of pipe or other material, and the parking or maneuvering of
vehicles, except roadways used for ingress or egress to the drill site.
Permittee shall mean the person to whom is issued a permit or certificate for the drilling, operating and producing of a well under
this section, and his heirs, legal representatives, successors and assigns.
Person means any natural person, corporation, association, partnership, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator and
a fiduciary or representative of any kind.
Property owner shall mean real property surface record owner(s).
Right-of-way is expressly limited to all public rights-of-way or streets or other public property within the City of Sachse.
Street is any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area, or other public right of way, including the entire
right-of-way.
Technical or oil and gas industry words, or phrases not specifically defined shall have that meaning customarily attributable
thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry.
Well shall mean any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, horizon, formation, strata or depth for the purpose of producing
any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water, sulphur water or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, or any of them.
When the title of any city official is used herein such title shall include any duly authorized representative of such official.
B. Prohibition against exploration and production in certain zoning districts and provisions for specific use permits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/448
(1) The placement of a well for the exploration for or the production of oil or gas is prohibited in the following zoning
districts unless otherwise specified herein:
(a) SF.
(b) C1 and C2.
(c) I1.
(d) AG.
C. Planning and zoning commission recommendations, for specific use permits.
(a) All applications for specific use permit will be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for their review.
The planning and zoning commission shall review each application and shall make recommendations regarding the
application to the city council. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall
provide a written explanation of the deficiencies if requested by the applicant. The city may return any application as
incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the railroad commission regarding the determination of the operator.
(b) In connection with its review of an application for a specific use permit for the drilling and production of oil or gas
wells, the commission may determine that it is necessary to hire a petroleum specialist to assist the commission in
reviewing the application. If the commission determines that it is necessary to hire such a specialist, the commission
will provide the applicant a written “scope of work” that the commission proposes for such specialist. The commission
and the applicant will attempt to agree upon the “scope of work”; however, the decision of the commission shall
control. If required by the specialist, the operator will provide a retainer; otherwise, the operator will pay for the
services of the specialist after they are rendered. All work by the specialist shall be itemized on a daily basis, such
itemization shall include a description of the work performed and the amount of time spent, and such itemization shall
be provided to the applicant with each invoice for payment.
(c) The city council may condition the release of the approved oil/gas well permit upon the applicant providing the
insurance and additional securities required by this section. Additionally, the city may require the applicant to enter
into a road repair agreement that will obligate the applicant to repair damage excluding ordinary wear and tear, if any,
to public streets caused by the operator or by the operator's employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or
representatives in the performance of any activity authorized by or contemplated by the approved oil/gas well permit.
(d) The commission shall have the authority to refuse any application for a permit when by reason of the location of
the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvement already erected on the drilling site in
question or adjacent thereto, or the use to which the land and surroundings are adopted for public or civic purposes,
or for sanitary reasons, the drilling of an oil or gas well would be injurious, or a disadvantage to the health, safety,
morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants.
(e) Each permit issued by the city shall:
(1) By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this section.
(2) Specify the location of the proposed drill site, well, or injection facility by lot and block or legal description.
(3) Contain any specific terms of the permit and shall be for a period of one year from the date of the permit
and so long thereafter as oil and gas produced or until such time as the permittee has permanently abandoned
the operation of such well or facility for which the permit was issued.
(4) Such permit shall constitute the permittee's drilling and installation license, as well as the contractual
obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, bond and of this section.
D. Specific use permits required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to
knowingly drill any well or to re-enter any well which has previously been abandoned for any reason or to install any
water and/or gas repressuring or injection facility within the city without first obtaining a specific use permit as required
by this section.
(2) When a permit has been issued for the drilling or re-entering of a well, such permit shall constitute sufficient
authority for drilling, operation, production, gathering of production in the manner approved by this permit,
maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well, and for the construction and use of all
facilities reasonably necessary or convenient in connection therewith, including gathering lines and discharge lines by
the permittees and their employees, agents, and contractors.
(3) No additional permit or filing fee shall be required for wells and water and/or repressurizing or injection facilities
and such other facilities as may be covered by this section existing which have not been abandoned or previously
permitted within the city on the effective date of this section or which are in existence and have not been abandoned
at the time the land upon which the same are situated is annexed to the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/448
(4) No permit shall authorize the drilling of more than one well or more than one water and/or gas repressurizing or
injection facility.
E. Permit application and filing fee. Application for a specific use permit to drill a well or to install a water and/or gas
repressurizing or injection facility shall be on a form provided by the city, signed by the applicant or authorized agent and filed
with the city manager. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit fee established by resolution of the city
council; an application shall not be accepted for filing until it is complete and the fee has been paid. A new application and permit
is required for the purpose of drilling a well or re-entering and drilling to a deeper formation or re-entering a well which has
previously been abandoned. A separate application shall be required for each well and each water and/or gas repressurizing or
injection facility. The application shall include, the following:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(2) The names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the proposed drill site. The applicant need
not furnish the names and addresses of the property owners if same are available on the last approved city tax roll.
(3) Proposed site of the well or water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility, including:
(a) Name of the lease owner(s).
(b) Description of the land.
(c) Location with respect to property lines, lot lines shown on any recorded subdivision plat for the area, right
of way or public easement boundaries, and the nearest residence, commercial structure, public building or
permanent accessory structure used in connection with such residence, structure or building surrounding such
proposed drill site, if within a distance of 500 feet.
(d) Location with respect to same items of any off-site tank battery or other gathering facility, together with
proposed routing of gathering lines.
(5) The proposed depth of the well.
(6) Location of compressor, compressor control, or safety devices with explanation of operation characteristics of
each in any application for a permit for a gas repressurizing or injection facility.
(7) The name of the person(s) to be notified in case of an emergency.
(8) Proposed hole size, casing program and cementing program.
(9) A copy of approved railroad commission's permit to drill shall be furnished to the city prior to commencement of
drilling operations.
(10) The application shall furnish satisfactory evidence that applicant is the fee simple owner of the surface and
minerals in, upon and under the real estate described in the application and upon which the well proposed in the
application is to be drilled; provided, however, if the applicant is the holder of an oil, gas and mineral lease on such
property there shall be attached to the application a certified copy of such lease.
(11) A map or plat showing the proposed site of the well, including the following:
(a) Name of the lease owner (where applicable).
(b) Accurate description of the land.
(c) Location with respect to property lines and Right of way boundaries.
(12) A statement outlining the applicant's plans for the handling and disposal of all drilling fluids, basis sediment, oil
filed brines, liquid petroleum, water, other deleterious substances and wastes that may be produced in connection
with the drilling, completion, operation and maintenance of the proposed well, which plan shall be reasonable,
adequate, practical and in accordance with the highest degree of care of the industry as well as the specific terms and
conditions of this ordinance.
(13) A written undertaking of the applicant that in the event a well is either nonproductive or abandoned that within
sixty days after the determination thereof or abandonment thereof, all tools, equipment and machinery used in
connection with the drilling, completion, production or maintenance of said well shall be removed; that the premises
will be fully restored to its original condition as soon as practicable and in no case more than 60 days after such
determination; and that said well will be plugged in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission.
(14) A written undertaking of the applicant that if such well is productive and completed, only the tools, machinery,
structures and equipment necessary for the normal daily operation thereof shall be maintained at the well site and that
the premises surrounding the immediate well site shall be restored to its original condition as nearly as practicable
and in no case more than 60 days after the completion of the well.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/448
F. Bond and insurance.
(a) No actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee has complied with the bond and insurance
provisions of this section.
(b) A bond or letter of credit approved by the city attorney shall be filed with the city manager in the amount of
$50,000.00 payable to the city, conditioned upon the full and faithful compliance with the terms and provisions of this
section and the permit, and saving the city and holding it free and harmless of and from all judgments and claims for
damages sustained by the city in the event that any claim for damage or injury is maintained against the city as a
result of the activities of the applicant at the time of permit application or during the time that permittee is operating
under any such permit issued by the city. Said bond shall be executed by surety company authorized to do business
in Texas, in a form approved by the city attorney.
(c) In addition to the bond required above, the permittee shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive
public liability insurance including contractual liability coverage, for accidental death, bodily injury and property
damage, naming both the permittee and city as insured, with an insurance company authorized to do business in the
state insuring and providing indemnity for judgments and defense of actions for injuries, loss or damage for which the
applicant, applicant's agents, servants, and employees or person in privity with applicant may be liable as the result of
the drilling, completion, operation or maintenance of any gas well or any structure, apparatus, machinery or facilities
appurtenant thereto or used in connection therewith. Such insurance policy, policies or certificates thereof shall be
accompanied by a certificate of the insurer that such insurance is in full force and shall not be canceled without thirty
days written notice thereof to the city clerk. Such insurance shall be maintained continuously in effect during the entire
period during which the applicant, permittee or persons in privity with applicant and permittee shall be conducting
drilling, completion, maintenance or production operations with respect to any gas well drilled hereunder. Such policy
or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverage's:
1. Accidental death or bodily injury, $5,000,000.00 one person and $5,000,000.00 total one accident.
2. Property damage, $1,000,000.00 total one accident.
In the event such insurance is canceled, the permit granted in connection with such policy or policies shall be
suspended and ineffective until permittee provides additional insurance as provided herein.
G. Permit termination. In the event of a failure of a permittee to comply with any provision of this section, the city manager or
designee shall notify the permittee in writing of such noncompliance and prescribe a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 48
hours to gain compliance. After expiration of such time period, if compliance has not been made, the city manager or designee
may suspend the permit. However, if it is determined that permittee's noncompliance poses a health and safety risk, the city
manager or designee may immediately suspend the permittee's license without giving the required notice.
H. Supplemental permit for deep drilling.
(a) Once any well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drill such well to a deeper geological formation than that reached in the prior drilling operations or re-enter
such well to produce from any geological formation than that reached in prior drilling operations or change the location
of any gathering lines or other facilities from that approved by the permit without the permittee, as to such well,
obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a supplemental application with the city specifying:
(1) The condition of the well and the casting therein.
(2) The depth to which it is proposed that such well will be deepened.
(3) The proposed casing and cementing programs to be used in connection with the proposed deepening
operation.
(4) The proposed locations of gathering facilities and routing of lines.
(b) In the event the city council is satisfied that such well may be deepened or re-entered with the same safety as
existed in the original well, a supplemental permit may be issued after payment of a fee established by resolution of
the city council authorizing the deepening or re-entering and operation of the well to such specified depth as applied
for or the change in the location of gathering lines or other facilities. In any deeper drilling or any deeper completion of
any deeper reproduction operations or any re-entry the permittee shall comply with all provisions contained in this
section and applicable to drilling completion, operation and production of a well or wells.
I. Use of streets and alleys.
(a) No permittee shall make any excavations for any purpose or construct any lines for conveyance of fuel, water or
minerals on, under or through the streets or alleys or other land of the city without an easement or right of way license
from the city, at a price to be agreed upon, and then only in strict compliance with the ordinances of the city.
(b) The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking up, or damaging of any streets as herein
defined, or leaving upon any street any earth or other material or obstruction, shall not be permitted unless such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/448
persons shall first have obtained written permission from the city and then only in compliance with specifications
established therefore.
J. Street and alleys, obstruction, permits. No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any
location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or streets or alleys shown by the master plan of the city. No
street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation except by written permission of
the city traffic engineer.
K. Well location. No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is within
500 feet of any residence, building, or structure, or any location platted for the development of any such residence, building or
structure.
L. Derrick and rig types; those prohibited; removal of those allowed; watchmen.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well within
the city, any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig. The drilling rig or derrick and other structures, material and
drilling equipment shall be removed from the premises within 30 days from the date of completion of the well, as
shown on the appropriate railroad commission form, and thereafter, when necessary, such completed well shall be
served by portable rigs, which shall be removed from the premises within 15 days from the completion of the servicing
operation. At all times from the start of erection of a derrick or a mast, or a ginpole, until the well is abandoned and
plugged or completed as a producer and enclosed as herein provided, the permittee shall keep a watchman on duty
on the premises at all times when other workmen of permittee are not on such premises.
(b) The city council may for good cause shown by the applicant, for drill sites located more than 500 feet from any
occupied residence, commercial structure or public building or any permanent accessory structure used in connection
with any of same, waive in the permit (if one is issued) the watchman requirement contained in the preceding section
hereof, provided the fencing requirements contained herein are satisfied.
(c) In the event permit is granted to drill or explore for oil or gas within the city, the permittee shall proceed with the
drilling operations with the highest degree of care so as not to injure adjoining property or persons in any manner. All
wastes must be contained within the drill site, as set out hereinafter, without any subsurface disposal and upon the
completion of such drilling operations the grounds around the well shall be immediately cleared of all drilling and/or
oil, salt water or water, and shall be made to conform in appearance to the lands in the neighborhood wherein such
drilling operations are so conducted.
(d) Caliche drilling pads shall also be removed in the cleanup operation except the portion thereof within the fenced
area around pump jacks. All cleanup and removal operations required above shall be completed within 30 days of the
date of completion of drilling operations.
(e) Steel slush pits shall be used in connection with all drilling and reworking operations. Such pits and contents
shall be removed from the premises and drill site within 30 days after completion of the well. No earthen slush pits
shall be used. However, cuttings from the drilling operations may be disposed of on the drill site according to the
following requirements:
1. Disposal shall be in a pit lined with black six millimeter PVC lining material.
2. Cuttings shall then be covered with not less than 24 inches of topsoil and the surface otherwise brought
back to the same level and substantially the same appearance as the surrounding ground.
M. Operations and equipment; practices and standards.
(a) Any violation of the state laws or any rules, regulations, or requirement of any state or federal regulatory body
having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining, or abandoning an
oil or gas well, or related appurtenances, equipment, or facilities, fire protection, blowout protection, or convenience of
persons or property, shall also be a violation of this section and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions
hereof.
(b) All drilling and operations at any well performed by a permittee under this section shall be conducted in
accordance with the practice of a reasonable and prudent operator. All casing, valves, and blowout preventors, drilling
fluid, tubing, wellhead, Christmas tree, and wellhead connections shall be of a type and quality consistent with such
practice. Setting and cementing casing and running drill stern tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time
consistent with the practices of a reasonable and prudent operator.
(c) An internal combustion engine may be used in the drilling operations of the well, or wells, if equipped with
mufflers so as to reduce noise to not more than 70 decibels at any point 100 feet beyond the drill site; and all of said
installations to be done, in accordance with accepted practices for fire prevention purposes. For production purposes,
only electric power may be used. Drilling operations must be conducted in such a manner that percolation or ground
water will not be adversely affected, including the prevention of vertical movement of percolating water.
(d) All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable,
dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/448
for the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances.
(e) Except in cases of emergency, no materials, equipment, tools or pipe used for drilling or production operations
shall be delivered to or removed from the site except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on any day. On drill
stem tests, only one trip will be allowed at night between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless an emergency exists.
(f) Fire fighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the Sachse City Fire Department shall be maintained on the
drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. No refining process or any process for the extraction
of products from natural gas shall be carried on at the drill site, except that a dehydrator and separator may be
maintained on the drill for the separation of liquids from natural gas. Any such separator shall serve only one well.
(g) All production equipment used shall be constructed and operated so that noise, vibration, dust, odor or other
harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling site or from
anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures
thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in methods of
production shall be adopted as they, from time to time, become available if capable of reducing factors of nuisance or
annoyance. There shall be no venting of gas into the open air except allowed by the Texas Railroad Commission in
residential areas.
(h) The well site shall not be used for the storage of pipe, equipment or materials constructed, established or
maintained on the premises at any time. This shall not be deemed to exclude a simple gas separation process.
(i) No refinery, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the
premises at any time. This shall not be deemed to exclude a simple gas separation process.
N. Cleanliness and sanitation.
(a) The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The permittee shall prevent any mud, wastewater,
oil, slush, or other waste matters from flowing into the alleys, streets, lots or leases within the city.
(b) All permittees' premises shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds and combustible trash within a radius of 100
feet around any oil tank, tanks, or producing wells. All waste shall be disposed of in such manner as to comply with
the air water pollution control regulations of the state and all ordinances of the city and removed as required in this
section.
O. Fences required. The well site, or drill site, shall not be used for the storage of pipe, equipment or materials except during
the drilling or servicing of the well and all such sites, shall be enclosed and kept fenced by a substantial chain link fence eight
feet high with slats woven through the links to make it sight proof and with concertina wire, barbed wire or other security wire on
the top, and properly built and thereafter maintained so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure, with all
gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within the enclosure.
P. Fire prevention, escape of gas, burning, flaring, general requirements.
(a) Any permittee engaged in the drilling or operation of an oil and/or gas well or the operation of any facility used in
conjunction with the production of oil and/or gas within the corporate limits of the city shall take reasonable
precautions to prevent gas from escaping into the air, and shall not flare or burn gas from a torch or any similar means
within the corporate limits of the city; provided gas may be burned for a limited time when necessary to complete any
oil and/or gas well upon the original completion or upon the recompletion or workover jobs upon oil and/or gas wells,
so long as the same does not constitute a fire hazard to the property of others within the vicinity of such oil and/or gas
well.
(b) The permittee shall place a sign at each well location or site to identify the well.
(c) Each permittee shall fully comply with the rules adopted by the railroad commission.
Q. Flow lines and gathering lines.
(a) Each permittee shall place an identifying sign at each point where a flow line or gas gathering lines crosses any
public street or road and it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to remove, destroy or deface any
such sign.
(b) Each permittee shall also place a warning sign at each point where a line carrying gas crosses any public street
or road and it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to remove, destroy or deface any such sign.
(c) No permittee shall make any excavation for any purpose or construct any lines for conveyance of fuel, water, or
minerals, on, under, or through the streets and alleys of the city without express permission of the city in writing, and
then only in strict compliance with the ordinances of the city; provided, however, emergency repairs may be made
without such permission when in the good faith opinion of the permittee the delay required to obtain written
permission would involve a hazard to person or property.
(d) The gathering lines and flow lines hereinafter installed in the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of
transporting oil, gas and/or water in conjunction with the operation of any well, tank, or tank battery, injection or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/448
gathering system; are hereby limited to a maximum operating gauge pressure of 250 PSI (pounds per square inch)
unless otherwise specifically approved by the city. The location of any such gathering lines and flow lines, if not
specified in the permit, must be specifically approved by the director of public works.
(e) The pipeline shall be tested prior to being placed in service.
(f) The companies responsible for any and all pipelines now existent or hereinafter installed within the corporate
limits are hereby required to furnish the city an “as built” plot plan showing the location of all their facilities for
permanent record with the city.
(g) The city engineer is authorized to approve a lesser cover or specify a greater cover or backfill in special cases
when in the opinion of the oil and gas inspector such variation is advisable and/or will not increase the degree of
hazard.
(h) The requirements for construction in public right-of-way must conform to such ordinances of the city regulating
such construction.
(i) The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking up, damaging of any street as herein
defined, or leaving upon any street any earth or other material or obstruction, shall not be permitted unless such
persons shall first have obtained written permission from the city engineer, provided, however, emergency repairs
may be made without such permission when in the good faith opinion of the permittee the delay required to obtain the
written permission would involve a hazard to person or property.
(Ordinance 2072, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/04)
Sec. 4-11. Temporary public amusements.
Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
Coin-operated machine shall mean every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins, or metal
slugs, tokens or checks, “music coin-operated machines” and “skill or pleasure coin-operated machines,” as those terms are
hereinafter defined, shall be included in such terms.
Place of amusement shall mean any building or premises, other than a private home, church, or nonprofit community center, in
which facilities are provided for playing of any skill or pleasure coin-operated machine or devices of amusement or skill, or other
game requiring special equipment for the playing thereof.
Music coin-operated machine shall mean every coin-operated machine of any kind or character which dispenses or vends or
which is used or operated for dispensing or vending music and which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or
checks.
Service coin-operated machine shall mean every pay toilet, pay telephone and all other machines or devices which dispense
service only and not merchandise, music, skill or pleasure.
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine shall mean every coin-operated machine of any kind or character whatsoever, when
such machine or machines dispense or are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure or when
such machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure, or for any purpose other than the
dispensing or vending of “merchandise or music” or “service” exclusively, as those terms are defined herein. The following are
expressly included within said term: Marble machines, marble table machines, marble shooting machines, miniature race tract
machines, miniature football machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines, and all other coin-operated
machines which dispense or afford skill or pleasure.
(A) Temporary commercial amusement facility. Shall include, but not be limited to, circuses, carnivals,
mechanically-operated rides which are designed to accommodate more than one adult or four children under 12 years
of age, pony rides, and miniature train rides. EXCEPTION: Not to include moonwalks and similar amusements.
(B) Application for permit generally. Any person desiring to conduct or show a temporary commercial amusement
facility within the city limits shall make application for a permit to the community development department and file
same with that office not less than two weeks prior to the time when it is desired to show or exhibit such commercial
amusement facility. Such application shall be on forms provided by the community development department and shall
contain the following:
(1) Name and permanent address of the owner of the temporary commercial amusement facility, and, if the
temporary commercial amusement facility is owned by a company or corporation, the application shall show
such fact and shall also show the name of the manager or other officer in charge of the temporary commercial
amusement facility.
(2) A list of all shows, rides, booths, and other business and attractions expected in connection with the
temporary commercial amusement facility, listing same by name and with a description of each show or
attraction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/448
(3) An affidavit as to the solvency and responsibility of the owner of the temporary commercial amusement
facility and as to the kind and character of shows and attractions exhibited by the facility, and attachment of a
certificate of liability insurance coverage in the amounts of $100,000.00 per individual, $300,000.00 per
occurrence, and $50,000.00 property damage.
(4) A the end of the application, the person making same shall also state that they agree to conduct the facility
and cash of the shows, attractions, and exhibits therein in a decent, orderly and law-abiding manner.
(C) Action on permit application. The community development department shall issue a permit if it finds that all
requirements of the previous sections have been complied with and, if the proposed location is a shopping center, at
least 75 percent of the shopping center tenants have signed a letter of no objection.
(D) Other requirements:
(1) Duration of permit: A temporary commercial amusement facility permit issued herein shall remain in effect
for fourteen (14) consecutive days only from the date the temporary commercial amusement facility or show is
proposed to begin operation.
(2) Hours of operation: The temporary commercial amusement facility shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or
past the hour of 11:00 p.m. on weekdays (Sunday through Thursday) or past 12:00 p.m. (midnight) on Friday
and Saturday.
(3) On-site living quarters: No living quarters of any kind shall be permitted to be located on the site of the
temporary commercial amusement facility except self-contained units needed for proper and customary security
measures.
(4) Number of permits issued: Only two temporary commercial amusement facilities may be permitted at a
given location during any one calendar year.
(5) All food related vendors must obtain a Dallas County health permit.
(E) Permit fee.
(1) Temporary public amusements: $550.00
(2) Temporary food sales health permit: Must be obtained from the Dallas County Health Department - Applies to all
applicants that are providing food products.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit any temporary commercial amusement facility within the
city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the community development department.
(F) Falsified application prohibited: Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or knowingly permit the making of
any false or misleading statement in any application made pursuant to this article. In addition to any other punishment or
sanction, the violation of this section shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of any permit granted pursuant to such
application. Such permit may also be suspended for a time definite and such suspension and revocation procedure shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this section. (Scope of permitted operation).
(G) Scope of permitted operation. Any person obtaining a permit to show and exhibit a temporary commercial facility within the
city limits shall have the right to show, maintain, and operate only such shows, rides, booths and other attractions as shall be
under the direct charge and supervision of the owner or operator of the temporary commercial amusement facility and it shall be
unlawful for any person to show or exhibit in connection with the temporary commercial amusement facility any show, attraction
or concession of any kind or character independent of the permitted operation, the permit granted to such temporary commercial
amusement facility covering and permitting only such shows, attractions and concessions as are owned, managed or operated
by the person applying for the permit.
(H) Permit revocation. If the temporary commercial amusement facility is conducted in a manner that violates any of the
provisions for the issuance of the permit, the community development department may immediately revoke the permit. Any
person who has been denied a permit or whose permit has been revoked as aforesaid, may within five days, after necessary
notice thereof, appeal to the city council for a hearing thereon, and the decision of the council in this regard shall be final.
(Ordinance 2074, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/04)
Sec. 4-12. Temporary retail sales and seasonal sales.
A. Temporary seasonal sales.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit temporary seasonal sales with certain guidelines to ensure
that such sales locations are properly maintained and operated so as to avoid any real or perceived negative impacts
on adjacent property. It is not the purpose of this section to allow for permanent or semi-permanent occupancy of a
property by a re-occurring temporary use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/448
For this section, seasonal means a product normally sold in a period of the year devoted to or marked by certain
activities, events, or climate conditions, such as special holidays, summer season, winter season.
(2) Specific requirements related to permit types.
(a) A permit for temporary seasonal fresh produce stands, snow cone and ice cream stands and any unlisted
temporary seasonal sales use may be granted by the community development department under the following
restrictions:
i. Each permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed 90 days.
ii. The applicant and/or property owner shall vacate the premises, including removal of all equipment,
goods and/or remnants of the temporary sale, at the end of the permit period for a period of at least 30
days before a new permit can be issued for any temporary retail or seasonal sales use on that property.
iii. No more than two permits for these uses shall be issued for each property within a 12-month period.
iv. Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided on a paved surface in accordance with this Code.
(b) A permit for temporary seasonal sales of Christmas trees may be granted by the community development
department under the following restrictions:
i. Each permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed 40 days.
ii. No more than one permit for the sale of Christmas trees shall be issued for each property within a 12-
month period.
iii. The applicant and/or property owner shall vacate the premises, including removal of all equipment,
goods and/or remnants of the temporary sale, at the end of the permit period for a period of at least 30
days before a new permit can be issued for any temporary retail or seasonal sales use on that property.
iv. Parking on unimproved surfaces may be allowed for the duration of the permit as approved by the
city engineer and fire marshal, provided the parking is not detrimental to property or improvements in the
surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
(c) The temporary seasonal sales of firewood shall only be permitted in conjunction with a “retail sales with
outdoor display” use, which has otherwise received the necessary approvals pursuant to this Code. The
temporary seasonal sales of firewood shall not be permitted to occupy any area that is required parking for an
otherwise permanent permitted use on the property.
(d) A permit for temporary seasonal sales activities such as, but not necessarily limited to firewood, plant
sales and landscaping materials may be granted by the community development department for a period not to
exceed 90 days.
i. The permit shall be issued only to the current certificate of occupancy holder on a site that contains a
minimum of 100 required parking spaces.
ii. The displayed merchandise shall not exceed five feet in height and have a front and side street set
back the same as the building unless a solid six-foot screen is provided.
iii. Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided on a paved surface in accordance with this Code.
iv. No more than two permits for these uses shall be issued for each property within a 12-month period.
v. The applicant shall submit in writing a statement that the temporary seasonal activity will be removed
at the end of the permit period or sooner if ordered by the community development department.
(3) General permit requirements.
(a) Issuance of permits for temporary sales shall be limited to areas zoned for retail or commercial uses.
(b) A temporary seasonal activity must be located so that it will not adversely affect parking or pedestrian
access.
(c) A site plan is required with an application showing the following:
i. All setbacks for the zoning district have been met.
ii. If the use is to occupy a paved area currently used for parking, then the parking that this use
displaces must not be required for the existing commercial uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/448
(d) The applicant and/or property owner shall submit in writing a statement that the temporary seasonal
activity will be removed at end of the permit period or sooner if ordered by the community development
department.
(e) All food related vendors must obtain a Dallas County health permit.
(f) The application for a temporary sales permit shall also include a true copy of the sales tax permit which
designates the City of Sachse as the point of sale.
(g) The applicant for a temporary sales permit shall also provide a driver's license or other photo identification
and a birth date of the owner/representative of the sales use.
(h) Temporary sales shall be kept clean at all times, including but not limited to the following.
i. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
ii. All land shall be maintained properly. Lawns, hedges, bushes, trees and other vegetation shall be
trimmed and kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly, especially in those areas where the vegetation
is exposed to public view and may cause a blighting influence if not properly maintained.
iii. All premises and exterior property shall be free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; however,
this shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
iv. No unsafe structures, either permanent or temporary (including sheds, tents, lean-tos, storage pods
or other shelters), defined as any structure that is found to be dangerous, unsafe or is so damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial
or complete collapse is possible are permitted.
v. Firewood and other goods for sale shall be kept in neat stacks or bundles.
vi. No chopping or splitting of wood shall be permitted on the property.
vii. Disposal of any unsold or damaged goods, including wood scraps, Christmas trees or any other
remnant of the temporary sale, must be completed by the end of the permit period. Any remnants of
previous sales may cause denial of any future permit applications.
(i) Any violation of permit requirements, including failure to keep a site clean and organized may lead to
revocation of a temporary sales permit.
(j) Signage for temporary sales shall be professional in nature and secured in such a way as to withstand
anticipated wind loads. All signs and supports shall be maintained in good condition to prevent deterioration,
oxidation, rust and other unsightly conditions. Hand-painted signs are not permitted.
(k) No more than three signs shall be permitted per site.
(l) No signage shall be permitted within the right-of-way. All signage must be set back a minimum of eight feet
from the property line.
B. Temporary retail sales or sidewalk sale.
(1) Permit. A permit for temporary outdoor retail sales of merchandise may be granted by the community
development department for a period not to exceed five consecutive days, at six-month minimum intervals to the
same retail merchant holding the certificate of occupancy.
(a) The outdoor retail sales must be located so that it will not adversely affect parking or pedestrian access.
(b) The type of merchandise that may be sold is limited to such products that the merchant would normally
sell in their place of business.
(c) The applicant shall submit in writing a statement that the temporary retail sales event will be removed at
the end of the permit period or sooner if ordered by the community development department.
C. Permit fees. Applications for temporary retail and seasonal sales permits, and other associated permits as listed below shall
be accompanied by a required fee as set forth in the City of Sachse Master Fee Schedule.
(1) Temporary seasonal sales: As set forth in the City of Sachse Master Fee Schedule.
(2) Temporary food sales health permit: As set forth in the City of Sachse Master Fee Schedule-Applies to all
applicants that are providing food products.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/448
(3) Temporary retail sales: As set forth in the City of Sachse Master Fee Schedule.
(4) Electrical fee, if applicable: As set forth in the City of Sachse Master Fee Schedule.
(Ordinance 2073, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3283, sec. 1, adopted 3/21/11; Ordinance 3400, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 4-13. Temporary activities and special events.
A. Temporary activities: Permit required.
(1) A permit for temporary activities such as, but not necessarily limited to revivals, public auctions, stock shows,
haunted houses, and other related activities, commercial sporting activities, non-profit fund raisers, church, school,
civic, and city sponsored events, may be granted by the community development department for a period not to 14
consecutive days.
(a) All outdoor temporary activities, except church, school, civic, and city-sponsored events, must be located a
minimum of 300 feet from a residential structure.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any temporary activity within the city without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the community development department.
(c) The applicant and property owner shall submit in writing a statement that the temporary activity will be
removed at the end of the permit period or sooner if ordered by the community development department.
B. Permit fee.
(1) Temporary activity: $200.00 (Church, school, civic and city sponsored events are exempt from this permit fee).
(2) Temporary food sales health permit: Must be obtained from the Dallas County Health Department-Applies to all
applicants that are providing food products.
(Ordinance 2073, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/04)
Sec. 4-14. Alcoholic beverages.
A. Purpose. The purpose of alcoholic beverage regulations is to protect the public health, safety and public welfare.
B. General requirements.
(1) The sale of beer in residential areas or within residential zoning districts is prohibited.
(2) Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold by a dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church, public
or private school, or public hospital, 1,000 feet of a public or private school if the city receives a request pursuant to
state law from the board of trustees of the school district or from the governing body of the private school. This
subsection does not apply to the holder of:
(a) A license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate covering a premise that is located
within 300 feet of a private school; or
(b) A license or permit covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering under sec. 109.53 of the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, and that is located within 300 feet of a private school.
(3) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the
church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in
direct line across intersections.
(4) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the
public or private school shall be:
(a) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of
business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
(b) If the permit or license holder is located on or above a fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line
from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line
across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the
permit or license holder is located.
(5) Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the public
may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of a public or
private school, measured along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of the
application to officials of the public or private school before filing the application with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/448
Commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the commission with the application. This subsection does not
apply to a permit or license covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering the premises.
(6) Except as provided herein, provisions relating to a public school also apply to a day-care center and child-care
facility as those terms are defined by sec. 42.002, Human Resources Code.
This section does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if:
(a) The permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located on different stories of
a multistory building; or
(b) The permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located in separate buildings
and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story
or higher of a multistory building.
C. Permit required.
(1) No person, corporation or association shall sell alcoholic beverages within the city without first having applied
for and been granted a valid permit issued by the city to sell alcoholic beverages. Upon the exhibition of a license or
permit duly issued by the State of Texas to the applicant, the community development director or designee shall, in
the name of the city, issue and deliver to the applicant a permit to engage in the business in the city of the character
described in and authorized by the license or permit from the state held by the applicant. The license or permit so
issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in a license
or permit from the state remains in force.
(2) An applicant for a permit under this section shall pay a fee at the time of the submission of the application. The
fee shall be equal to one-half of the state fee for each permit issued for premises located within the city.
(Ordinance 2162, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 4-15. Special events.
A. Purpose. Some gatherings or organized activities, due to their size and special requirements, may place unique demands
on public resources or pose a danger to public health, safety and welfare. In order to plan for these demands on public resources
and to ensure that public health and safety is protected, it is necessary that the city receive advance notice of these special
events. The provisions of this division are intended to address those concerns and are not intended to place unnecessary burden
on any individual's right to association or freedom of expression.
B. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future.
Applicant shall mean a person who has filed a written application for a special event permit.
Block party shall mean the use of a residential street for a neighborhood function in which traffic control is required.
City shall mean the City of Sachse, Texas.
Demonstration shall mean a public display of the attitude of the assembled persons toward a person, cause, issue, or other
matter.
Parade shall mean any assembly, march, demonstration, or procession upon public thoroughfares within the city consisting of 50
or more persons, animals, or vehicles with an intent of attracting public attention and that is reasonably likely to interfere with the
normal flow or regulation of traffic upon public thoroughfares.
Permittee shall mean the person to whom a permit is granted pursuant to this article.
Person shall mean any individual, assumed named entity, partnership, association, corporation, or organization.
Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines or lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines
intended for the use of pedestrians.
Special event shall mean a temporary event, gathering or organized activity, including but not limited to parades, bike races,
marathons, walk-a-thons, fireworks displays, concerts, carnivals, or other types of races and festivals, using city-owned property,
involving 50 or more persons and which involves one or more of the following activities:
(1) Closing a public street;
(2) Blocking or restriction of city-owned property;
(3) Sale of merchandise, food or beverages on city-owned property;
(4) Erection of a tent equal to or greater than 200 square feet in area on city-owned property;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/448
(5) Installation of a stage, band-shell, trailer, van, portable building, grandstand or bleachers on city-owned
property;
(6) Placement of portable toilets on city-owned property;
(7) Placement of temporary no-parking signs in a public right-of-way; or
(8) Placement of pedestrian boundary markers on city-owned property.
Street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to
use by the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic.
C. Exemptions. The provisions of this article do not apply to a special event conducted by the city, block parties, parades, or
peaceful demonstrations at a fixed location other than a street.
D. Permit required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event without first having obtained a permit from the
parks and recreation department.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a special event for which the person knows a permit is
required and has not been granted.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a special event to knowingly
fail to comply with any condition of the permit.
E. Application for permit.
(1) An organization or individual requesting a special event permit must reside within the city.
(2) The director of parks and recreation, or his designee, shall ensure that the other licenses and permits,
restrictions, regulations, fees for the city services, safeguards or other conditions deemed necessary by individual city
departments for the safe and orderly conduct of a special event be requested, submitted, and approved before the
application for permit is granted. (i.e. health permit applications, agreement with police department for police
coverage, agreement with public works department regarding cost associated with street closure, etc.). Separate
permits will not be required for tents, awnings, canopies, loudspeakers or temporary signage in conjunction with the
event.
F. Filing period. A special event permit application may be filed not more than 13 months in advance of the intended event
date. A special event permit application shall be filed at least 90 days before the event date.
G. Submittal requirements. The application for a special event permit shall set forth as a minimum the following information:
(1) The event name, location, purpose and approximate number of persons attending;
(2) Applicant/main contact name, address, phone, and email;
(3) Organization hosting the event, including organization name, address, phone, email, and head of organization
name;
(4) If a fee is required to participate in the event, a fee schedule, including admissions, registrations and activities
must be provided;
(5) List of all activities to be conducted as part of the event;
(6) All events must include a site plan and/or route map;
(7) Dates of the event, including set-up and tear down dates;
(8) Proposed parking locations, including written permission for use of parking from property owner(s);
(9) Listing of all items that will be a part of the event, including closing a public street, sale of merchandise, portable
toilets/portable building; inflatables, food, loudspeakers, generators, fencing, stage and tent(s);
(10) Explanation of plans to deal with sanitation needs;
(11) If the event is a run/walk or parade, additional information will be necessary, including start times for each
distance, onsite registration and set-up information, assembly location, name of company providing
registration/marking/run timing, contact name and phone number, the estimated number of participants/runners, the
estimated number of vehicles/floats, and other types of participants (animals, etc.);
(12) Whether or not signs or banners will be utilized;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/448
(13) Property owner information; and
(14) If the event will impact surrounding property owners, the method used to notify each property owner and the
date notice was provided.
H. Standards for issuance of permit. A special event will be conducted in such a way that it:
(1) Will not unnecessarily interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic near its location or route;
(2) Will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the event locale or line of
movement and the adjacent areas as to prevent normal protection for the city;
(3) Will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the event and adjacent areas;
(4) Will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment in route to a fire. The concentration of people,
animals, and vehicles at assembly points will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection or ambulance
service to areas near such assembly points; or
(5) In the case of a parade, the parade shall be scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination
without unreasonable delays in route.
I. Denial or revocation.
(1) The director of parks and recreation may deny a special event permit if:
(a) The event will conflict in time and location with another event for which a permit has already been granted;
(b) The applicant fails to comply with or the event will violate an ordinance of the city or any other applicable
law;
(c) The applicant makes or permits the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact
on an application for a special event;
(d) The applicant has been convicted of violating this section or has had a permit revoked within the
preceding 12 months;
(e) The applicant fails to provide proof of a license or permit required by this or another city ordinance or by
state law;
(f) The event, in the opinion of one or more city departmental directors, would severely hinder the delivery of
normal or emergency services or constitutes a public threat.
(g) Insurance requirements for the event have not been met.
(2) A special event permit may be revoked upon the following conditions:
(a) In the event that the chief of police, fire chief, building official or other city official, or their designated
representatives, find that any of the provisions of this article, another city ordinance, or state law is being
violated, they shall immediately notify the director of parks and recreation and based on that information, the
director of parks shall determine whether it shall be revoked;
(b) When, in the judgment of the above named officials, a violation exists which requires immediate
abatement, they shall have authority to revoke a permit in the absence or unavailability of the director of parks
and recreation; or
(c) The applicant made or permitted to be made a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact
on an application for a special event.
J. Appeals. Decisions of the director of parks and recreation, police chief or any other city official regarding the issuance of a
permit or the imposition of costs, additional restrictions or conditions upon the granting of a permit may be appealed to the city
manager, or in his absence, an executive director. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city manager within
five business days after the issuance of a decision by the parks director or other official. When making a determination regarding
the appeal, the city manager, or in his absence, an executive director, shall consider the application under the standards provided
in this article and sustain or overrule the director's decision. The decision of the city manager or executive director shall be
issued within five business days and shall be final.
K. Duration of permit. The permit granted under the terms of this article shall not exceed a period of 14 days. Another permit
shall not be granted for the same location until at least 30 days have elapsed from the expiration of the previous permit. The
director of parks and recreation may reduce the time limitations above upon review of location of the event, time of the event,
type of event, safety of the event, and proximity to residential properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/448
L. Insurance. Insurance coverage must be provided in accordance with the city's requirements.
M. Indemnification. Applicant shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents,
and representatives against all claims of liability and causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or property
arising out of the special event.
(Ordinance 3718, sec. 1, adopted 2/1/16)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PROTECTION
Sec. 5-1. International Fire Code.
A. Adoption. The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition with amendments, including Appendix B “Fire-Flow Requirements for
Buildings,” Appendix C “Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution,” Appendix D “Fire Apparatus Access Roads” and Appendix I
“Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions,” a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby
adopted and designated as the fire code of the City of Sachse, the same as though such code were copied in full herein.
B. Amendments to the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2015
Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1; change to read as follows:
These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Sachse, Texas, hereinafter referred to as “this
code.”
(2) Section 102.1; change #3 to read as follows:
3. Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or in specific sections of this code.
(3) Section 105.3.3; change to read as follows:
105.3.3 Occupancy Prohibited before Approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire
code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections indicating the applicable
provisions of this code have been met.
(4) Section 105.7; add Section 105.7.19 to read as follows:
105.7.19 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or
modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Chapter 10. A separate construction permit is
required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control system.
Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
(5) Section 109.4; change to read as follows:
109.4 Violations penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a
violation continues after due noticed has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(6) Section 111.4; change to read as follows:
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
to a fine not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00).
(7) Section 202; add new definition of “Addressable Fire Detection System” as follows:
ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM. Any system capable of providing identification of each individual
alarm-initiating device. The identification shall be in plain English and as descriptive as possible to specifically identify
the location of the device in alarm. The system shall have the capability of alarm verification.
(8) Section 202; amend definition of “Ambulatory Health Care Facility” as follows:
[B] AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric,
nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation.
This group may include but not be limited to the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/448
Dialysis centers
Procedures involving sedation
Sedation dentistry
Surgery centers
Colonic centers
Psychiatric centers
(9) Section 202; add new definition of “Analog Addressable Fire Detection System” as follows:
ANALOG ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM. Any system capable of calculating a change in value by
directly measurable quantities (voltage, resistance, etc.) at the sensing point. The physical analog may be conducted
at the sensing point or at the main control panel. The system shall be capable of compensating for long-term changes
in sensor response while maintaining a constant sensitivity. The compensation shall have a preset point at which a
detector maintenance signal shall be transmitted to the control panel. The sensor shall remain capable of detecting
and transmitting an alarm while in maintenance alert.
(10) Section 202; change definition of “Atrium” as follows:
[BG] ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories... {Remaining text unchanged}
(11) Section 202; add new definition of “Defend in Place” as follows:
[BG] DEFEND IN PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff
to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within
the building, or both, without evacuating the building.
(12) Section 202; amend definition of “Fire Watch” as follows:
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or
portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for
the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire
and notifying the fire department.
(13) Section 202; amend definition of “Fireworks” as follows:
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for
entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a match or other
heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth herein.
...{Remainder of text unchanged}...
(14) Section 202; add a second paragraph to “High-Piled Combustible Storage” to read as follows:
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE. Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building
exceeding 6,000 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess
of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection
system and life safety features shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height.
(15) Section 202; change definition of “High-Rise Building” to read as follows:
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building having any floors used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet (16 764
mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
(16) Section 202; amend definition of “Repair Garage” to read as follows:
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This
occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items
such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement, and other such
minor repairs.
(17) Section 202; add new definition of “Self-Service Storage Facility” as follows:
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing
individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service
basis.
(18) Section 202; add new definition of “Standby Personnel” as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/448
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the number
required shall be as directed by the Fire Chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the
jurisdiction.
(19) Section 202; add new definition of “Upgraded or Replaced Fire Alarm System” as follows:
UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or replaced includes,
but is not limited to the following:
* Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model
* Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one
* Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system
* Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement:
* Firmware updates
* Software updates
* Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware
(20) Section 307.1.1; change to read as follows:
307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions
or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited.
Exceptions: {No changes}
(21) Section 307.2; change to read as follows:
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior
to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease
or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of
the land upon which the fire is to be kindled.
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to
the following:
1. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or restrictions.
2. State, County, or Local temporary or permanent bans on open burning.
3. Local written policies as established by the fire code official.
(22) Section 307.2; add Section 307.2.2 to read as follows:
307.2.2 Exception to the prohibition on Open Burning. Open burning is permitted by the City of Sachse for
property owners with land parcels 2 acres and greater for the on-site burning of residential yard and garden debris
and waste plant growth only. Trees, brush, grass, leaves, branch trimmings, or other plant growth may be burned on
the property of which the material grew. The plant growth must be burned by the property owner or any person
authorized by the owner. Permit holder shall comply with the general requirements for burning listed below and the
other sections of this code.
1. Commence or continue burning only when the wind direction and other weather conditions are such that
the smoke and other pollutants will not present a hazard to any public road, landing strip, or navigable water
(e.g., lake, river, stream, or bay) or have an adverse effect on any off-site structure containing “sensitive
receptors” (e.g., a residence, business, farm building, or greenhouse; see box, page 6).
2. Post someone to flag traffic if at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow onto or
across a road or highway.
3. Keep fires downwind of, or at least 300 feet away from, any neighboring structure that contains sensitive
receptors. This requirement may be waived only with the prior written approval of whoever owns or rents the
adjacent property and either resides or conducts business there.
4. Begin burning no earlier than one hour after sunrise, end it the same day and no later than one hour before
sunset, and make sure that a responsible party is present while the burn is active and the fire is progressing. At
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/448
the end of the burn, extinguish isolated residual fires or smoldering objects if the smoke they produce can be a
nuisance or a traffic hazard.
5. Don't start burning unless weather conditions are such that the smoke will dissipate (winds of at least 6
miles per hour; no temperature inversions) while still allowing the fire to be contained and controlled (winds no
faster than 23 miles per hour).
6. Don't burn any electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics, non-wooden construction or demolition
materials, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, or items that contain
natural or synthetic rubber.
7. The permit will be valid for a period of one year from issuance date.
8. An on-site inspection must be conducted prior to igniting each the fire.
9. Permit holder must notify the fire department dispatch center prior to igniting each fire.
10. The fire department will charge an administrative permit review fee per year.
11. The fire department on-site inspection fee will be charged for normal hours and for after hour & weekend
inspections for each fire. This exception does not apply to land clearing operations.
12. Neither the permit nor this section shall alleviate the permit holder from complying with Texas
Commissions on Environmental Quality and the Texas Clean Air Act rules and requirements.
(23) Section 307.3; change to read as follows:
307.3 Extinguishment Authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit
holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or
objectionable situation.
(24) Section 307.4; change to read as follows:
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet (91 440 mm) from any structure, and
provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet (91 440 mm) of any structure.
Exceptions: {No changes}
(25) Section 307.4.3, exceptions: add exception #2 to read as follows:
Exceptions:
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
(26) Section 307.4.4; add Section 307.4.4 to read as follows:
307.4.4 Permanent Outdoor Firepit. Permanently installed outdoor firepits for recreational fire purposes shall not
be installed within 10 feet of a structure or combustible material.
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the International Building
Code.
(27) Section 307.4.5; add Section 307.4.5 to read as follows:
307.4.5 Trench Burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance with Section
307.2.
(28) Section 307.5; change to read as follows:
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires, recreational fires, and use of portable outdoor fireplaces
shall be constantly attended until the... {remainder of section unchanged}
(29) Section 308.1.4; change to read as follows:
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills and other similar devices
used for cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of
combustible construction.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater
than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/448
to exceed 100 lbs (5 containers).
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system, except
that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound
(9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs (2 containers).
3. {No change}.
(30) Section 308.1.6.2, exception #3; change to read as follows:
Exceptions:
3. Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3.
(31) Section 308.1.6.3; change to read as follows:
308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released an untethered unmanned free-floating
devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not limited to a sky lantern.
(32) Section 311.5; change to read as follows:
311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or
structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as
required by Section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5.
(33) Section 401.3; add Section 401.3.4 to read as follows:
401.3.4 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or
transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner.
(34) Section 403.5; change to read as follows:
403.5 Group E Occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with Section 404 shall
be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing both a Group E occupancy and an
atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each classroom.
Group E occupancies shall also comply with Sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.3.
(35) Section 404.2.2; add number 4.10 to read as follows:
404.2.2 Fire Safety Plans.
4.10. Fire extinguishing system controls.
(36) Section 405.4; change to read as follows:
405.4 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at unexpected
times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of fire.
(37) Section 501.4; change to read as follows:
501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection is required to
be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and approved prior to the time of which
construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure.
(38) Section 503.1.1; add sentence to read as follows:
503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus... {text unchanged}... building or facility. Except for oneor
two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a 10 feet (3048 mm) wide unobstructed
pathway around the external walls of the structure.
Exceptions: {No changes}
(39) Section 503.2.1; change to read as follows:
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet
(7315mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an
unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm).
Exception: Vertical clearance may be reduced; provided such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus
and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance when approved.
(40) Section 503.2.2; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/448
503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access
widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations.
(41) Section 503.2.3; change to read as follows:
503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support imposed loads of
80,000 pounds for fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities.
(42) Section 503.3; change to read as follows:
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire
apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings
shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to
provide adequate visibility.
(1) Striping. Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six
inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE
NO PARKING” shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along
both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
(2) Signs. Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” and shall be 12" wide
and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than
2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet,
six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides
of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief.
(43) Section 503.4; change to read as follows:
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any
manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and
any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times.
(44) Section 505.1; change to read as follows:
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification.
The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the
property.
Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers
or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) 6
inches (152.4 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the fire code official,
address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access
is by means of a private road, buildings do not immediately front a street, and/or the building cannot be viewed from
the public way, a monument, pole or other sign with approved 6 inch (152.4 mm) height building numerals or
addresses and 4 inch (101.6 mm) height suite/apartment numerals of a color contrasting with the background of the
building or other approved means shall be used to identify the structure. Numerals or addresses shall be posted on a
minimum 20 inch (508 mm) by 30 inch (762 mm) background on border. Address identification shall be maintained.
Exception: R-3 Single Family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum 3 1/2 inches in height and
a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the street fronting the property and rear
alleyway where such alleyway exists.
(45) Section 507.4; change to read as follows:
507.4 Water Supply Test Date and Information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire
protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 “Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing
and Marking of Hydrants” and within one year of sprinkler plan submittal. The fire code official shall be notified prior to
the water supply test. Water supply tests shall be witnessed by the fire code official, as required. The exact location of
the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan
submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the waterflow test report, or as approved by the fire code official.
The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum
operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then
design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA
standard. Reference Section 903.3.5 for additional design requirements.
(46) Section 507.5.4; change to read as follows:
507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences,
vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire
department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/448
or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining
immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants.
(47) Section 509.1.2; add new Section 509.1.2 to read as follows:
509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by this section
shall have a minimum height of two inches when located inside a building and four inches when located outside, or as
approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the background.
(48) Section 603.3.2.1, exception; change exception to read as follows:
Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons (11,356 L) in
accordance with all requirements of Chapter 57.
{Delete remainder of Exception}
(49) Section 603.3.2.2; change to read as follows:
603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2 shall be used only
to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2.4. Connections between
tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made using closed piping systems.
(50) Section 604.1.2; add sentence to read as follows:
604.1.2 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in accordance with
the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in
accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11.
(51) Section 604.1.9; add new Section 604.1.9 to read as follows:
604.1.9 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to
maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of
public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70.
(52) Section 604.2; change to read as follows:
604.2 Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections
604.2.1 through 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code.
(53) Section 604.2.4; change to read as follows:
604.2.4 Emergency Voice/alarm Communications Systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency
voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required
in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24
hours, as required in NFPA 72.
Covered and Open Malls, Section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3
Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4.
Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.12.3
High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.13
Atriums, Section 907.2.14
Deep Underground Buildings, Section 907.2.19
(54) Section 604.2.12; change to read as follows:
604.2.12 Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in
accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes)
(55) Section 604.2.13; change to read as follows:
604.2.13 Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary tents and
membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6.1. (90 minutes) Standby power shall be provided for
auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in accordance with Section 2702 of the International
Building Code. (4 hours) Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated
membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.10.4.
(56) Section 604.2.15; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/448
604.2.15 Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following
occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 909.11:
Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7
Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7
Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8
Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2
Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.3.7.2
Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code, Section 411.1
Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2.1
(57) Sections 604.2.17 to 604.2.24; add new sections to read as follows:
604.2.17 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in accordance with Section
907.2.20 and 914.2.3.
604.2.18 Airport Traffic Control Towers. A standby power system shall be provided in airport traffic control
towers more than 65 ft. in height. Power shall be provided to the following equipment:
1. Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting.
2. Elevator operating equipment.
3. Fire alarm and smoke detection systems.
604.2.19 Smokeproof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be provided for
smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required
by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2.
604.2.20 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as
required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5.
604.2.21 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when
eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code,
Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3.
604.2.22 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust
systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code,
Section 504.10, Item 7.
604.2.23 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection
systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 421.8.
604.2.24 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of
egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60
minutes elsewhere.)
(58) Section 604.8; add new section to read as follows:
604.8 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere
in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied
with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system.
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved.
(59) Section 609.2; change to read as follows:
[M] 609.2 Where Required. A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and
domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors, including but not limited to
cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any
form of roofed enclosure, as required by the fire code official.
Exceptions:
1. Tents, as provided for in Chapter 31.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/448
2. {No change to existing Exception.}
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with the extinguishing
system, as required by Section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose shall be properly maintained in good
working order and in accordance with all applicable regulations.
(60) Section 704.1; change to read as follows:
704.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts, including but not limited to stairways, elevator hoist ways, service and
utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected in accordance with the
codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of when constructed, not less than as required in Chapter
11. New floor openings in existing buildings shall comply with the International Building Code.
(61) Section 807.3; change to read as follows:
807.3 Combustible Decorative Materials. In other than Group I-3 In occupancies in Groups A, E, I, and R-1, and
dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and other similar combustible decorative materials
suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with Section 807.4 and shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall
or ceiling area to which they are attached.
(62) Sections 807.5.2.2 and 807.5.2.3; change to read as follows:
807.5.2.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not
more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall.
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the
flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
807.5.2.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not
more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached.
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet
the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
(63) Sections 807.5.5.2 and 807.5.5.3; change to read as follows:
807.5.5.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not
more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall.
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the
flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
807.5.5.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not
more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and
other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria
of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
(64) Section 901.6.1; add Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows:
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA
25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be back flushed when
foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system.
Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of
standpipe systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing
water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as
approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to
verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to
introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check
valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of
NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/448
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as
required by the fire code official.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire
Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in
the building. The tag shall be check-marked as “Fifth Year” for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag
shall read “5 Year Standpipe Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and
Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority
Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as
required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during
freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions.
9. Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe
systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose
valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove
hose by the fire code official.
(65) Section 901.6.3; add Section 901.6.3 to read as follows:
901.6.3 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or
transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner.
(66) Section 901.7; change to read as follows:
901.7 Systems Out of Service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an
excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where
required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for
all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service....
{remaining text unchanged}
(67) Section 901.8.2; change to read as follows:
901.8.2 Removal of Occupant-use Hose Lines. The fire code official is authorized to permit the removal of
occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions exist:
1. The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire department.
2. If the occupant-use hose lines are removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as per the fire code
official, such shall be compatible with local fire department fittings.
(68) Section 901.11; add Section 901.11 to read as follows:
901.10 Discontinuation or change of service. Notice shall be made to the fire code official whenever contracted
alarm services for monitoring of any fire alarm system is terminated for any reason, or a change in alarm monitoring
provider occurs. Notice shall be made in writing to the fire code official by the building owner and alarm service
provider prior to the service being terminated.
(69) Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows:
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall
be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as
approved by the fire code official.
(70) Section 903.2; add paragraph to read as follows:
Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator
hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any
circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry
doors to the elevator machine room indicating “ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED.”
(71) Section 903.2; delete the exception.
(72) Section 903.2.9; add Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows:
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service
storage facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/448
Exception: One-story self-service storage facilities that have no interior corridors, with a one-hour fire barrier
separation wall installed between every storage compartment.
(73) Section 903.2.11; change 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 as follows:
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
buildings that have one or more stories with an occupant load of 30 or more, other than penthouses in compliance
with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet (10 668 mm) or more above the lowest level of
fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor.
Exception: Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no
other occupancies above the subject garage.
903.2.11.7 High-Piled combustible storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572 mm),
see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply.
903.2.11.8 Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by
an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
903.2.11.9 Buildings 6,000 sq. ft. or Greater. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all
buildings with a building area 6,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 6,000 sq. ft. or
greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings.
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code.
(74) Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows:
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required
in the following rooms or areas where such... {text unchanged}...because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated
construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents,
when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder
of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
2 hours.
4. {Delete}
5. Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would
not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances.
6. {Delete}
(75) Section 903.3.1.2.3; add Section 903.3.1.2.3 to read as follows:
[F] Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such
buildings two or more stories in height, in accordance with NFPA 13 and or NFPA 13R requirements, and attached
garages.
(76) Section 903.3.1.3; change to read as follows:
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings;
Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with
NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law.
(77) Section 903.3.1.4; add Section 903.3.1.4 to read as follows:
[F] 903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be
allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the
attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/448
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the
roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code
official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.
(78) Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
[F] Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of
the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety
factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements.
(79) Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system
and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler
and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a
supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering.
(80) Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows:
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance
with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection.
(81) Section 905.2; change to read as follows:
905.2 Installation Standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14.
Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure
with a high/low alarm.
(82) Section 905.3; add Section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows:
905.3.9 Buildings Exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and
where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally,
from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be
provided.
Exceptions:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.
(83) Section 905.4, change item 1, 3, 5, and add item 7 to read as follows:
1. In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below
grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise
approved by the fire code official.
2. {No change.}
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an interior exit stairway
hose connection by a {No change to rest.}
4. {No change.}
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each
standpipe shall be provided with a two-way a hose connection shall be located to serve the roof or at the highest
landing of an interior exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12.
6. {No change.}
7. When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the
structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by
the fire code official.
(84) Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/448
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system
and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler
and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a
supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering.
(85) Section 907.1; add Section 907.1.4 to read as follows:
907.1.4 Design Standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire
alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices.
(86) Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows:
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant of 300 or more persons or more than 100
persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in
accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for
the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be
provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy.
Exception: {No change.}
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking
surface level, and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
(87) Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows:
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency
voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with
Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke
detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved
smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100'
open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm
occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems.
Exceptions:
1. {No change.}
1.1. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station
detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section
907.2.6.)
{No change to remainder of exceptions.}
(88) Section 907.2.13, change exception 3 to read as follows:
3. Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building
Code, when used for open air seating; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but
not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas.
(89) Section 907.4.2; add Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.
(90) Section 907.6.1; add Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows:
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single
initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other
such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with
the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation
horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a
signaling line circuit interface device may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the
initiating device is ten feet or less.
(91) Section 907.6.3; delete all four exceptions.
(92) Section 907.6.6; add sentence at the end of paragraph to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/448
[F] See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.
(93) Section 909.22; add Section 909.22 to read as follows:
909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for
compliance with Building Code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be
pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft
relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated
conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a
separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from
the fire department as per Section 105.7.
[F] 909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization
system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the
smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by
smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance
levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3.
909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other
building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of
the following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and
directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork
enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building
Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smokeproof
enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less
than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated
from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire
barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a fireresistance
rating of not less than 2 hours.
909.22.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and
automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the
Building Code.
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be
tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these
requirements.
(94) Section 910.2; change exception 2. and 3. to read as follows:
[F] 2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with early
suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
3. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with control
mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are listed to control a
fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
(95) Section 910.2; add subsection 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows:
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1394 m2)
in single floor area.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/448
2. In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and
unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 waterreactive
materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials.
(96) Section 910.3; add subsection 910.3.4 to read as follows:
910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and
manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1
through 910.3.2.3.
[F] 910.3.4.1 Sprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically.
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at
least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers
installed.
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2.
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device
rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents.
(97) Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows:
910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation
of makeup air openings shall be manual or automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square
feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust.
(98) Section 910.4.4; change to read as follows:
910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic
sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided.
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2.
(99) Section 912.2; add sentence at the end of paragraph to read as follows:
912.2 Location. With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings and landscaping, fire department connections shall
be so located that fire apparatus and hose connected to supply the system will not obstruct access to the buildings for
other fire apparatus. The location of fire department connections shall be freestanding and a minimum of 1x's the
building height away from the building.
Exception: Changes made by the Authority having Jurisdiction.
(100) Section 912.2; add sections 912.2.3 and 912.2.4 to read as follows:
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department
connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.
912.2.4 Hydrant distance from protected buildings. See Appendix C of this code.
(101) Section 913.1; add second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire
department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors
that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor
leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance
as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key
box as required by Section 506.1.
(102) Section 914.3.1.2; change to read as follows:
914.3.1.2 Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 420 120 feet (128 m) in building
height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different
streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/448
connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and
pressure required for the pumps to operate.
Exception: {No change to exception.}
(103) Section 1006.2.2.6; add a new Section 1006.2.2.6 as follows:
1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the
Electrical Code as adopted.
(104) Section 1009.1; add the following exception 4:
Exceptions:
{previous exceptions unchanged}
4. Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any
variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of
Section 1009.
(105) Section 1010.1.9.4 Bolt Locks; change exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows:
Exceptions:
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy.
{Remainder unchanged}
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy... {Remainder unchanged}...
(106) Section 1015.8 Window Openings; change number 1 to read as follows:
1. Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 (16 764 mm) above the
finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with
ASTM F 2006.
(107) Section 1020.1 Construction; add exception 6 to read as follows:
6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single
tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The
actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke
detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided.
(108) Section 1029.1.1.1; delete this section.
(109) Section 1031.2; change to read as follows:
1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from
obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit or exit passageway shall
not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress.
(110) Section 1103.3; add sentence to end of paragraph as follows:
Provide emergency signage as required by Section 607.3.
(111) Section 1103.5; add Section 1103.5.1 to read as follows:
1103.5.1 Spray Booths and Rooms. Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved
automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404.
(112) Section 1103.7; add Section 1103.7.8 and 1103.7.8.1 to read as follows:
1103.7.8 Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced,
the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or heat detectors shall have
analog initiating devices.
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion
exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion initiated after the
date of original fire alarm panel installation exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system
must comply within 18 months of permit application.
1103.7.8.1 Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/448
(113) Section 2304.1; change to read as follows:
2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in
accordance with the following:
1. Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or,
2. Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or
3. Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3.
At any time the qualified attendant of item #1 or #2 above is not present, such operations shall be considered as
an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3.
(114) Section 2401.2; delete this section.
(115) Table 3206.2, footnote j.; change text to read as follows:
j. Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler systems or
control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m•s) 1/2 or less that are listed to
control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in accordance with NFPA 13,
manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be
required within these areas.
(116) Section 3310.1; add sentence to end of paragraph to read as follows:
When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be
approved prior to the time at which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure.
(117) Section 5601.1.3; change to read as follows:
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Section 5604
and 5608.
2. {Delete Exception}
3. The use of fireworks for approved displays as allowed in Section 5608.
4. {Delete Exception}
(118) Section 5703.6; add a sentence to read as follows:
5703.6 Piping systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids shall
be in accordance with Sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of secondary containment shall be
provided for underground tank and piping systems.
(119) Section 5704.2.9.5; change Section 5704.2.9.5 and add Section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows:
5704.2.9.5 Above-ground Tanks Inside of Buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall comply with
Section 5704.2.9.5.1 and 5704.2.9.5.2 through 5704.2.9.5.3.
5704.2.9.5.1 {No change.}
5704.2.9.5.2 {No change.}
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks Inside of Buildings. The maximum aggregate allowable
quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) of Class II or III combustible liquid for storage in protected
aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met:
1. The entire 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground tanks;
2. The 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or multiple
smaller tanks;
3. The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with
Section 903.3.1.1; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/448
4. Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an approved
closed piping system.
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted towards
the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be
located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade.
(120) Section 5704.2.9.6.1; change to read as follows:
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of districts in
which such storage is prohibited in accordance with the City of Sachse Code of Ordinances.
(121) Section 5704.2.11.4; add a sentence to read as follows:
5704.2.11.4 Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 3404.2.11.5.1
through 3404.2.11.5.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and
piping systems.
(122) Section 5704.2.11.4.2; change to read as follows:
5704.2.11.4.2 Leak Detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved method of
leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as
specified in Section 5704.2.11.4.3.
(123) Section 5704.2.11.4; add Section 5704.2.11.4.3 to read as follows:
5704.2.11.4.3 Observation Wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in diameter shall be installed
in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from
a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable
surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of
4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one
every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required.
(124) Section 5706.2.4.4; change to read as follows:
Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids
in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of districts in
which such storage is prohibited in accordance with the City of Sachse Code of Ordinances.
(125) Section 5706.5.4; delete Section 5706.5.4.5 and replace with the following:
5706.5.4.5 Commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing. Dispensing of Class II and III motor
vehicle fuel from tank vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles located at commercial, industrial, governmental or
manufacturing establishments is allowed where permitted, provided such dispensing operations are conducted in
accordance with Sections 5706.5.4.5.1 through 5706.5.4.5.3.
5706.5.4.5.1 Site requirements.
1. Dispensing may occur at sites that have been permitted to conduct mobile fueling.
2. A detailed site plan shall be submitted with each application for a permit. The site plan must indicate:
a. All buildings, structures, and appurtenances on site and their use or function;
b. All uses adjacent to the property lines of the site;
c. The locations of all storm drain openings, adjacent waterways or wetlands;
d. Information regarding slope, natural drainage, curbing, impounding and how a spill will be
retained upon the site property; and,
e. The scale of the site plan.
3. The Code Official is authorized to impose limits upon: the times and/or days during which mobile
fueling operations are allowed to take place and specific locations on a site where fueling is permitted.
4. Mobile fueling operations shall be conducted in areas not generally accessible to the public.
5. Mobile fueling shall not take place within 15 feet (4.572 m) of buildings, property lines, or combustible
storage.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/448
5706.5.4.5.2 Refueling Operator Requirements.
1. The owner of a mobile fueling operations shall provide to the jurisdiction a written response plan
which demonstrates readiness to respond to a fuel spill, carry out appropriate mitigation measures, and to
indicate its process to properly dispose of contaminated materials when circumstances require.
2. The tank vehicle shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 385 and Local, State and Federal
requirements. The tank vehicle's specific functions shall include that of supplying fuel to motor vehicle fuel
tanks. The vehicle and all its equipment shall be maintained in good repair.
3. Signs prohibiting smoking or open flames within 25 feet (7.62 m) of the tank vehicle or the point of
fueling shall be prominently posted on 3 sides of the vehicle including the back and both sides.
4. A fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 40:BC shall be provided on the vehicle with signage
clearly indicating its location.
5. The dispensing nozzles and hoses shall be of an approved and listed type.
6. The dispensing hose shall not be extended from the reel more than 100 feet (30.48m) in length.
7. Absorbent materials, non-water absorbent pads, a 10 foot (3.048 m) long containment boom, an
approved container with lid, and a non-metallic shovel shall be provided to mitigate a minimum 5-gallon
fuel spill.
8. Tanker vehicles shall be equipped with a fuel limit switch such as a count-back switch, limiting the
amount of a single fueling operation to a maximum of 500 gallons (1893 L) between resetting of the limit
switch.
Exception: Tankers utilizing remote emergency shut-off device capability where the operator constantly
carries the shut-off device which, when activated, immediately causes flow of fuel from the tanker to cease.
9. Persons responsible for dispensing operations shall be trained in the appropriate mitigating actions in
the event of a fire, leak, or spill. Training records shall be maintained by the dispensing company and shall
be made available to the fire code official upon request.
10. Operators of tank vehicles used for mobile fueling operations shall have in their possession at all
times an emergency communications device to notify the proper authorities in the event of an emergency.
5706.5.4.5.3 Operational Requirements.
1. The tank vehicle dispensing equipment shall be constantly attended and operated only by designated
personnel who are trained to handle and dispense motor fuels.
2. Prior to beginning dispensing operations, precautions shall be taken to assure ignition sources are not
present.
3. The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during dispensing operations.
4. Night time fueling operations shall only take place in adequately lighted areas.
5. The tank vehicle shall be positioned with respect to vehicles being fueled so as to preclude traffic from
driving over the delivery hose and between the tank vehicle and the motor vehicle being fueled.
6. During fueling operations, tank vehicle brakes shall be set, chock blocks shall be in place and warning
lights shall be in operation.
7. Motor vehicle fuel tanks shall not be topped off.
8. The dispensing hose shall be properly placed on an approved reel or in an approved compartment
prior to moving the tank vehicle.
9. The Code Official and other appropriate authorities shall be notified when a reportable spill or
unauthorized discharge occurs.
(126) Section 5806.2; change to read as follows:
Section 5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is
prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited in
accordance with the City of Sachse Code of Ordinances.
(127) Section 6103.2.1; add Section 6103.2.1.8 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/448
6103.2.1.8 Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not available,
portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such
containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2
kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet.
(128) Section 6104.2, change to read as follows:
Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law restricting the
storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity
of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570L) in accordance with the City of
Sachse Code of Ordinances.
(129) Section 6104.2, exception; add exception to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. {existing text unchanged}
2. Except as permitted in 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in residential areas.
(130) Section 6104.3; add Section 6104.3.2 to read as follows:
6104.3.2 Spas, Pool Heaters and other listed devices. Where natural gas service is not available, an LP-Gas
container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such container shall not
exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers.
Exception: Lots where LP can be off loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located; may install 500
gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved containers.
(131) Section 6107.4; change to read as follows:
6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity to alleys,
driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in accordance with NFPA 58
Section 312.
(132) Section 6109.13; delete exception and change to read as follows:
6109.13 Protection of Containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a suitable enclosure or otherwise
protected against tampering. Vehicle impact protection shall be provided as required by Section 6107.4.
Exception: {delete exception}
(133) Table B105.2; change footnote a. to read as follows:
a. The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,000 1,500 gallons per minute.
(134) Appendix D change to read as follows:
D103.1 Access Road with a fire hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the
minimum road width shall be 26 feet, exclusive of shoulders (see Figure D103.1 (2015)).
D103.3 Turning radius. The minimum turning radius along all fire lanes shall be 30 feet.
(Ordinance 529 adopted 12/1/86; Ordinance 578 adopted 5/4/87; Ordinance 617 adopted 11/2/87; Ordinance 1164 adopted
3/21/94; Ordinance 1172, sec. 3, adopted 4/18/94; Ordinance 1257, secs. 1–3, adopted 4/17/95; Ordinance 1317, sec. 1,
adopted 11/20/95; Ordinance 1427, sec. 2, adopted 12/16/96; Ordinance 1693 adopted 11/15/99; Ordinance 1887, sec. 1,
adopted 10/1/01; Ordinance 2138, sec. 1, adopted 5/2/05; Ordinance 3198, sec. 1, adopted 3/15/10; Ordinance 3428, sec. 9,
adopted 10/15/12, eff. 1/1/13; Ordinance 3845, sec. 9, adopted 12/18/17)
Sec. 5-2. Arson reward.
The City of Sachse, Texas, hereby offers a reward of $250.00 to anyone who secures and furnishes information necessary to
and which results in arrest and conviction of any person or persons who commit the crime of arson within the corporate limits of
the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid as often as is necessary out of the general fund of the city. (Ordinance
177 adopted 12/11/73)
Sec. 5-3. Hazardous material reimbursement.
A. Any party who accidentally, negligently or intentionally causes or is responsible for an unauthorized release of hazardous
material(s) as defined in the uniform fire code which affects public or private property within the City of Sachse, Texas, shall be
liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the city in the effort to mitigate and abate said hazard. The remedy provided by this
section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/448
B. For the purposes of this section, costs incurred by the city shall include, but not be limited to all out-of-pocket expenses
attributable to the abatement or clean-up of the hazardous material(s), including cost of equipment operation, cost of materials
utilized, costs of third party specialists, experts or contract labor not in the full time employment of the city, overhead costs,
overtime costs and any other costs incurred by the City of Sachse, Texas.
C. Basic costs associated with fire department services shall be $400.00 per hour for each engine or truck company and
$200.00 per hour for each medical/rescue unit.
(Ordinance 1723 adopted 3/20/00)
Sec. 5-4. Ambulance service.
Fire department means the fire department under the organization of the City of Sachse.
Fire department emergency ambulance means a motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped and used for
transporting the injured or sick in answer to an emergency call.
A. The Sachse Fire Department shall staff and provide emergency medical service/ambulance service.
B. The Sachse fire department shall respond to all medical emergencies through the 911 systems, private phone,
walk-in or report of a medical emergency from a citizen.
C. The person receiving emergency ambulance service and any person contracting for the service shall be
responsible for payment of service fees. In the case of service received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the
minor shall be responsible for payment of the fee.
(Ordinance 1837, sec. I, adopted 4/2/01)
Editor's note – Ordinance 1837, sec. I, adopted April 2, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as sec. 5-3. As section 5-3 was previously
designated, these provisions have been included herein as a new sec. 5-4, at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 5-5. Ambulance service fees.
A. The rates and charges for ambulance services shall be administered in accordance with the City of Sachse Master Fee
Schedule established by resolution of the city council.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section and the master fee schedule, the following definitions shall apply, unless clearly
indicated to the contrary.
Advanced life support (“ALS”) intervention means a procedure beyond the scope of an EMT-Basic as defined in the National
EMS Education and Practice Blueprint.
Advanced life support, level 1 (“ALS1”) means the provision of an assessment by an advanced life support provider or supplier or
the provision of one or more advanced life support interventions when medically necessary.
Advanced life support, level 2 (“ALS2”) means the administration of three or more different medications and the provision of at
least one of the following advanced life support procedures when medically necessary: manual defibrillation/cardioversion,
endotracheal intubation, central venous line, cardiac pacing, chest decompression, surgical airway, or intraosseous line.
Advanced life support provider/supplier means a provider trained to the level of an EMT-intermediate or paramedic as defined in
the National EMS Education and Practice Blueprint.
Basic life support (“BLS”) means the establishment of a peripheral intravenous (IV) line when medically necessary.”
(Ordinance 2023, sec. I, adopted 7/7/03; Ordinance 2108, sec. 1, adopted 11/15/04; Ordinance 3319, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/11;
Ordinance 3430, sec. 1, adopted 11/5/12)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Sec. 6-1. Food service sanitation.
A. Adoption of rules. The rules on food service sanitation adopted by the Texas department of health on November 30, 1977,
are hereby adopted as the food service sanitation regulations of the City of Sachse, and a copy of said rules shall be kept on file
in the office of the city secretary.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the terms, phrases, words and their derivations contained in the rules on food
service sanitation shall have the meaning given therein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/448
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and the word “will” is merely directory. Provided, that as an exception to the
definitions provided in said rules, the provisions of this section and of said rules shall include retail food markets, which are
defined as any establishment where food and food products are offered for sale to the ultimate consumer and intended for offpremises
consumption. Such food or food products may be expected to vary in degrees of preparation and may often need
further preparation or processing after purchase. “Regulatory authority” shall mean the City of Sachse, Texas or its duly
authorized officer, agent or employee.
C. Valid permit, license or certificate required. No person shall operate a food service establishment who does not have a valid
permit, license or certificate issued to him by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
section shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license or certificate. Permits, licenses or certificates are not
transferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every food service establishment in the city.
D. Issuance of permit, license or certificate.
(1) Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application for a permit, license
or certificate on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include the name and address of
each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food service establishment, and the signature of each applicant
and shall be accompanied by any application fee required by the regulatory authority to cover the cost of processing
such application and any inspection conducted in connection therewith.
(2) Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license or certificate, the regulatory authority shall inspect the
proposed food service establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this section.
(3) The regulatory authority shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the applicant if its inspection reveals that
the proposed food service establishment complies with the requirements of this section.
E. Suspension of permit, license or certificate. The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any
permit, license or certificate to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the permit, license or certificate does not
comply with the requirements of this section, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of
this section, or if the food service establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is
effective upon service of the notice required by this section. When a permit, license or certificate is suspended, food service
operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license or
certificate or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit, license or certificate is, upon service of the notice,
immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within
ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no
longer exist.
F. Revocation of permit, license or certificate.
(1) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a permit, license or certificate for
serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this section or for interference with the regulatory authority
in the performance of duty.
(2) Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify in writing the holder of the permit, license or certificate or
the person in charge, of the specific reason for which the permit, license or certificate is to be revoked and that the
permit, license or certificate shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a
written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within
such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit, license or
certificate becomes final.
G. Service of notices. A notice provided for in this section is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit,
license or certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the holder of the permit, license or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory
authority.
H. Hearings. The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place
designated by it. The city council of the City of Sachse shall designate an officer, agent or employee of the City of Sachse as
hearing officer for purposes of this section. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be recorded, and the hearing officer shall
make provision for the replaying or copying of the transcript of such hearing for any person at his cost. The hearing officer shall
make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered
in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license or certificate by the
regulatory authority.
I. Application after revocation. When a revocation of a permit, license or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked
permit, license or certificate may make written application for a new permit, license or certificate on forms provided by the
regulatory authority.
J. Inspection frequency. An inspection of every food service establishment within the city shall be performed at least once
every four months. Additional inspections of a food service establishment shall be performed as often as are necessary for the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/448
enforcement of this section or of the rules on food service sanitation adopted hereby.
K. Inspection fee. The regulatory authority shall be authorized to collect from each such food service establishment an annual
inspection fee that shall not exceed the annual inspection fee charged by the Dallas County Health Department.
L. Access. Representatives of the regulatory authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service
establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this section. The
representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment, to obtain information pertaining to the food and
supplies purchased, received or used.
M. Report of inspections. Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or a commissary is made, the findings shall
be recorded on an inspection report form issued by the Texas department of health, entitled “Food Service Establishment
Inspection Report,” described in the rules on food service sanitation adopted hereby and available from the food and drug
division office of the Texas department of health. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this section and
shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number,
the section of the rules or this section violated and shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment
shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the inspection report form shall be
furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form
is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any persons who requests it according to law.
N. Correction of violations.
(1) The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the
violations found. The corrections of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions:
(a) If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the
establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations. Operations shall not be
resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority.
(b) All violations of four or five point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event,
within ten days following inspection. Within 15 days after inspection, the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate shall submit a written report to the regulatory authority stating that the four or five point weighted
violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction.
(c) All one or two point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of
the next routine inspection.
(d) When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the establishment shall initiate corrective
action on all identified violations within 48 hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable
time intervals to assure correction.
(e) In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected within 24 hours. If
violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the temporary food service establishment shall immediately cease
food service operations until authorized to resume by the regulatory authority.
(2) The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation
of food service operations. An opportunity for hearing of the inspection findings or the time limitations or both will be
provided if a written request is filed with the regulatory authority within ten days following cessation of operations. If a
request for a hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of that request.
(3) Whenever a food service establishment is required under the provisions of this section to cease operations, it
shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease
operations no longer exists. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
O. General. Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this
section. The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specifying with particularity the
reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of subsection N(1)(a) or N(1)(b) or any other
provision of this section. The regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food
subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of
the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case
immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed
within ten days and if no hearing is requested, the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be
held within 20 days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be
vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to
bring it into compliance with the provisions of this section.
P. Submission and review of plans. Whenever a food service establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications
for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval before
construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/448
mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
The regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of this section and of the “Rules
on Food Service Sanitation” as hereby adopted. No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or
converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority. Whenever plans and
specifications are required, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to the start of operations to
determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this section and the Rules on
Food Service Sanitation adopted hereby.
Q. Procedure when infection suspected. When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease
transmission by an employee of a food service establishment, it may secure morbidity history of the suspected employee or
make any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The regulatory authority may require any or
all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food service establishments;
(2) The immediate closing of the food service establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the regulatory
authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
(3) Restriction of the employee's services to some areas of the establishment where there would be no danger of
transmitting disease;
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of other employees and of his and their
body discharges.
(Ordinance 329 adopted 3/7/83)
Sec. 6-2. Smoking, tobacco use and/or electronic cigarette use in municipal facilities.
A. Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for a person to use a tobacco product or to possess an actively burning tobacco product or an
electronic cigarette product, as defined in section 12-5 B.1. of this Code, in any municipal park or park facility. For purposes of
this section, park or park facility shall mean a park, playground, athletic field, recreation center, adjacent city-owned parking lots,
trails or any other area in the city owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation.
A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses an actively burning tobacco, wood or other plant product or electronic
cigarette product in any indoor or enclosed municipal facility.
B. Signs. The City of Sachse shall post conspicuous signs at all entrances to municipal facilities. The signs shall contain the
words “No Smoking or Electronic Cigarette Use, City of Sachse Ordinance” and the universal symbol for No Smoking.
(Ordinance 1258 adopted 4/17/95; Ordinance 3275, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/11; Ordinance 3605, sec. 1, adopted 9/2/14)
Sec. 6-3. Noise.
A. [Definition:] Prohibited noise is any noise which is unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary that it is offensive to the
ordinary sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city, and which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable, or
interferes with public peace and comfort.
B. Prohibited noise. A person commits an offense if he or she makes, causes to be made, or allows to be made any prohibited
noise in the city, including but not limited to prohibited noise from the following activities.
(1) Blowing a horn or operating an audible signal device attached to or located on an automobile, motorcycle, bus
or other vehicle, except as may be required or permitted by state law;
(2) Playing a musical instrument, radio, television set, stereo system, loud speaker, public address system, or
similar device;
(3) Keeping or harboring an animal or fowl which emits prohibited noise;
(4) For any person operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the city to
operate any sound amplifier which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette
tape player, or other similar device in the motor vehicle, in such a manner that, when operated, it is audible at a
distance of 30 feet or, when operated, causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a
distance of 30 feet from the source.
(5) Operation of the engine of a motor vehicle, as defined in the Texas Transportation Code, so as to assist in
braking or slowing the vehicle through the use of gears or through the use of any engine brake or engine retarding
device, commonly referred to as a “engine” brake, or by any other method which produces any noise in addition to the
normal operating engine noise, on any street or public highway within the city.
C. Parties responsible. The persons responsible for violations of this section are:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/448
(1) At a private residence: Any adult resident present at the time of the offense, and any adult guest or adult
trespasser with the apparent authority to control the level of noise at the time of the offense when no adult resident is
present at the time of the offense.
(2) At a business or other non-residential location: The property owner, operator, manager, and employee in
charge, and all persons in control of or in possession of an instrument or property generating the noise at the time of
the offense.
D. Defenses. The following defenses shall apply to any offense established in this chapter:
(1) The emission of any sound was for the purpose of altering persons to the existence of an emergency, danger, or
attempted crime.
(2) The sound was produced by authorized emergency vehicle.
(3) The sound was produced by emergency work necessary to restore public utilities, or to restore property to a
safe condition, or to protect persons or property from imminent danger, following a fire, accidence, or natural disaster.
(4) The sound was generated:
a. At a lawfully scheduled stadium event.
b. By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a permitted parade;
c. By spectators and participants at a lawfully scheduled amphitheatre event;
d. By a pyrotechnic display that was inspected and approved by the fire chief or his designee;
e. By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival, fiesta, or concert which was
sponsored, cosponsored, or permitted by the city; or
f. Any other lawfully activity which constitutes protected expression pursuant to the First Amendment of the
United States Constitution.
(5) The sound was produced by the erection, excavation, construction, demolition, alteration, or repair work, or the
permitting or causing thereof, of any building or other structure, or the operation or permitting or causing the operation
of any tools or equipment used in such activity conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(6) The sound was produced by operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill,
sander, router, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawn mower, or any other similar device used between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(7) The sound was produced by aircraft in flight or in operation at an airport, or railroad equipment in operation on
railroad rights-of-way.
(8) The sound was produced by church bells or church chimes when used as part of a religious observance or
service which did not exceed five continuous minutes in duration during any one-hour period.
(9) The sound was produced from a mechanical loudspeaker or amplifier on a truck or other moving vehicle for the
purpose of advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise.
(Ordinance 1176 adopted 5/2/94; Ordinance 1184A adopted 7/5/94; Ordinance 2149, sec. 1, adopted 6/20/05; Ordinance 3089,
sec. 1, adopted 11/17/08)
Sec. 6-4. Firearms.
A. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
(1) A person commits an offense if he or she discharges or causes to be discharged within the city limits:
(a) Any firearm, rifle, shotgun, automatic rifle, revolver, pistol, or any other weapon designed for the purpose
of firing or discharging a shell or cartridge, whether such shell or cartridge is blank or live ammunition, or
(b) Any B-B gun, pellet gun, air rifle, bow and arrow, or other device, manufactured, altered or intended to
cause any material, item or thing to become a projectile.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph (1) of this subsection A that the person:
(a) Was a law enforcement peace officer acting in the performance of his or her official [duties];
(b) Fired a weapon under circumstances which were justified under the provisions of the Texas Penal Code;
or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/448
(c) Fired a weapon on his or her own property at a predatory animal in order to protect livestock, poultry or
domestic animals from attack, and that the fired projectile did not cross a property line.
(Ordinance 1316, sec. 1, adopted 11/20/95; Ordinance 3796, sec. 1, adopted 6/5/17)
Sec. 6-5. Automobile junk or wrecking yards.
The city council of the City of Sachse hereby declares that a business of a junk or wrecking yard is a public nuisance, fire hazard,
and hazardous to public health and safety of residents of the city. No junk or wrecking yard shall be allowed to establish or to
operate within the city limits. A junk or wrecking yard shall be classified as any place or business used for the dismantling or
wrecking of used automobiles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked cars or their parts. (Ordinance 42
adopted 12/9/59)
Sec. 6-6. Private sewage disposal systems (septic tanks).
A. Interpretation and purpose. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations, it is the intention of
the city council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the design
and location of private sewage disposal systems in the City of Sachse and, where other ordinances of the city are more
restrictive in their requirements, such other ordinances shall control. The procedure and standards for the development, layout
and design of private sewage disposal facilities within the corporate limits of the City of Sachse, Texas, and for such other areas
as may be authorized by Article 974.A of Texas Revised Civil Statutes are intended to:
(1) Promote and protect the land in a manner to assure the best possible community environment.
(2) Guide and assist the citizens in the correct procedure to be followed and to inform them of the standards which
shall be required.
(3) Protect the public interest by inspecting the location, design, class, and type of private sewage disposal
systems.
(4) Protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given therein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Definitions not expressly
prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.
The word “shall” is always mandatory and the word “may” is merely directory.
Building is a structure built, erected, and framed of component structural parts designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure or
support of persons.
Private sewer is a sewer which is owned by an individual or corporation rather than by public authority. The private sewer system
consists basically of septic tanks and a discharge system of piping for absorption of the wastes by the soil.
Public sewer is a common sewer collection system directly controlled by public authority.
Septic tank is a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, and is designed and
constructed so as to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the liquids to
discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a system of open joint or perforated piping, or disposal pit.
Sewage is any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, and may include liquids containing
chemicals in solution.
C. Authority. The control and use of an adequate and safe sewage disposal facility in areas with no public sewage system is a
major factor influencing the health of individuals. The Texas General Sanitation Law of 1945 (article 4477-1, Vernon's Annotated
Civil Statutes) which governs the treatment and disposal of domestic sewage states:
(1) Section 4.(b). No kitchen waste, laundry waste or sewage shall be allowed to accumulate, discharge or flow into
any public place, gutter, street or highway.
(2) Section 5.(a). All human excreta in populous areas must be disposed of through properly managed sewers,
treatment tanks, or by other methods approved by the state department of health. The disposal systems shall be
sufficient to prevent the pollution of surface soil, the contamination of any drinking water supply, the infection of any
flies, cockroaches or the creation of any other nuisance.
(3) Section 5.(b). All effluent from a septic tank hereafter constructed shall be disposed of through a subsurface
drainage field designed in accordance with good public health engineering practice or any other method which does
not create a nuisance.
In the City of Sachse the property owner shall connect to the public sewage collection system where it is available or within six
months after notification is given that public sewer is available. In those areas not sewered by the public sewage system, a city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/448
approved septic tank and soil absorption system may be used. This section is to regulate the use and construction of septic tanks
for those areas which are not served by a public sewage system.
D. Approval.
(1) The City of Sachse will approve construction of a private sewer system when:
(a) The public sewer system cannot economically be extended to serve the subject area.
(b) An application is filed with the city providing the information required to determine the amount of sewage
generated at the proposed building site.
(c) A plan is provided showing the facilities to be constructed, with the proposed grades and the design
complies with this section and city construction standards.
(d) The result and certification of percolation tests performed by a registered professional engineer, a member
of a county public health unit, or a designated member of the city staff is provided. This test shall be performed
as outlined in the construction standards.
(2) The facilities shall be inspected while under construction by the City of Sachse and/or the Dallas County health
department to insure compliance with the various conditions required in this section, the city construction standards,
and the approved plan. The builder or developer shall request city inspection the day before inspection is desired. The
final inspection will be made after all construction, except for the backfilling of the tank and drain field, is completed.
(3) The city inspector will verify the construction complies with the approved plan, this section and Sachse
construction standards. Any violations found shall be corrected before city approval will be given.
(4) When private sewage systems do not comply with the intent of this section, the city will issue notices of the
violations and request correction. In those cases where the necessary corrections are not made within the time
specified, the person or corporation shall be in violation of the provisions of this section.
E. Variances. The City of Sachse may authorize a variance from these regulations when in its opinion undue hardship will
result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the city shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or
desirable to the public interest and making the findings herein below required. The city shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use of treatment involved and the probable effect of such variance upon the public health, safety, convenience and
welfare in the vicinity.
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property involved such that the strict application
of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
(2) That the variances are necessary for the preservation and employment of a substantial property right of the
applicant, that the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to
other property in the area.
(3) That the granting of a variance is not the result of findings of a pecuniary hardship to a building or home owner,
standing alone, and the result of a financial hardship.
(4) The city may not authorize a variance that would constitute a violation of any other valid ordinance of the City of
Sachse, the County of Dallas, the Texas state health department, the City of Dallas, and/or the Texas water
commission.
F. Conflicts. When the building code of the City of Sachse, the zoning ordinance or the subdivision ordinance of the City of
Sachse contains regulations which are more restrictive than the regulations contained herein, the ordinance which is more
restrictive shall control.
(Ordinance 164 adopted 8/8/72)
Editor's note – See article 4, section 6 of the Zoning Ordinance for lot area requirements for septic tanks.
Sec. 6-7. Nuisances and vegetation.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this subsection:
Abate shall mean to eliminate or remedy by removal, repair, rehabilitation, or demolition.
Brush shall mean scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth.
Carrion shall mean the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish.
City shall mean the City of Sachse, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/448
Dump shall mean to dispose, discharge, place, deposit, throw, leave, sweep, scatter, unload, or toss on or into land or water.
Filth shall mean any matter in a putrescent state.
Garbage shall mean solid waste that is putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation,
cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce
and other food products.
Impure or unwholesome matter shall mean any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter which tends to, may or
could cause injury, death or disease to human beings.
Includes and including are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and use of the terms does not
create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded.
Junk shall mean all worn out, worthless or discarded material, including but not limited to any of the following materials, or parts
of said materials or any combination thereof: new or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap, brass or waste materials; used
and/or inoperative household appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor coverings and/or window coverings not
currently in use; used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe, tubs, drums, barrels, and/or roofing material not
currently in use; air conditioning and heating equipment not currently in use; used vehicle components and parts not currently in
use; used furniture other than that designed for outdoor use or that which would normally be considered as antique furniture;
used and/or inoperative residential lawn care equipment and machinery not currently in use; used pallets, windows or doors not
currently in use; new or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain not currently in use; used and/or inoperable vending
machines, radios and/or televisions, or other electronic devices not currently in use; and any other type of used and/or inoperable
machinery or equipment not currently in use.
Matter shall mean that of which any physical object is composed.
Nuisance shall mean any condition, object, material or matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; or that
renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health, or that is offensive to the
senses, or that threatens to become detrimental to the public health; and shall include but not be limited to: any abandoned wells,
shafts or basements, abandoned refrigerators, stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, privies, filth, carrion, rubbish, junk, trash,
debris or refuse, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, any objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of whatever
nature.
Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter shall mean any matter, condition or object which is objectionable, unsightly or
unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities.
Owner shall mean any person or entity shown as the property owner on the latest property tax assessment rolls of the city or
county, or any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the property, or any person claiming, occupying
or having supervision or control of any property, including any tenant of the property and any agent who is responsible for
managing, leasing or operating the property.
Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation, or any other entity recognized at law.
Property shall mean all land, occupied or unoccupied, and any improvements located on or within such land, including any
building or other structure designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial, or religious purposes. The term shall
also include a yard, ground, wall, driveway, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the land.
Putrefaction shall mean decomposition of organic matter resulting in production of foul-smelling matter; or putrefied matter; or the
condition of being putrefied.
Putrescible shall mean subject to putrefaction.
Refuse shall mean heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials, including but not
limited to, garbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter.
Rubbish shall mean nondecayable waste from a public or private establishment or residence.
Trash and debris mean all manner of refuse including, but not limited to: mounds of dirt; piles of leaves; grass and weed
clippings; paper trash; useless fragments of building material; rubble; furniture, other than furniture designed for outside use;
items of salvage, such as scrap metal and wood; old barrels; old tires; tree and brush trimmings; and other miscellaneous wastes
or rejected matter.
Vegetative growth shall mean any grass, weeds, shrubs, trees, brush, bushes, vines, or other plant material.
Waste or litter shall mean nondecayable solid waste or decayable waste as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code sec.
365.011.
Weeds shall mean any vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, excluding: shrubs, bushes
and trees, cultivated flowers, and cultivated crops.
B. Prohibited accumulations, dumping, stagnant water, trash, and other unsightly or unsanitary matter declared a nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/448
(1) It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for an owner of property within the corporate limits of the city to permit or
allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, refuse, filth, carrion, weeds, rubbish, brush, trash, debris, junk,
garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever nature to
accumulate or remain upon such property or within any public easement on or across such property or upon any
adjacent public street or alley right-of-way between the property line of such property and where the paved surface of
the street or alley begins.
(2) It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to dump, or permit to be dumped, upon or along any
drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street, park, right-of-way, vacant land, body of water, or any other public or private
property within the city, any unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, weeds, brush, junk,
garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind.
(3) It shall be the duty of the owner of property within the city to keep the sidewalks in front of such property free
and clear of all such matter described in subsections (1) and (2), and to fill up, drain, or regrade any such property
which shall have stagnant water thereon, and to cleanse and disinfect any such property from refuse, rubbish, trash,
filth, carrion, or objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind, or other impure or unwholesome matter of
any kind.
C. Weeds, brush, and other objectionable matter.
(1) It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for an owner of any property within the city to permit weeds, grass,
or any objectionable or unsightly matter, to accumulate or grow to a height greater than 12 inches upon such property
within 150 feet of any property line of such property which abuts any street right-of-way, alley, utility easement,
subdivided property, or any buildings or other structures. Exceptions:
(a) Hay which is being cultivated on property that has been granted an agricultural property tax exemption on
the most recent tax roll as certified by the county appraisal district.
(b) Regularly cultivated row crops; provided such crops shall not be allowed to grow within the right-of-way, or
easement; nor shall they be allowed to obstruct the necessary view to and from adjacent rights-of-way.
(c) Within ten feet of any property line where the property is zoned agricultural.
(d) Landscaping that is maintained and in compliance with chapter 11 of the Code.
(e) Open space land located on or adjacent to the floodplain (riparian buffers, creeks, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers easements, or other designated shorelines) may be left in its natural state to help filter runoff, prevent
erosion, increase vegetation and shade, improve water quality, and other conservation benefits, subject to
discretionary review and approval by the city manager or his/her designee. The extent, to which these areas are
maintained, whether owned privately, by an HOA, or by a governmental entity, shall be determined on a case by
case basis by city staff. Operations, environmental benefits, cost of maintenance, accessibility, proximity to
floodplain and water, public use of the property, threat of fire, aesthetic factors, and other variables may be
considered by staff.
(2) It shall be the duty of an owner of property within the city to keep the area from the property line of the owner's
property to the curb line adjacent to it or if there is no curb line, then to the centerline of any adjacent unpaved street
or the edge of the pavement of such street free of any condition or matter deemed a nuisance.
D. Inspections.
(1) For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this section exist, the city manager or his/her designee, is
authorized to enter property at a reasonable time to inspect, investigate, or abate a nuisance or other violation of this
section or to enforce this section, in accordance with law.
(2) If an inspection or investigation of property is sought from an owner of property but is refused, the city manager
or his/her designee, shall have every recourse provided by law, including an administrative search warrant and/or
injunction to secure entry. If the owner of property cannot be identified or located, the city manager or his/her
designee, may enter the property to the extent allowed by law. The city manager or his/her designee is designated as
a code enforcement official of the city to be issued a search warrant as authorized by V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal
Procedure sec. 18.05, as the same may be amended or superseded.
E. Duty of owner to cut and remove weeds, brush, and unsightly matter. It shall be the duty of an owner of property to drain
and/or fill any such property or portion thereof which is unwholesome, contains stagnant water, or in any other condition that may
produce disease. It shall be the duty of an owner of property to cut and remove all weeds, brush, vegetative growth, and other
objectionable or unsightly matter as often as may be necessary to comply with subsection C., and to use every precaution to
prevent the same from occurring, growing, or accumulating on such property.
F. Notice of violation and to abate; failure to comply; correction by city.
(1) If property within the city is in violation of this section, the city manager or his/her designee, shall give notice, in
accordance with this section, to an owner of property that such property is in violation of this section and the nature of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/448
the violation.
(2) If the owner of property for which such notice has been given does not comply with the terms of this section and
the demand for compliance as set forth in the notice within seven days of the notice of a violation, the city may:
(a) Do or cause to be done the work or make or cause to be made the improvements required to obtain
compliance with this section; and
(b) Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. The
city shall be entitled to reimbursement of all such expenses. All such expenses incurred in doing or in having
such work done shall be a charge to, and a personal liability of, such owner.
(3) The notice must be given:
(a) Personally to the owner in writing;
(b) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the
appraisal district in which the property is located; or
(c) If personal service cannot be obtained, by:
(i) Publication at least once;
(ii) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the primary building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
(iii) Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which
the violation relates.
(d) If notice is mailed to the owner of property in accordance with subsection (3)(b) of this section, and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not
affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. If notice is returned for reason other than “refused” or
“unclaimed” then notice shall be made as stated in subsection (3)(c) of this section.
(e) In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner of property by regular mail and a
posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the
same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the
date of the notice, the city, without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess
the expense against the property. If the violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the
one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the
city without notice may take any action permitted by subsections (2)(a) and (2)(b) of this section and assess its
expenses as provided by subsection H.
G. Additional authority to abate nuisance.
(1) The city may abate, without notice, weeds that:
(a) Have grown higher than 48 inches; or
(b) Are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person.
(2) Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds under this section; the city shall give notice to
the property owner in the manner required by subsection F. The notice shall contain:
(a) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(b) A description of the violations of this article that occurred on the property;
(c) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(d) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city's
abatement of the weeds.
(3) The city shall conduct an administrative hearing before municipal courts on the abatement of weeds under this
section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the
city a written request for a hearing.
(4) An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the
date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to
the city's abatement of the weeds.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/448
(5) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens
under subsection H. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under
subsection H.
(6) The authority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by subsection F.
H. Assessment of expenses; lien.
(1) Any and all expenses incurred by the city under or pursuant to this section may be assessed against the
property on which the work is done or improvements made in addition to an abatement administrative fee as
approved in the Master Fee Schedule for the city.
(2) In order to obtain a lien against the property, the city manager or his/her designee, must file a statement of
expenses with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. The lien statement shall be filed in the
real property records of the said county. The lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal
description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk.
(3) The lien obtained by the city is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten
percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
(4) The city shall charge a lien filing and release administrative fee for expenses incurred associated with the filing
and release of the lien, as approved in the Master Fee Schedule for the city.
(5) The lien is inferior only to:
(a) Tax liens; and
(b) Liens for street improvements.
(6) The city attorney may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest
due.
(7) The city attorney may foreclose a lien on property under this section in a proceeding relating to the property
brought under V.T.C.A., Tax Code Ch. 33, Subchapter E, as amended or superseded.
(8) The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by
the city in doing or causing to be done the work or making or causing to be made the improvements.
(9) The remedy provided by this section is in addition to any fines or civil penalties that may be assessed.
I. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city manager or his/her designee, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder any such person in the exercise of that person's duties under this section.
J. Violation; penalty for failure to comply.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section, and after any period of notice which
may be required hereunder, any such violation shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine in an amount not to
exceed $2,000.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or
failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for
abatement of a nuisance by the city and charging the cost of same against the owner of the property.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of any provision of this section which constitutes an immediate
danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such
purpose.
(Ordinance 74 adopted 5/24/66; Ordinance 1172, secs. 1, 2, adopted 4/18/94; Ordinance 1427, sec. 1, adopted 12/16/96;
Ordinance 3788, sec. 1, adopted 4/3/17)
Sec. 6-8. Personal property in streets and alleys.
All streets and alleys within the city limits which are open and used by the public shall be kept free and clear of personal property.
A time limit of 48 hours after being notified to remove such property shall be given offenders of this section. (Ordinance 43
adopted 12/9/59)
Sec. 6-9. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place within the corporate limits of the City of
Sachse. This section shall not apply to persons in their private residences, as guests of other persons in such other persons
private residences, or to persons within privately owned premises and not open to the public view. (Ordinance 283 adopted
2/23/81)
Sec. 6-10. Transportation and discharge of liquid waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/448
A. Definitions. In this section:
Approved means accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this section and given formal and official sanction by the approving
authority.
Approving authority means the director or any other official designated by the city manager of any city party to this section, or his
duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this section.
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease trap
waste, grit trap waste, and/or septage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including ground waters.
Disposal site means a permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or septage is processed, treated
and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which said waste will remain after closure.
Disposer means a person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste.
Generator means a person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste.
Grease trap means a water-tight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty,
liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer system to which the
receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
Grease trap waste means greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease
trap.
Grit trap means a water-tight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum based oil,
grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
Grit trap waste means petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair
and/or washing facilities.
Hazardous waste means any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
(1) Have any of the following characteristics; toxic, corrosive, and irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or
combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness;
(2) Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or
disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the
Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the
Federal “Solid Waste Disposal Act”, as amended by the “Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976” and as
may be amended in the future.
Liquid waste means water-borne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable
toilet and/or septic tank and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage.
Manager means the person conducting, supervision, managing or representing the activities of a generator, transporter, or
disposer.
Manifest system means a system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and
disposal of liquid waste.
Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Permit means the formal written document issued to a person by the approving authority authorizing collection of grease trap
waste, grit trap waste and septage.
Permittee means a person granted a permit under this section.
Person means an individual, corporation, (including governmental corporation) organization, governmental subdivision or agency,
federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body, business or business trust, partnership,
association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission, or any other legal entity.
POTW means publicly owned treatment works.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not normally admitted.
Septage means waste removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/448
Shall means the word “shall” wherever used in this section will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; “may” is permissive.
Special wastes any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical
characteristics or biological properties, require special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment.
Spill means the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and septage.
Tank means a device, designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage which is
constructed primarily of nonearthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic; to provide structural support for the containment.
TDH means Texas Department of Health.
TWC means Texas Water Commission.
Toxic waste means any liquid, semi-liquid, or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury once it
reaches a susceptible site in or on the body.
Transporter means a person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste.
Trip ticket means the shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information required by the
approving authority.
Vehicle means a mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway.
B. Permit required.
(1) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting
liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid waste and the approving
authority shall designate on the permit the liquid waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate vehicle
permit number is issued for each vehicle operated.
(2) A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application on a form provided by the approving authority.
(3) A person who desires to obtain a permit must submit to the approving authority at the time of application a
photocopy of the manager's drivers license. The approving authority shall be notified of manager employment
changes during the permit period and shall be provided a copy of the new manager's drivers license.
(4) The approving authority shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits for inspection by the approving
authority the vehicle the applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste and the vehicle is found by the authority to
be constructed and equipped in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(5) A permit is not transferable.
(6) A permit issued by the City of Sachse excludes the hauling of materials that are hazardous in nature.
(7) Transporters transporting hazardous wastes must have the applicable Texas Water Commission and U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) registration number and use the appropriate EPA manifest system.
(8) Each applicant must specify the disposal site or sites to be used for the authorized disposal of liquid wastes.
The approving authority shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period.
C. Fee and display of permit.
(1) The approving authority shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A
person shall pay a fee $25.00 for the first vehicle and $25.00 for each additional vehicle operated by the person. Each
permit must be renewed annually.
(2) The approving authority shall number permits consecutively, and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed
on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger the business
name, TDH registration number and the following:
X X X
The first three letters (X X X) shall represent the city issuing the permit. The blank space shall contain the permit
number. The permit holder shall place business name, TDH registration number and the vehicle permit number on
each vehicle before the vehicle is operated. The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt, or a copy, in the vehicle
at all times.
D. Liquid waste vehicles; maintenance.
(1) A liquid waste transporter shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/448
(a) Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections, and other
appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks;
(b) Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank;
(c) Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle odor-free at the beginning of each work day.
(2) The approving authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this
section, and he may authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The approving authority may
also revoke the permit for the improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked an
appeal may be filed by the transporter pursuant to subsection M of this section.
E. Liquid waste vehicles: inspection.
(1) A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the approving authority prior to the issuance of a
vehicle permit with qualifications as follows:
(a) Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of vehicle to transport liquid wastes; portable tanks
or other containers temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited;
(b) Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to tank and/or vehicle;
(c) Tank to be liquid tight;
(d) Tank to be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned;
(e) Piping, valves, and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean;
(f) Inlet, or opening of tank to be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling, transfer, or
during transport;
(g) Outlet connections to be constructed so that no liquid waste will leak, run, or spill out from the vehicle;
(h) Outlets to be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste handled and capable of controlling flow or
discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use;
(i) Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances to be of a design and type suitable for the
type of waste handled, capable of operation without spillage, spray, or leakage, and capable or being easily
disassembled for cleaning.
F. Responsibilities of a liquid waste transporter.
(1) Before accepting a load of liquid wastes for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the nature
of the material to be transported and that his equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without spillage, leaks,
or release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes, liquids, or other substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer,
the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
(2) A transporter with a City of Sachse liquid waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are
hazardous as defined in subsection A of this section in vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste.
(3) A transporter holding a City of Sachse permit must use a disposal site permitted and approved by the city, or the
state, or the federal government.
(4) A manifest system, consisting of a four-part trip ticket is used to document the generation, transportation and
disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the City of Sachse and shall be used as follows:
(a) The trip ticket books are purchased by the transporter from the City of Sachse, department of building
inspections, for an established fee;
(b) A transporter will complete one trip ticket for each location serviced, with the exception of
chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units. Chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their
own units shall be exempt from trip ticket requirement but shall be required to submit a monthly total of volumes
disposed and location of disposal to the approving authority;
(c) White copy of trip ticket signed by a transporter and generator at time of waste collection and yellow copy
maintained by generator;
(d) White copy of the trip ticket signed by disposer at time of disposal and pink copy maintained by disposer;
(e) Green copy of trip ticket maintained by transporter;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/448
(f) All completed trip ticket books containing the white copy of the trip ticket will be delivered at least monthly
by the transporter to the City of Sachse, department of building inspections;
(g) A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of two years.
G. Accumulation of liquid waste. A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or
is unsanitary or injurious to public health to accumulate upon property under his control.
H. Disposal of liquid waste.
(1) A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or exchanges liquid waste, except at a place
permitted by the city or the state or the federal government.
(2) A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges liquid waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary
sewer or an area that drains into the storm sewer system.
I. Responsibilities of liquid waste generator.
(1) A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from his premises by a liquid waste
transporter who holds a valid permit from the city and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved site for
disposal.
(2) A generator of liquid wastes shall not have hazardous wastes or liquid waste in combination with hazardous
waste removed from his premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit.
(3) A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when a load is picked up by the transporter and shall
keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of two years. The approving authority may inspect these records during
normal business hours.
(4) A generator shall:
(a) Install or provide collection device of size and type specified by approving authority;
(b) Maintain collection device in continuous, proper operation;
(c) Supervise proper cleaning of collection device;
(d) Report spills and accidents involving collection device to approving authority within 24 hours;
(e) Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by permitted transporter by
proper means.
J. Responsibilities of liquid waste disposers.
(1) A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation of liquid waste on his premises so that
rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health hazard.
(2) A liquid waste disposer shall:
(a) Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or federal law;
(b) Accept waste only from a permitted transporter;
(c) Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two years;
(d) Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or permit;
(e) Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the approving authority during normal
business hours.
K. Rules and regulations. The approving authority may promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this section and protect the public from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may undertake
immediate actions as may be necessary to protect the public from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may
amend any permit issued hereunder to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
L. Denial, suspension, revocation of permit.
(1) The approving authority may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under subsections
B through F of this section and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee:
(a) Is not qualified under subsections B through F of this section;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/448
(b) Has violated a provision of this section;
(c) Has failed to pay a required fee;
(d) Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements;
(e) Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the approving authority.
(2) After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When the
authority determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have been
taken to prevent future violations, and all required fees have been paid, he shall reinstate the permit.
(3) The approving authority may revoke for a period of one year or less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter
if the transporter or an employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this section, any rule or regulation
promulgated by the approving authority, or applicable provisions of the City Code or state law.
(4) A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport, or dispose of any waste materials
within the jurisdiction of the approving authority.
M. Appeal. If the approving authority denies the issuance of a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant, or
permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of this action and the right to an appeal. The applicant, or
permit holder, may appeal the decision of the approving authority in accordance with the Code of Appeal in the City of Sachse.
N. Responsibility of corporations or associations.
(1) In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this section to hold a corporation
or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or
association and within the scope of his office or employment.
(2) Any person, operator, or owner who shall violate any provisions of this section, or who shall fail to comply with
any provisions hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as provided for
in section 1-7 of the City of Sachse Code of Ordinances, and each violation and each day a violation continues, shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly.
(3) Any person found to be guilty of violating provision of this section shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate clean-up and proper disposal of said waste
materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed clean-up cost shall be levied by the city
against the guilty person.
(Ordinance 706 adopted 8/15/88)
Sec. 6-11. Solid waste regulations.
A. Rate schedule. Each residential user of the city's waterworks systems shall be charged a monthly rate for the collection of
solid waste materials as set forth in the city's Master Fee Schedule.
Customer Class.
(1) Residential service:
Per unit charge for monthly collection (Polycart)..... $7.31
Per unit charge for recyclable collection..... 2.43
Bulk trash fee..... 2.86
Franchise fee..... 0.50
Administrative fee..... 0.26
13.36
Sales tax..... 1.03
Total per unit monthly charge..... 14.39
Extra solid waste Polycart..... 6.34
(2) Commercial container service:
Per unit charge for monthly collection..... 24.62
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/448
Extra cart..... 10.57
(3) Individual bulk collection at hourly rate (billed direct to customer)..... 95.00
(4) Polycart replacement fee..... 75.00
B. Franchise fee required. As compensation for use of the city's streets and alleys all commercial solid waste contractors shall
pay to the City of Sachse the sum of three percent of the gross revenues received by the contractors for services provided to
customers in the city. Said payments shall be made quarterly and be due and payable no later than 15 days after the end of each
calendar quarter. Failure to pay the franchise fee on or before the due date shall result in a penalty of ten percent of the amount
due being added to the required payment.
C. Permit required. A permit shall be required for the movement of commercial solid waste disposal vehicles over any public
street of the city. Application for a permit shall be filed with the city secretary and shall include the following:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the solid waste disposal company.
(2) A descriptive statement of the kind, type and character of solid waste material to be transported.
(3) An affidavit, duly sworn before an officer authorized to administer oaths, showing the weight of said solid waste
vehicle, the maximum load to be transported thereon, and the total gross weight for which said vehicle is to be
permitted.
D. Regulation of commercial collection containers. All commercial/industrial owners or tenants are responsible (when not
already provided) to provide a refuse container for their business or property. For the purposes of this section a
commercial/industrial refuse container shall mean a metal refuse receptacle of commercial/industrial grade for the purpose of
disposal of trash and debris for commercial/industrial locations provided by a contractor. It is the responsibility of those
owners/tenants to contract their own contractor to provide such service. The contractor shall provide, at his own expense,
containers to the owner or occupant of any premises wherein he contracts for commercial storage and collection of solid waste,
subject to the following requirements:
(1) All such containers shall be constructed according to reasonable specifications which are acceptable to the city.
(2) All such containers shall be equipped with suitable covers to prevent blowing or scattering of refuse or garbage
while being transported for disposal of their contents.
(3) All such containers shall be maintained by the contractor so as to be in good repair and a sanitary condition.
(4) All such containers shall be clearly marked with the contractor's name and telephone number in letters not less
than two inches in height.
(5) All such containers shall be placed in designated, screened areas, when available.
(6) Containers will not be emptied if a safety hazard exists. Customer shall be contacted by contractor to remove
excess and pick up will be rescheduled when excess has been removed.
(7) All containers will be exchanged at reasonable intervals to maintain good appearance considering type of refuse
generated, normal wear, and weathering.
(8) The customer will be responsible for odor and insect control in and around containers.
E. Books and records of solid waste disposal contractors. All solid waste disposal contractors serving commercial customers in
the city shall maintain adequate books and records relating to the performance of their billing and accounting at their respective
place of business. These records shall be available for inspection by the city at any time during normal working hours. The city
may at any time, at its option, cause an audit, either formal or informal, to be made of that portion of the contractors books and
records which are used in the calculation of the franchise fee. The expense of such audit will be paid for by the city.
F. Scavenging of recyclable materials prohibited. No person or persons, other than the current resident of the property on
which recyclable materials are placed for collection or an authorized carrier shall remove, pick up, or transfer recyclable materials
left at curbside in any residential subdivision or at curbside at any family residence. Materials left at curbside in either specifically
marked recovery containers or any other type of container are to be picked up by a designated carrier for the purpose of removal
of recyclable materials. Each unauthorized removal of any item or items from residential subdivision location or single-family
residence location shall constitute a separate violation of this subsection.
G. Trash and bulk storage/pick-up.
(1) Placement of garbage containers/bags for collection where no alleys exists. Where a residence or duplex is not
served by an alley, public utility easement or other public way in the rear or alongside thereof, all containers shall be
placed just behind the curb line of the street abutting such property, but shall not be placed in the street or on the
sidewalk, or in any manner placed where the containers will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/448
(a) Where garbage is collected from the street curb line adjacent to the property, containers/bags shall be
placed there no earlier that 6:00 p.m. of the afternoon preceding the collection day and must be removed to a
point at the side or rear of the structure not later than 8:00 a.m. of the day following collection.
(b) Where special conditions exist which subject containers are so placed to overturn and which are subject to
spillage, the designee of the city may, at his/her discretion, require such containers subject to overturn and
spillage to be placed in a portable or moveable rack.
(c) If collection day falls on a holiday, trash will be collected the next day. Holidays that fall on Friday will be
collected on Saturday.
(d) If inclement weather should occur, pick-ups may be delayed or picked up the next day depending on road
conditions.
(2) Placement of oversize brush and bulky trash. Oversize brush and bulky trash (when accepted by contractor)
must be placed just behind the curb line of the street abutting the property from which the brush and trash originated,
or as otherwise designated by the city designee but must not be placed in the street or on the sidewalk or in any
manner that will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and must not be placed out for collection earlier than one
week preceding collection week.
(3) Placement of bundled or containerized brush and yard or household containerized trash. Bundled or
containerized brush and yard brush and yard or household containerized trash must be placed adjacent to the normal
place for collection of garbage or as designated by the city designee but must not be placed in the street or on the
sidewalk or in any manner that will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. If any residential customer shall desire
to dispose of any brush, bulky items, outside of the normal bulk pick-up, such customer shall notify contractor to
arrange extra pick up and that cost billed to the customer by the contractor. Storage of pick up shall not be placed out
earlier than one week before pick up date.
(Ordinance 951 adopted 5/20/91; Ordinance 972 adopted 8/19/91; Ordinance 1242 adopted 3/6/95; Ordinance 1720 adopted
3/20/00; Ordinance 1732 adopted 5/15/00; Ordinance 1761 adopted 6/19/00; Ordinance 2174, sec. I, adopted 11/7/05;
Ordinance 3123, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/09; Ordinance 3318, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/11; Ordinance 3419, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/12, eff.
10/1/12; Ordinance 3611, sec. 1, adopted 9/15/14)
Sec. 6-12. Stormwater runoff pollution control; stormwater management program, adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference for the city a stormwater management program, Phase II MS4s, dated February 2003,
attached to the enabling ordinance, Ordinance No. 1994, as Exhibit “A”, and made part hereof for all purposes, the same as if
fully copied herein. This program is adopted as the official policy of the city to provide stormwater runoff pollution control as
required by state and federal law. (Ordinance 1994, sec. 1, adopted 2/3/03)
CHAPTER 7
PERSONNEL
Sec. 7-1. Library board.
A. Created. There is hereby created a library board which shall be composed of seven members, and its officers shall consist
of a chairman, vice-chairman, and a secretary. Such officers shall be selected by the library board from among its members. All
members, including the presiding chairman, shall have the right of one vote each.
B. Appointment. The members of the library board shall be qualified voters of the State of Texas, and shall have resided in the
city limits of the City of Sachse for at least one year preceding their appointment. They shall be appointed by the governing body.
All vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment by the governing body.
C. Term of office. The members of the library board shall hold office for a term of two years and until their successors are duly
appointed.
D. Removal. The members of the library board shall be subject to removal from office by the governing body for any cause
deemed sufficient for their removal in the interest of the public service. If any member of the library board is absent from three
consecutive regular meetings, such member may be removed by the city council.
E. Purpose. The purpose and object of the library board is to act as an advisory board to the governing body relating to the
establishment and use of the library, the nature of the services rendered or to be rendered by the library, the manner in which the
library service may be coordinated with the services of other libraries which render services to citizens of the city and such other
matters as the governing body may deem beneficial to the city.
F. Powers and duties. Subject to the authority of the governing body of the City of Sachse, the library board shall have the
following duties and powers:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/448
(1) Hold monthly meetings at stated times. The majority of the library board shall constitute a quorum to transact
business.
(2) Receive suggestions and recommendations from the citizens of Sachse respecting the developments and
improvements of the library and library services and make recommendations to the governing body regarding the
same if deemed necessary or desirable.
(3) Consult with officials of the public school libraries and of the Dallas County Library regarding means of
coordinating library service to the city.
(4) Make periodic reports to the governing body concerning the work of the board and such special reports as may
be requested by the governing body.
(5) Carry out and perform such other reasonable regulations and requirements as may from time to time be made
and adopted by the governing body.
G. Designation as community library. The City of Sachse hereby accepts the designation of a community library as authorized
by the Texas state library and archives commission, pursuant to the authority invested in the said commission by the Texas
Library Systems Act, also being known as article 5446a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes. Such community library as herein
designated shall be a member of the Northeast Texas library system with its major resource center library at Garland, Texas.
H. Policies for use of the library community room.
(1) Reservations must be made by telephone or in person with the city librarian. Requests for the community room
will accepted no more than three months in advance.
(2) The community room is available for regular business meetings, special meetings and programs of established
Sachse nonprofit organizations. The city librarian has the final approval in granting permission to use the community
room for such activities.
(3) Other uses and special uses of the community room are subject to advance approval of the Sachse Library
Board.
(4) Attendance must be open to the entire community without regard to race, creed, color, age, socio-economic or
ethnic background.
(5) The user agrees to set up the room for the meeting or program and to accept responsibility for its cleanup
before departure from the library. A $25.00 cash deposit will be collected within one business day of the time the
reservation is made. The deposit will be returned if the following conditions are met:
(a) All tables and countertops must be wiped clean;
(b) All floors must be cleaned of debris;
(c) All food brought in must be removed;
(d) All trash cans must be emptied and trash carried out to the dumpster. Users will provide their own trash
bags;
(e) All restroom facilities must be left clean; and
(f) Under no circumstances will the users be allowed to attach anything to the walls or ceiling regardless of the
fastener used.
(6) No alcoholic beverages are allowed, inside or outside the building.
(7) For use of the community room outside library hours, the user must arrange, with the city librarian, to obtain and
return the key during library hours. The key must be returned by the next business day after use.
(8) Adult supervision must be maintained without interruption during any type of activity.
(9) The city reserves the right, after presentation, review, and decision by the library board, to refuse future use to
any group, organization, or individual who exhibits a lack of regard for the policies for use of the room, property, or
fixtures.
(Ordinance 84 adopted 11/22/66; Ordinance 307 adopted 11/30/81; Ordinance 426 adopted 7/1/85; Ordinance 938 adopted
4/1/91; Ordinance 1102 adopted 8/16/93; Ordinance 2167, sec. 1, adopted 10/3/05; Ordinance 2227, sec. 1, adopted 6/19/06;
Ordinance 3555, sec. 1, adopted 1/6/14)
Cross reference – See also City Charter, section 8.02.
Sec. 7-2. Park and recreation commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/448
A. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future.
Words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
City means the City of Sachse, Texas.
City park shall mean any public park located wholly within the city limits of the City of Sachse, Texas.
Curfew shall mean a regulation enjoining the withdrawal of usage of a public park or facilities of a public park wholly within the
city limits of the City of Sachse, Texas.
Facilities shall mean any facilities in a public park of the City of Sachse, Texas.
Park is a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city owned or used by the city, and devoted to
active or passive recreation, including all areas within public rights-of-way and adjacent to a public street or highway within the
city and which is planted with grass, shrubs or flowers.
Permission shall mean the permission secured by the individual from the park and recreation commission authority to utilize any
public park facilities for holding of recreational use under the provisions of this section.
Person is any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company or organization of any kind.
Vehicle is any conveyance employing wheels, track-laying devices, runners, fans or propellers, whether motor powered, animaldrawn,
or self-propelled. The term shall include trailers of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and
vehicles in the service of the city.
B. Created.
(1) There is hereby created a park and recreation commission consisting of seven members. The commission shall
elect a chairman from its membership who shall be a voting member.
(2) Members shall be qualified voters of the City of Sachse, Texas.
(3) Members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms.
(4) In the event the city council has not designated a replacement upon the end of a member's term, then that
member shall continue his membership until a replacement has been named.
(5) Members shall serve without compensation.
(6) A majority of the members of the commission in attendance at any meeting shall constitute a quorum. However,
a vacancy on the commission shall not be considered for this purpose.
(7) Whenever a member is absent from any meeting, it shall be so stated in the minutes of the meeting. In the
absence of a quorum for a meeting, the chairman will submit, or cause to have submitted, a report to the city council
stating all members absent.
(8) The city council, by a majority vote may remove any member of the commission at any time without cause.
(9) If a member of the park and recreation commission is absent from three consecutive regular meetings, such
member may be removed by the city council.
If a member of the park and recreation commission is absent from three of five consecutive regular meetings, without explanation
acceptable to a majority of the city council members, his office shall be declared vacant at the next regular meeting of the city
council by resolution. In addition, any member of the park and recreation commission who has been absent for four consecutive
regular meetings due to any reason shall have his seat declared vacant at the next regular meeting of the city council.
C. Officers.
(1) The commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary among its membership. The terms of office
for each shall correspond with the terms of the designated member.
(2) The chairman shall preside at all meetings when he is present. He shall implement or cause to have
implemented any practice or procedure in the calling of meetings, conduct of meetings and reporting of activities, that
he considers in the best interest of the commission and shall so inform the council or consult with them when
necessary or desirable. It shall be the responsibility of the chairman to request support activity needed from any
officer or employee of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the chairman to submit reports to the city council, when
necessary or requested, relative to participation by members, effectiveness of the support given by the officers or
employees of the city, and any other matter significant relative to the commission's functions. The chairman shall
represent the commission at public functions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/448
(3) The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the total affairs of the commission and, in the absence
of the chairman, shall assume all duties of the chairman.
(4) The secretary shall record the minutes of the meetings of the commission and shall assist the commission and
the chairman with the submission of reports and preparation of correspondence.
D. Powers and duties.
(1) The park and recreation commission shall have the duty of acting in an advisory capacity to the council in all
matters pertaining to parks and recreation. It shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and inspection of
the complete park and recreation system of the city, and shall advise the council as to present and future
maintenance, operation, planning, acquisition, development, enlargement and use policy of the city park and
recreation system, and naming of public facilities managed by the parks and recreation department.
(2) The commission shall study and encourage development of park and recreation areas and study and encourage
the development of wholesome recreation for all residents of the city.
(3) The commission shall recommend standards to the council for the acquisition of park and recreation areas and
facilities, and for the planning of programs and the securing of financial support.
(4) The commission shall undertake the preparation of a master planning guide of park and recreation facilities for
the city. Such guide shall be submitted for consideration and action by the council. The master planning guide shall be
reviewed at least annually and periodically updated by the commission. The commission shall review periodically all
recreation services within the city and shall make recommendations to the council of services that may be needed. In
the conduct of this activity, the commission shall, at the request of the city council, hold public hearings, provided that
notice is published in the official city newspaper at least ten days prior to such public hearing.
(5) The commission shall aid in the coordination of programs for parks and recreation with other governmental
agencies and voluntary organizations.
(6) The commission shall review the effectiveness of the support provided by the officers and employees of the city
and shall report to the council.
(7) The commission shall, prior to the 15th day of July of each year, review and study, and make recommendations
to the council for priorities of projects and activities considered to be desirable for the park and recreation department.
Such recommendations shall include the commission's views on the inclusion of improvements within the budget or
long-range capital improvement program of the city.
(8) The city council may from time to time adopt additional rules and regulations for the conduct of business by the
commission.
(9) The commission shall recommend to the city council rules and regulations governing the use of park and
recreation facilities. The commission shall make any other recommendations to the city council regarding park and
recreation matters that it considers advisable.
(10) The commission may solicit for the City of Sachse, revenues, gifts, bequests or endowments of money or
property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject to the approval and acceptance by the
city council.
(11) The commission shall meet monthly. Such meetings shall be conducted at a time, date and place designated
by the chairman and all members of the commission shall be notified at least three days in advance, as prescribed by
law. An agenda shall be posted at the city hall in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Law and meeting shall be
conducted under same.
E. Policies. Rules and regulations for utilization of all city parks and park facilities. The following rules shall apply to the
utilization of all municipal parks and park facilities:
(1) General rules and regulations.
(a) Any person(s) desiring to hold an occasional gathering in a city park shall be able to do so without
permission so long as said gathering does not create a public disturbance or nuisance, and so long as said
gathering disbands by curfew time described in paragraph (g).
(b) No unauthorized wheeled vehicles shall be allowed on park property outside of designated parking areas
and park roadways.
(c) The consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within the park area.
(d) Gambling is prohibited within the park area.
(e) Cutting or burning of any trees, shrubs, dead or alive located in the park area is prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/448
(f) All fires shall be confined to the city's barbecue grills. Open fires in other than these designated areas are
prohibited.
(g) Any person(s) shall not be allowed in, on, about or around a public park and/or facility between curfew of
11:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on week nights and 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. on weekends. No exceptions shall be
allowed without written permission from the parks and recreation commission.
(h) Smoking and tobacco use is prohibited in city parks.
(2) Rules and regulations regarding the use of ball fields.
(a) Any persons desiring to reserve the ball field(s) for recreational entertainment or team practice may do so
at the Sachse City Hall between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Reservations must be made in person.
Telephone reservations will be held until 4:00 p.m. at which time a team representative must appear in person to
complete the reservation form and make the required deposit. Reservations for practice will be accepted for the
current week only. Teams will be placed on a calendar on a first come basis and will receive a card stating the
date and time of reservation. Practice time will not exceed two hours.
(b) The use of lights will be required 15 minutes prior to sunset for the safety of all players. The amount of
these fees are specified in subsection (4), rules and regulations regarding fees and deposits.
(c) No games played on the ball fields in the city parks shall begin before 8:00 a.m. All lights shall be turned
off by 11:00 p.m. on Monday through Thursday and by 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. The use of the
lights on Sunday is prohibited.
(d) The Sachse police department will be provided a list of all persons/teams which have reservations to use
the ball field. A warning will be given first, and a citation may be issued for use of lights and/or ball fields without
proper authority.
(e) A clean up deposit, as scheduled in subsection (4)(a)(3) will be required for all tournaments. This clean up
deposit is to be applied to the city's cost for clean up in the event the sponsoring group fails to properly clean up
the reserved area. Deposits are to be paid two weeks in advance and will be refunded when the city manager's
designee inspects the field on the day following the tournament and finds that all litter generated by the group's
usage is placed in proper receptacles.
(f) All tournament cancellations must be received at the Sachse city hall in writing not less than one week prior
to the tournament date. Failure to cancel the fields one week prior to the tournament date will result in forfeit of
the deposit. Rainouts are the exception.
(3) Rules and regulations regarding the use of covered picnic facilities at city parks and the City Complex
Amphitheater.
(a) Covered picnic facilities and the City Complex Amphitheater are available for use by families, churches,
businesses, and organizations for public purposes or related park activities.
(b) Reservations for the use a covered picnic facility and the City Complex Amphitheater can be made only by
a Sachse resident who is a member of the group using the facility. Any person(s) desiring to reserve a covered
picnic facility or City Complex Amphitheater shall secure written permission from the parks and recreation
department at City Hall between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(c) The parks and recreation department has the right to refuse rental if the proposed event conflicts with
scheduled events or if the proposed use is perceived to be physically detrimental to the facilities and/or grounds
adjoining the facilities.
(d) Advance request for reservations may be accepted up to 12 months in advance of the requested date, and
may be made either in person or by telephone. Any reservation may not exceed seven consecutive days and
only one facility may be reserved. Entire reservation must be completed before additional dates or facilities may
be requested.
(e) Rental agreement must be signed and fees received two weeks after the request for reservation(s) is
submitted, if requested date is less than two weeks, rental agreement must be signed and fees received within
two days after the request has been made. Failure to do so will void the reservation and facility will be opened
for other requests.
(f) If lessee wished to cancel, written notice signed by lessee must be received one week in advance of
scheduled use date, and then refund in the amount of 75 percent will be made. If cancellation notice is given
less than one week, all rental fees will be forfeited. If cancellation is initiated by the parks and recreation
commission, due to park closing (i.e. flooding, damage, etc.) lessee will be notified as far in advance as
possible. Lessee will be permitted to reschedule, and, if not able to reschedule, full refund will be made.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/448
(g) A deposit in the amount scheduled in section (4)(b)(2) is required for keys to lights. Keys must be returned
the day following the reservation, or in the case of weekend, on the Monday following. If not returned as
specified, the deposit will be forfeited.
(h) Two chaperones (age 21 or over) shall be required for functions of 50 youth or less (age 18 and under)
with one additional chaperone for each additional 25 youth.
(i) All litter generated by group's usage shall be placed in proper receptacles.
(j) Lessee shall be responsible for payment of repair costs for damages to city property and equipment
caused as a result of group's use of facility.
(k) Lessee, as additional consideration, shall covenant promise and agree to hold the City of Sachse fully
harmless and indemnify it against any and all suits, damages, claims, causes or actions which may arise out of
use of the facility.
(l) Amphitheater is not available for reservations during city business hours including; office hours, city council,
boards and commission meetings, and other related city business.
(m) Amphitheater is available for the following events:
(i) Public use activity held by the city and/or a public use activity cosponsored by the city for the interest
of the community.
(ii) Private use by a person or persons for non-public use such as weddings, reunions, company picnics,
etc. This shall be a rental where the public is generally not invited and the activity is not advertised.
(n) Amphitheater may NOT be reserved for the following:
(i) Commercial use by an individual, organization, or company for the purpose of profit making. This
would include charging admission fees, or the selling of merchandise on the premises.
(o) Restroom facilities may be reserved for amphitheater rentals. Refer to the master fee schedule.
(p) Sound levels at the amphitheater are not to exceed those levels established by the city.
(4) Rules and regulations regarding ball field reservations and deposits.
(a) Ball field reservations and deposits shall be as follows:
(1) All sports associations or leagues approved by the City of Sachse requesting to reserve ball fields for
league or season games, practices and tournaments shall make all field preparations for games and
practices including dragging the fields, striping fields, setting up bases, scoreboards and goals for softball,
baseball, soccer and football. Clean up and placing trash in proper containers is required after every event.
(2) Requests to reserve ball fields for league or season play must be submitted to the city two weeks
before practice or league play begins. Proof of insurance and a complete season schedule must be
provided to the city parks department at the time of request.
(3) Fees for the use of ball fields shall be established by city council resolution.
(4) Light key deposit shall be $25.00.
(5) Establishment of user fees for recreation facilities.
(a) Fees for the use of park and recreation facilities shall be established by city council resolution.
(6) City approved Sports Associations or Leagues shall pay $25.00 light key deposit, $50.00 clean up
deposit and comply with stipulations in (4)(a)(1).
(b) Covered picnic facilities and deposits shall be as follows:
(1) Reservation fee shall be $25.00 per day.
(2) Light key deposit shall be $10.00.
(Ordinance 187 adopted 4/23/74; Ordinance 299 adopted 10/12/81; Ordinance 317 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 1050 adopted
11/2/92; Ordinance 1103 adopted 8/16/93; Ordinance 1824, secs. I, II, adopted 2/5/01; Ordinance 2002, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/03;
Ordinance 2227, sec. 2, adopted 6/19/06; Ordinance 3258, sec. 1, adopted 11/1/10; Ordinance 3344, sec. 1, adopted 11/21/11;
Ordinance 3410, sec. 1, adopted 9/4/12; Ordinance 3555, sec. 2, adopted 1/6/14)
Sec. 7-3. Emergency and disaster management.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/448
A. Organization. There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Sachse which shall be held by the
mayor in accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and
for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this section. He/she may delegate authority for execution of
these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the City of Sachse shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
B. Emergency management director powers and duties. The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management
director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city, and
an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend
to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development of an Emergency Management Plan for the City of Sachse, and shall
recommend that plan for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the
implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess
of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city
secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this section. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means
calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the
disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the Sachse Emergency Management Organization as well as the
training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management
organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, or federal emergency management
organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in carrying
out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of
the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of
an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the
county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including
acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and
other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during
a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.S. article 6889-7).
C. Emergency management plan. A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a
current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this section. As
provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency
Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the
recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and
agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/448
all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this section and have the effect of law during
the time of disaster.
D. Interjurisdictional program. The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Dallas and the
mayors of other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Dallas and shall
have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint
emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency
management insofar as said program may affect the City of Sachse.
E. Override. At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this section shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
F. Liability. This section is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety and neither the City of Sachse, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or
attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be liable for
any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises
who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Sachse a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to
inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons
during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in
interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
G. Commitment of funds. No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this section without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to
bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared
disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed necessary for
the protection of health, life, and property.
H. Offenses; penalties.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this section, or to do any act
forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this section.
(2) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Sachse, unless authority to do
so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(3) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the
termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by this section.
(4) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $500.00.
(Ordinance 861 adopted 1/23/90)
Sec. 7-4. Reserve battalion of police department.
A. Established. There is hereby established the Reserve Battalion of the City of Sachse police department which shall be a
voluntary force of reserve policemen hereafter referred to as the reserve battalion.
B. Under control of chief of police. The reserve battalion shall function under the general direction and control of the chief of
police subject to the supervision of the city manager, and also subject to such rules, regulations and orders as may be
promulgated from time to time by the chief of police in accordance with the authority vested in the chief of police by the city
charter or ordinances of the City of Sachse.
C. Composition. The reserve battalion shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and
whose applications for membership have been accepted and which have complied with all the rules, regulations and orders
provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof. It shall be composed of not more than 15 members.
D. Training. A police reserve applicant shall receive training from the Sachse police department in accordance with the
requirements of the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education (TCLEOSE) and shall apply for
certification by said commission as a reserve police officer. The names of reserve police applicants who have received
certification from the TCLEOSE shall be submitted to the city council by resolution. Upon approval by the city council, a reserve
police officer commission may be issued to each approved police reserve applicant by the city manager.
E. Call to active service by chief of police. Members of the reserve battalion shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police
and may be called into active service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to
preserve the peace and enforce the law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/448
F. Carry weapons at direction of chief of police. No person appointed to the reserve battalion may carry a weapon while
serving as a reserve police officer except at the express direction of the chief of police.
G. General powers of chief of police relative to reserve. The chief of police may, by order, establish rules and regulations to
govern the police reserve force, to fix specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may
change such orders from time to time and he may command members of the police reserve force to obey the instructions of
regular police officers in carrying out their orders.
H. Uniform and badges for members. The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the
police reserve battalion and direct the manner in which the same shall be worn.
I. Status as peace officer. Reserve officers of the reserve battalion shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of
official duties, subject at all times to the direction, control and supervisory authority of the chief of police.
(Ordinance 272 adopted 6/23/80)
Sec. 7-5. Police volunteers.
A. Purpose. An auxiliary to the police force to be known as the police volunteers is hereby established, such auxiliary to be
separate and distinct from the police department.
B. General powers of the chief of police.
(1) The chief of police shall be the head of the police volunteers, and members of the police volunteers shall be
under the authority, control and command of the chief of police subject to this article.
(2) The police volunteers shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the auxiliary whose
application for membership has been approved by the chief of police. The police volunteers shall be composed of
members appointed by the chief of police.
(3) The chief of police may establish rules and regulations to govern the police volunteers.
(4) The chief of police may terminate membership in the police volunteers at any time for any cause; and a member
may resign at any time by written notice to the chief of police.
(5) A list of eligible applicants shall be maintained by the chief of police from which the chief of police shall make
appointments to the police volunteers.
C. Application; qualifications.
(1) Application for membership in the police volunteers shall be filed with the police chief on a form provided by the
police department.
(2) Each applicant for membership in the police volunteers shall either be a resident of the city, or an employee of a
business located in the city who works in the city. An applicant for membership shall furnish satisfactory proof of good
moral character and physical ability to perform the duties of the position.
D. Duties.
(1) The duties of the members of the police volunteers shall at all times be under the direction and control of the
chief of police.
(2) The police volunteers shall not assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of the
law but shall assist the regular members of the police department in nonlaw enforcement duties including
administrative, clerical and designated field duties, as may be assigned by the chief of police, from time to time.
(Ordinance 3774, sec. 1, adopted 12/5/16)
Editor's note – Ordinance 3774, sec. 1, adopted December 5, 2016, renumbered the former secs. 7-5–7-9 as 7-6-7-10, and enacted a new
sec. 7-5 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.
Sec. 7-6. Municipal court.
A. Fee for granting defensive driving course. The municipal court of the City of Sachse, Texas, may at its option, require a
person requesting and being granted a defensive driving course, to pay a fee to the city, not to exceed $10.00.
B. Special expense fee for dismissal of certain traffic cases. The municipal court of the City of Sachse, Texas, may at its
option, require a special expense payment for services performed by the court, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 or the actual
expense, whichever is less, for dismissal of traffic cases which state law requires dismissal because of actions taken by
defendant subsequent to the alleged defense, including no insurance and no drivers license cases.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/448
C. Warrant fees. The municipal court of the City of Sachse, Texas, may at its option, require a special expense payment, for
issuance and service of a warrant for an offense under section 38.11, Penal Code or under section 149, Uniform Act Regulating
Traffic on Highways (article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) in an amount not to exceed $25.00.
(Ordinance 606 adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance 607 adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance 608 adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance 3774, sec. 1, adopted
12/5/16)
Note – See the editor's note to sec. 7-5.
Sec. 7-7. Texas municipal retirement system.
The city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all employees of all departments now existing or
hereafter established participate in the Texas municipal retirement system as provided in subtitle G, title 110B, Public Retirement
Systems, V.T.C.S. (Ordinance 649 adopted 1/18/88; Ordinance 664 adopted 4/4/88; Ordinance 3774, sec. 1, adopted 12/5/16)
Editor's note – Ordinances providing for administration of the Texas municipal retirement system have been saved from repeal, but such
ordinances have not been codified herein. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city secretary.
Note – See the editor's note to sec. 7-5.
Sec. 7-8. Social security.
The city council acting for and on behalf of the City of Sachse shall enter into all necessary agreements with the employees
retirement system of Texas for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Federal Old Age Survivors and Disability
Insurance Program (Social Security). The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all
necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and city. The city secretary is hereby directed to be
the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and reports as required by the employees retirement
system of Texas. The agreement shall be applicable to all employees except elected officials and fee basis positions. (Agreement
of January 26, 1971; Ordinance 3774, sec. 1, adopted 12/5/16)
Note – See the editor's note to sec. 7-5.
Sec. 7-9. Drug abuse policy.
A. Purpose and scope. The objectives of the city's drug abuse policy are to develop a drug and alcohol-free workplace, ensure
a safe and productive workplace, and provide educational materials to employees.
B. City's policy. Any of the following actions engaged in by an employee regardless of position or rank may subject that
employee to disciplinary action including immediate termination:
(1) Using, selling, purchasing, transferring, possessing, manufacturing, or storing an illegal drug or drug
paraphernalia, or attempting or assisting another to do so, while in the course of employment or engaged in a city
sponsored activity, or on city premises, in a city owned, leased or rented vehicles, or on city business.
(2) Working or reporting to work, conducting city business or being on city premises or in a city-owned, leased or
rented vehicle while under the influence of an illegal drug, alcohol, unauthorized prescription drug, inhalant or in an
impaired condition.
(3) Switching, adulterating or attempting to tamper with any sample submitted for medical testing, or otherwise
interfering or attempting to interfere with the testing process.
C. Employee treatment assistance. Employee treatment activities such as counseling and referral appointments will be treated
on the same basis as other personnel business or health matters. Time off to participants in these activities is governed by the
City of Sachse Personnel Policy Manual-section 3. The city also provides health insurance coverage which allocates a lifetime
maximum amount for drug/psychiatric treatment.
D. Drug and alcohol testing. Employee testing for drugs and/or alcohol may be required by a department head under the
following circumstances:
(1) During routine physical examinations such as annual physical or return to work physical.
(2) Whenever an employee is suspected of having caused or contributed to an on-the-job accident.
(3) Whenever there is reasonable suspicion that drugs or alcohol is affecting job performance and conduct in the
work place.
(4) Whenever an applicant has been selected to fill any position of employment with the city.
When an immediate supervisor and the next higher level of management determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that one or more of the above circumstances exists, the city reserves the right to require an immediate drug and/or
alcohol test. Refusal to participate in such tests may result in immediate dismissal.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/448
Sample testing procedures shall conform to scientifically accepted analytical methods and procedures and shall include
confirmation of any positive test results by gas chromatography, mass spectroscopy, or other comparably reliable analytical
method before the results of any test may be used as a basis for any action. Both screening and confirmatory urine testing will
follow the guidelines adopted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The city will use only laboratories which
are certified under the appropriate federal and/or state regulation and follow the guidelines adopted by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services for workplace drug testing. In the administration of this testing compatibility and personal privacy will
be considered to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ordinance 962 adopted 7/15/91; Ordinance 3774, sec. 1, adopted 12/5/16)
Note – See the editor's note to sec. 7-5.
Sec. 7-10. Employee policy manual adopted by reference.
The City of Sachse Employee Policy Manual attached hereto as Exhibit “A” is hereby adopted as the official employee manual for
the City of Sachse. (Ordinance 3139, sec. 1, adopted 5/18/09; Ordinance 3773, sec. 1, adopted 12/5/16; Ordinance 3774, sec. 1,
adopted 12/5/16)
*Exhibit “A” is hereby adopted by reference for the city and made part hereof for all purposes, the same as if fully copied herein.
Note – See the editor's note to sec. 7-5.
CHAPTER 8
SUBDIVISIONS*
Sec. 8-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Sachse Subdivision Ordinance.” (Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted
7/2/12)
Sec. 8-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the City Charter, the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, including
Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. (Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-3. Intent and purpose.
A. Intent. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations, it is the intention of the city council that the
principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the platting and developing of
subdivisions in the City of Sachse and, where other ordinances of the city are more restrictive in their requirements, such other
ordinances shall control.
B. Purpose.
(1) Promote and develop the utilization of land in a manner to assure the best possible community environment in
accordance with the adopted plans and regulations of the City of Sachse;
(2) Guide and assist the developers in the correct procedures to be followed and to inform them of the standards
which shall be required;
(3) Protect the public interest by supervising the location, design, class and type of streets, sidewalks, utilities and
essential areas and services required; and
(4) Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the city who divides the tract in two or more parts to
lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the city, to lay out a building lot or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys,
squares, parks or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots
fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts must have a plat of the subdivision prepared and
approved according to this chapter. A division of a tract under this chapter includes a division regardless of whether it is made by
using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other
executing contract, or by using any other method. A division of land does not include a division of land into parts greater than five
acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is dedicated.
D. The procedure for approving a plat requires a preliminary plat and final plat. The requirement for a preliminary plat may be
omitted with the approval of the city manager. Except as otherwise permitted, the approval of a preliminary plat by the planning
and zoning commission and city council is required for the construction of public improvements on the property. The preliminary
plat and the associated engineering plans for the property may be amended during construction, with only major changes
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/448
requiring re-approval by the planning and zoning commission. Upon completion of the required public improvements, or the
provision of an improvement agreement, the owner may submit a corrected final plat for the subdivision. Lots may be sold and
building permits obtained after approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission, and the recording thereof.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all Subdivisions of land within the corporate limits and within the extra territorial jurisdiction of the City
of Sachse, Texas, and for other areas as may be authorized by Chapter 212 of Local Government Code. (Ordinance 3401, sec.
1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-5. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
City. The City of Sachse, Texas.
City council. The governing body of the City of Sachse, Texas.
City engineer. Person employed by the city as the director of public works and engineering or their designee.
City manager. Person employed by the city as city manager.
City staff. The director of development services or designee and other officials of the city designated by the city manager.
Comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan of the city adopted by the city council, as amended from time to time. The
comprehensive plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, streets, parks and
other public and private developments and improvements.
Comprehensive zoning ordinance. The city comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended.
Development. The subdivision of land and/or the construction or reconstruction of one or more buildings or the structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any buildings or structures on a lot, tract, or tracts of land.
Developer. The owner of property or the person authorized by the owner to develop the property.
Director of development services. Person employed by the city as director of development services.
Easement. One or more of the property rights granted by the owner to and/or for the use by the public or another person or entity.
Engineer. A person licensed as a professional engineer duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice
Act, as amended, to practice the profession of engineering.
Engineering design manual or City of Sachse engineering design manual. The current engineering design manual adopted
by the city, and as such engineering design manual is thereafter amended.
Engineering plans. The drawings and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer submitted to the city and
required for plat approval.
Improvement agreement. A contract entered into by the developer and the city by which the developer promises to complete the
required public improvements within the subdivision within a specific time period following final plat approval in accordance
with this chapter. An improvement agreement may be entitled as a facilities agreement, developer's agreement or other similar
contract title as entered into by the developer and the city.
Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land under one ownership having frontage on a public street, and either occupied or intended
to be occupied by one main building and the required parking, or a group of main buildings, and accessory buildings, which parcel
of land is designated as a separate and distinct tract and building site.
Owner. Fee simple title owner of the land comprising a subdivision or the owner's authorized representative.
Plat. The graphic representation of a subdivision, resubdivision, combination of lots or tracts, or recombination of lots or tracts.
Plat includes, a replat, minor plat and amending plat.
Plat, amending. A plat as described by the Texas Local Government Code Section 212.016, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/448
Plat, final. The final plat of a proposed development submitted for approval by the planning and zoning commission prepared in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and requested to be filed with the appropriate County Clerk of either Dallas County
or Collin County.
Plat, minor. A plat which contains four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street
or extension of municipal facilities as described by the Texas Local Government Code Section 212.0065, as amended.
Plat, preliminary. The initial plat or working draft map or plan of a proposed development submitted to the planning and zoning
commission and the city council for approval.
Planning and zoning commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Sachse, Texas.
Property owner. The record title holder of the lot or tract.
Shall. The word “shall” is always mandatory and nondiscretionary.
Storm drainage master plan. The Master Plan for the City of Sachse for storm drainage facilities adopted by ordinance from
time-to-time, as amended.
Street. A public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, private place or however otherwise designated, other than an alley or driveway.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or which is attached to something
having a location on the ground.
Subdivision. The division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits, or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction,
in two or more parts, or the identification of a single tract, for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any
addition to the city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts
intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys,
squares, parks, or other parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of creating building sites. A division of a tract includes
a division regardless of whether it is made by using metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a
deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. Subdivision includes resubdivision,
but it does not include the division of land into parts greater than five acres, where each part has access and no public
improvement is dedicated.
Substantial completion. Shall mean that stage in the progression of the work when the work is sufficiently complete in
accordance with the approved construction plans that the city can enjoy beneficial use or occupancy of the public improvement
and can utilize the public improvement for its intended purpose, even though minor miscellaneous work and/or adjustment may be
required.
Substantial completion letter. A letter prepared by the city engineer to the developer certifying that the public improvements are
substantially complete and allowing the developer to submit the final plat to the city for staff review.
Surveyor. A registered professional land surveyor as authorized by state law to practice the profession of surveying as authorized
by the Land Survey Practices Act, as amended.
Temporary improvement. Improvements built and maintained by an owner during construction of the development of the
subdivision or addition and prior to the acceptance of the performance bond or improvements required for the short term use of
the property.
Thoroughfare. Any planned or existing roadway within the city.
Thoroughfare plan. The thoroughfare plan of the city and area traffic circulation plans included in the comprehensive plan, as it
may be amended from time to time.
Vicinity location map. A small vicinity location map which shows sufficient streets, collector and arterial street names, and major
features of the surrounding area to locate the area being subdivided.
Wastewater master plan. The Master Plan for the City of Sachse for wastewater facilities adopted by ordinance from time-totime,
as amended.
Water master plan. The Master Plan for the City of Sachse for water facilities adopted by ordinance from time to time, as
amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/448
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3594, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-6. Filing fees.
A. Preliminary and final plats.
(1) Filing fees for plats as shown in the master fee schedule established by resolution of the city council from timeto-
time shall be paid by the developer at time of application.
(2) Plat recordation fees which are charged by Dallas County and/or Collin County shall be paid by the developer
directly to the appropriate county when the developer records the plat with that county.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-7. Waivers.
A. Authorization. The city council may authorize a waiver from these regulations when in its opinion undue hardship will result
from requiring strict compliance. In granting waiver, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or
desirable to the public interest and making the findings herein below required. The city council shall take into account the nature
of the proposed use of land involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in
the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such waiver upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety,
convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No waiver will be granted unless the city council finds:
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of
the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of their land.
(2) That the waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant,
that the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other
property in the area.
(3) That the granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly Subdivision of other lands in the
area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such finding of the city council together with the specific facts
on which such findings are based shall be incorporated under the official minutes of the city council meeting at which
such waiver is granted. Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship
to the sub-divider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Editor's note–Former section 8-7 pertaining to previously filed applications and deriving from Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12, was
deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19. The remaining sections were renumbered.
Sec. 8-8. Penalty and enforcement.
A. Any individual (including any officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of any individual, firm, association or corporation)
who shall violate any provision of this chapter within the corporate limits or within the extra territorial jurisdiction of the city, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00, and each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-9. Preliminary platting procedures.
A. Pre-development meeting. A pre-development meeting shall be held between the applicant and city staff prior to submission
of a preliminary plat application for the purpose of advising the applicant as to the general restrictions, requirements, and other
planning and engineering matters applicable to the plat. If an issue arises during the pre-development meeting that directly
concerns a city department not represented, the appropriate city staff will be contacted.
B. Generally.
(1) The developer shall submit the required number of copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision
with the city for submission to the planning and zoning commission and include the required filing fees and tax
certificates showing all taxes have been paid on the property being platted.
(2) After the pre-development meeting, the developer shall file the required number of copies of the preliminary plat
of the proposed subdivision with the city for submission to the planning and zoning commission, and include the
required filing fees and tax certificates showing all taxes have been paid on the property being platted.
(3) The following notice shall be stamped on the face of each preliminary plat: “Preliminary Plat - for inspection
purposes only and in no way official or approved for record purposes.”
(4) Preliminary plats shall be distributed by city staff to city departments. The owner shall be provided an
opportunity to attend a developer/city staff meeting for the purpose of notifying the developer of necessary
corrections.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/448
(5) The development services department shall accumulate the comments of the city departments, and conduct a
developer/city staff meeting to report the comments and requested corrections to the developer. The developer shall
be allowed to make comment or make required corrections and submit the corrected preliminary plat to the
development services department for submission to the planning and zoning commission. The corrected preliminary
plat shall be submitted within 30 days of the date the original preliminary plat was officially filed and prior to the
meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which such preliminary plat is scheduled for consideration. Upon
timely receipt, the director of development services shall submit the corrected preliminary plat to the planning and
zoning commission.
(6) A written report shall be prepared by city staff and submitted to the planning and zoning commission stating the
review comments of the preliminary plat noting any unresolved issues.
(7) The actions of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat. One
copy shall be returned to the developer and the other retained in the files of the development services department.
(8) Approval of a preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission and/or the city council is not approval of
the final plat but is an expression of approval of the layout shown subject to satisfaction of specified conditions. The
preliminary plat serves as a guide in the preparation of a final plat.
C. Standards for approval. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless the following standards have been met:
(1) The preliminary plat conforms to the applicable zoning and all other requirements of this chapter and the City
Code of Ordinances; and
(2) A tree management plan has been approved in accordance with the regulations in the City Code of Ordinances.
D. Data requirement. All preliminary plat applications shall include the following at the time of submittal:
(1) A preliminary drainage plan and study, including the 100-year floodplain, and any existing or proposed drainage
easements affecting the plan;
(2) Preliminary water extension and layout plan;
(3) Preliminary sanitary sewer extension and layout plan;
(4) The number of copies, page sizes and specific data requirements shall be in accordance with application
guidelines provided by the development services department.
(5) A preliminary plat shall not be determined to be complete if it does not conform to the requirements of this Code.
A preliminary plat shall be considered filed on the date the application is considered complete.
E. Effect of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission or city council constitutes
authorization for the property owner to submit engineering plans for review by the city engineer.
F. Changes or alterations to approved preliminary plat. No previously approved preliminary plat may be changed or altered,
except to bring the plat in conformance with the conditions and requirements stipulated by the planning and zoning commission
and/or city council. Minor changes as outlined below shall be permitted at the discretion of the director of development services:
(1) The proposed internal street and/or circulation system and alignments may be altered if minor in nature.
Changes to street classifications, connections to perimeter streets, or extensions to the subdivision's perimeter to unsubdivided
property shall not be considered minor alterations.
(2) A net increase, not to exceed three percent of the total residential lots (rounded to the nearest whole number) in
the overall lot yield of the approved preliminary plat may be made, except as elsewhere prohibited by these
regulations.
(3) If the director of development services determines that the proposed changes are minor, a revised preliminary
plat may be approved administratively. A revised preliminary plat shall include all property within the boundary of the
original preliminary plat. A revision to a preliminary plat shall not affect the expiration date of the plat and shall carry
the same expiration as outlined below.
G. Expiration of preliminary plat approval.
(1) The approval of a preliminary plat expires 24 months after the date of approval unless a final plat is submitted
and has received approval by the planning and zoning commission for the property within such period, or the period is
extended by the director of development services in accordance with the extension and reinstatement guidelines
contained herein.
(2) If the time period is not extended, or a final plat is not submitted and approved by the planning and zoning
commission within the 24-month-period, the preliminary plat approval shall be null and void and the owner shall be
required to submit a new plat for the property subject to the then existing zoning, subdivision and other regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/448
H. Extension and reinstatement of expired preliminary plat.
(1) Prior to the expiration of preliminary plat approval, the time for filing of the application for the final plat may be
extended at the written request of the subdivider. The first filing extension (not to exceed 90 days) may be granted by
the director of development services. Any further requests for extension shall be considered by the planning and
zoning commission.
(2) In determining whether to grant such request, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the
reasons for lapse, the ability of the owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval and the
extent to which newly adopted zoning and subdivision regulations shall apply to the preliminary plat. The planning and
zoning commission may extend or reinstate the preliminary plat or deny the request, in which instance the owner must
submit a new preliminary plat application for approval.
I. Waiver of requirement for preliminary plat. A preliminary plat is not required when a minor plat or conveyance plat is
submitted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-10. Final platting procedures.
A. Generally.
(1) After approval of the preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission and, upon substantial completion
of the required public improvements and issuance of a substantial completion letter from the city engineer to the
developer or the provision of an improvement agreement as allowed herein, the owner shall submit a final plat for the
property for approval.
(2) The final plat shall conform substantially to the approved preliminary plat and, if desired by the developer, may
cover only a phase of the approved preliminary plat; provided, however, such phase conforms to all the requirements
of this chapter and the approved preliminary plat indicated the phasing of such development.
(3) The final plat shall be distributed to the city departments and other agencies for review and comment in the
same manner as a preliminary plat.
(4) The development services department shall accumulate the comments of the city departments and agencies
and conduct a developer/city staff conference to report the comments and requested corrections to the developer. The
developer shall make comments or make the required corrections and submit the corrected final plat to the
development services department for submission to the planning and zoning commission.
(5) The final plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission at the next available meeting with any
appropriate comments and recommendations by the development services department. The planning and zoning
commission shall act on the final plat within 30 days after the official filing date. If no action is taken by the planning
and zoning commission within such period, the final plat shall be deemed approved. A certificate showing the filing
date and failure to take action thereon within the 30-day period shall on request be issued by the planning and zoning
commission, which shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement of approval. The planning and zoning
commission shall be the final approval authority for final plats. The denial of approval of a final plat shall not be
appealable to the city council.
(6) The planning and zoning commission shall consider the final plat, including all proposals by the owner with
respect to the dedication of right-of-way for public use, the construction of utilities, streets, drainage and other
improvements.
(7) The approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission shall authorize the planning and zoning
commission chairperson to execute the certificate of approval on the final plat.
(8) The approved final plat shall then be filed of record in the plat records of the appropriate county clerk.
(9) Final plats disapproved by the planning and zoning commission shall be returned to the developer by the
development services department.
(10) In the event a final plat is approved by the planning and zoning commission for a subdivision in phases, the
final plat of each phase shall carry the same name throughout the entire subdivision, but bear a distinguishing letter,
number or subtitle. Lot and block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though
such subdivision may be finally approved in phases.
B. Standards for approval. No final plat shall be approved unless the following standards have been met:
(1) The final plat substantially conforms to the preliminary plat;
(2) The city engineer has issued a substantial completion letter indicating required public improvements have been
substantially constructed, and/or an improvement agreement has been approved by the city for the subsequent
completion of the public improvements;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/448
(3) The final plat conforms to the applicable zoning and all other requirements of this chapter;
(4) Provisions have been made for adequate public facilities under the terms of this chapter; and
(5) All required fees have been paid.
C. Data requirement.
(1) The subdivider shall submit to the development services department the necessary copies of the final plat and
required supporting data prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in the application guidelines provided
by the development services department. All documents shall be signed and dated by the applicant or person
preparing the plans.
(2) The final plat shall be prepared and signed by a registered professional land surveyor.
(3) A final plat shall not be determined to be complete if it does not conform to the requirements of this Code. A final
plat shall be considered filed on the date the application is considered complete.
D. Execution and recordation.
(1) When an improvement agreement and security are required, the chairperson of the planning and zoning
commission shall endorse approval on the final plat after the improvement agreement and security have been
approved by the city attorney and all the conditions pertaining to the final plat have been satisfied. A final plat for
which an improvement agreement has been approved shall contain the following notation on the final plat:
“This Subdivision is subject to an Improvement Agreement pursuant to the City of Sachse, Texas Subdivision
Ordinance. All or some of the public infrastructure were not constructed and accepted by the City of Sachse, Texas
prior to approval of this Final Plat.”
(2) When substantial completion of the public improvements is required prior to recordation of the Final Plat, the
Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall endorse approval on the Final Plat after all conditions of
approval have been satisfied and all public improvements are substantially completed as provided for a written
substantial completion letter by the City Engineer. There shall be written evidence that the required public
improvements have been substantially completed and have been completed in a manner satisfactory to the City as
shown by a letter signed by the City Engineer stating that the necessary dedication of public lands and substantial
completion of public improvements have been accomplished.
(3) The property owner shall be responsible for filing the final plat with the appropriate county clerk. Simultaneously
with the filing of the final plat, the property owner shall record such other agreements of dedication and legal
documents as shall be required to be recorded by the planning and zoning commission and the city attorney. The final
plat, bearing all required signatures, shall be recorded after final approval and within five working days of its receipt.
One copy of the recorded final plat, with street addresses assigned, will be forwarded to the owner by the city staff.
(4) Approval of a final plat shall certify compliance with the regulations of the City of Sachse pertaining to the
subdivision. An approved and signed final plat may be filed with the appropriate county clerk as a record of the
Subdivision and may be used to reference lots and interests in property thereon defined for the purpose of
conveyance and development as allowed by these regulations.
E. Expiration of final plat approval.
(1) If public improvements for a subdivision have not been constructed and accepted by the city and the
corresponding final plat for said subdivision has not been filed in the appropriate county plat records within two years
after the date of final plat approval by the planning and zoning commission, said final plat shall be null and void and
shall conclusively be deemed to be withdrawn without further action by the city. This provision shall not apply to final
plats approved by the city prior to the effective date of this section.
(2) An approved, unexpired final plat may upon written request by the subdivider be extended once by the director
of development services for a period not to exceed 90 days. The planning and zoning commission upon written
request, may extend approval once for a period not to exceed 12 months provided:
(a) Good cause is shown by the developer; and
(b) There has been no significant change in development conditions affecting the subdivision; and
(c) The final plat continues to comply with all applicable, regulations, standards and this chapter.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3594, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-11. Vacating plats, replats and amending plats.
A. Vacating plats.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/448
(1) The owners of the tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. The
plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the
manner prescribed for the original plat.
(2) If lots have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots
in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat.
(3) The planning and zoning commission and city council shall disapprove any vacating instrument which abridges
or destroys public rights in any of the public uses, improvements, streets or alleys.
(4) Upon approval and recording with the appropriate county clerk, the vacated plat has no effect.
B. Re-platting without vacating preceding plat.
(1) A re-plat of a subdivision or part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlled over the preceding plat
without vacation of that plat if the replat:
(a) Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being platted;
(b) Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
(c) Is approved, after a public hearing on the matter, by the planning and zoning commission.
(2) An application for a replat shall follow the same procedure required for preliminary and final plats.
C. Additional requirements for certain replats.
(1) In addition to compliance with section 8-11.B., a replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to
the requirements of this section if:
(a) During the preceding five years any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent
zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot; or
(b) Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two
residential units per lot.
(2) Notice of the public hearing as required in section 8-11.B. shall be given before the 15th day before the date of
the public hearing by:
(a) Publication in the official newspaper; and
(b) By written notice, with a copy of Texas Local Government Code Section 212.015(c) attached, forwarded to
the owners of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within 200 feet of the lots to be replatted as
indicated on the most recently approved city tax rolls of the property upon which the replat is requested.
(3) If the proposed re-plat requires a waiver and is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed replat
must receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present at the
meeting of the planning and zoning commission. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by owners of at least
20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed re-plat and
extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the planning and zoning
commission prior to the close of the public hearing.
(4) In computing the percentage of land area under section 8-11.C.(3) above, the area of streets and alleys shall be
included.
(5) Compliance with section 8-11.C.(3) and (4) is not required for approval of a replat of part of a preceding plat if
the area to be re-platted was designated or reserved for other than single or duplex family residential use by notation
on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to the plat.
D. Administrative approval of certain amending plats, minor plats and re-plats.
(1) The director of development services is authorized to approve the following:
(a) Amending plats described by section 212.016 Texas Local Government Code;
(b) Minor plats involving four or fewer lots fronting an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new
street or extension of municipal facilities; and
(c) A replat under section 212.0145 Tex. Loc. Gov't Code that does not require the creation of any new street
or the extension of municipal facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/448
(2) The director of development services may for any reason elect to present an amending plat, minor plat or re-plat
meeting the requirements of section 8-11.D.(1) above to the planning and zoning commission for approval.
(3) Any amending plat, minor plat or re-plat meeting the requirements of this section which the director of
development services fails or refuses to approve shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for
approval.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-12. Conveyance plats.
A. Generally. A conveyance plat is a boundary survey drawn as a plat. Easements, dedications and reservations may be
recorded on a conveyance plat. Engineering plans are not required to process a conveyance plat, unless the developer plans to
construct limited improvements on the property. Development fees are not collected at the time of conveyance plat approval.
B. Purpose. The purpose of a conveyance plat is to subdivide land and to provide for recordation of same, for the purpose of
conveying (i.e., selling) the property without developing it. A conveyance plat may be used to convey the property or interests
therein; however, a conveyance plat does not constitute approval for any type of development on the property. A Conveyance
Plat is an interim step in the subdivision and development of land.
C. Applicability. A conveyance plat may be used in lieu of a final plat to record the subdivision of property in the following
instances:
(1) To record the remainder of a parent tract that is larger than five acres, and that is created by the record platting
of a portion of the parent tract, provided that the remainder is not intended for immediate development; or
(2) To record the subdivision of a property into parcels, five acres or smaller in area, that are not intended for
immediate development, provided that each parcel has direct access to all required public improvements (water,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer) via dedicated easements or direct adjacency to existing infrastructure, each parcel has
frontage on an existing public right-of-way, and each parcel has frontage on an existing public right-of-way, and the
proposed lot meets the minimum lot dimension requirements as stipulated in this Code.
D. Certification. The conveyance plat shall contain a certification note on the plat face, as follows:
“This Conveyance Plat shall not convey any rights to Development or guarantee of public utilities, public or private
access, or issuance of addressing and permits, without compliance with all Subdivision rules and regulations and the
approval and recording of a Final Plat. A Conveyance Plat is filed for record in the appropriate County Clerk office
upon administrative approval by the Director of Community Development.”
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-13. Public sites and open spaces.
A. Location of public sites. The sub-divider shall give consideration to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other
areas for public use so as to conform with the recommendations of the city council. Any provision for schools, parks, etc. shall be
indicated on the preliminary plat.
B. Development adjacent to public sites. In cases where a subdivision contains or abuts a school, park or playground, the
subdivider shall dedicate one-half plus five feet of a normal street but not less than 30 feet, and provide for one-half the cost of
paving and the full cost of all the utilities necessary. The interested agency shall provide the necessary right-of-way for the
remainder of the street.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-14. Completion and maintenance of public improvements.
A. Construction plan procedure.
(1) General application requirement. Construction plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a
professional engineer or architect registered in the State of Texas as required by state law governing such
professions. Plans submitted for review by the city shall be dated and bear the responsible engineer's or architect's
name, serial number and the designation of “engineer,” “professional engineer” or “P.E.” or “architect” and an
appropriate stamp or statement near the engineer's or architect's identification, stating that the documents are for
preliminary review and are not intended for construction. Final plans acceptable to the city shall bear the seal and
signature of the engineer or architect and the date signed on all sheets of the plans. Public works construction in
streets, alleys or easements which will be maintained by the city shall be designed by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Texas.
(2) Construction plan review procedure. Copies of the construction plans, including a copy of the approved
preliminary plat and payment for the construction plan review fee shall be submitted to the city engineer for final
approval. The plans shall contain all necessary information for construction of the project, including screening walls
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/448
and other special features. The design of all public improvements shall be in accordance with the engineering design
manual. Each sheet of the plans shall contain a title block including space for the notation of revisions. This space is
to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note the nature of the revision and the date the
revision was made. The city engineer will release the plans for construction, after payment of all inspection fees and a
preconstruction conference is held. Upon such release, each contractor shall maintain one set of plans stamped with
city release at the project site at all times during construction.
(3) Failure to commence construction. If commencement of construction has not occurred within one year after
approval of the plans, resubmittal of plans may be required by the City engineer for meeting current standards and
engineering requirements. For purposes of this section “Commencement of Construction” shall mean:
(a) Issuance of construction permit(s); and
(b) Grading of the land.
B. Improvement agreements.
(1) Substantial completion of improvements. Except as provided below, before the final plat is approved by the
planning and zoning commission or the director of development services, all applicants shall be required to make
substantially complete, in accordance with the city's direction and to the satisfaction of the city engineer, all street,
sanitary and other public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual residential lots of the subdivision
as required in these regulations and specified in the final plat, and to dedicate those public improvements to the city.
As used in this section, “lot improvements” refers to grading and installation of improvements required for proper
drainage and prevention of soil erosion.
(2) Agreement. The city council, considering the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, may
waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approval of the final
plat, and may permit the owner to enter into an improvement agreement by which the owner covenants to complete
all required public improvements no later than two years following the date on which the final plat is signed. The city
council may also require the owner to complete and dedicate some required public improvements prior to approval of
the final plat and to enter into an improvement agreement for completion of the remainder of the required
improvements during such two-year period. The improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and
conditions as are agreed to by the owner and the city.
(3) Improvement agreement required for oversize reimbursement. The city shall require an improvement agreement
pertaining to any public improvement for which the developer shall request reimbursement from the city for oversize
costs.
(4) Security. The improvement agreement shall require the owner to provide sufficient security covering the
completion of the public improvements. The security shall be in the form of cash escrow or, where authorized by the
city, a letter of credit or other security acceptable to the city attorney. Security shall be in an amount equal to 100
percent of the city's estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements and lot improvements. In
addition to all other security, for completion of those public improvements where the city participates in the cost, the
owner shall provide a performance bond from the contractor, with the city as a co-obligee. The issuer of any surety
bond and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney.
(5) Letter of credit. If the planning and zoning commission authorizes the owner to post a letter of credit as security
for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the letter of credit shall:
(a) Be irrevocable;
(b) Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods but in no event less
than two years; and
(c) Require only that the city present the issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an authorized
representative of the city certifying to the city's right to draw funds under the letter of credit.
(6) Letter of credit reductions. As portions of the public improvements are completed, the developer may make
application to the city engineer to reduce the amount of the original letter of credit.
(a) The city engineer, if satisfied that such portion of the improvements has been completed in accordance
with city construction standards, may cause the amount of the letter of credit to be reduced by such amount
deemed appropriate, so that the remaining amount of the letter of credit adequately insures the completion of
the remaining public improvements.
(b) Upon the dedication of and acceptance by the city of all required public improvements, the city shall
authorize a reduction in the security to ten percent of the original amount of the security if the owner is not in
breach of the improvement agreement. The remaining security shall be security for the owner's covenant to
maintain the required public improvements and the warrant that the improvements are free from defect for two
years thereafter.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/448
(7) Temporary improvements. The owner shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by
the planning and zoning commission and shall maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the
planning and zoning commission. Prior to construction of any temporary improvement, the owner shall file with the city
a separate improvement agreement and escrow, or where authorized, a letter of credit, in an appropriate amount for
such temporary improvements, which improvement agreement and escrow or letter of credit shall ensure that the
temporary improvements will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed.
(8) Units of government. Governmental units may file, in lieu of the contract and security, a certified resolution or
ordinance agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section.
(9) Failure to complete improvements. For plats for which no improvement agreement has been executed and no
security has been posted, if the public improvements are not completed within the period specified by the city, the
preliminary plat approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where an improvement agreement has
been executed and security has been posted and required public improvements have not been installed within the
terms of the agreement, the city may:
(a) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed regardless
of the extent of completion of the development at the time the improvement agreement is declared to be in
default;
(b) Suspend final plat approval until the public improvements are completed and record a document to that
effect for the purpose of public notice;
(c) Obtain funds under the security and complete or cause the public improvements to be completed;
(d) Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the
subdivision for which public improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that
subsequent owner's promise to complete the public improvements in the subdivision; and
(e) Exercise any other rights available under the law.
(10) Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of street, public areas, easements,
and parks shall be by authorization of the city engineer. The approval by the planning and zoning commission of a
plat, whether preliminary or final, shall not in and of itself be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the city
of any street, easement, or park shown on plat. The planning and zoning commission may require the plat to be
endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect.
(11) Maintenance of public improvements. The owner shall maintain all required public improvements for a period of
two years following the acceptance by the city and shall provide a warranty that all public improvements shall be free
from defect for a period of two years following such acceptance by the city.
C. Construction procedures.
(1) Permit required. A permit is required from the city prior to commencement of any subdivision development work
in the city which affects erosion control, vegetation or tree removal or a floodplain.
(2) Preconstruction conference. The city engineer may require that all contractors participating in the construction
meet for a preconstruction conference to discuss the project prior to release of a permit.
(3) Conditions prior to authorization. Prior to authorizing release of a construction permit, the city engineer shall be
satisfied that the following conditions have been met:
(a) The preliminary plat shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission;
(b) All required contract documents shall be completed and filed with the city engineer;
(c) All necessary off-site easements or dedications required for city infrastructure and not shown on the final
plat must be conveyed solely to the city, with proper signatures affixed. The original of the documents shall be
returned to the engineering department prior to approval and release of the engineering plans and issuance of a
permit;
(d) All contractors participating in the construction shall be provided, at the developer's cost, with a set of
approved plans bearing the stamp of release of the engineering department. One set of these plans shall remain
on the job site at all times;
(e) A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers where a
responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the City Engineer at least 24 hours prior to
the preconstruction meeting; and
(f) All applicable fees must be paid to the city.
D. Inspection of public improvements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/448
(1) General procedure. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the city engineer. Construction shall be in
accordance with the approved plans and the engineering design manual of the city. Any change in design required
during construction should be made by the engineer whose seal and signature are shown on the plans. Another
engineer may make revisions to the original engineering plans if so authorized by the owner of the plans and if those
revisions are noted on the plans or documents, provided such revisions are permitted by the Texas Engineering
Practice Act. All revisions shall be approved by the city engineer. If the city engineer's inspection finds that any of the
required public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's engineering design manual, the
owner shall be responsible for completing and/or correcting the public improvements.
(2) Certificate of satisfactory completion. The city will not accept dedication of required public improvements until
the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the city engineer, through submission of record drawings,
indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the planning and zoning commission or
city engineer that all required public improvements have been completed. The record drawings shall also include a
complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer or other public improvements, showing that
the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the plat, and all
changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet a record drawing stamp bearing the
signature of the engineer and the date. The engineer or surveyor shall also furnish a paper copy of the final plat and
engineering plans along with digital copies of the plans in Portable Document Format (“PDF”) and Computer Assisted
Design Drawings (“CADD”), in such a format that is compatible with the city's CADD system. The developer shall
provide a maintenance bond executed by a corporate surety duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas,
payable to the city and approved by the city as to form, to guarantee the maintenance of the construction for a period
of two years after its completion and acceptance by the city. In lieu of a maintenance bond the developer may submit
either an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the city and approved by the city as to form, or a cash bond payable to
the city and approved as to form. The amount of the maintenance bond, letter of credit or cash bond shall be at least
ten percent of the full cost of the infrastructure in the subdivision, as determined by the construction costs. When such
requirements have been met the city engineer shall thereafter accept the public improvements.
(3) Acceptance of the development shall mean that the developer has transferred all rights to all the public
improvements to the city for use and maintenance.
(4) Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the city engineer shall submit a certificate to the
developer stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
E. Deferral of required improvements.
(1) The planning and zoning commission may upon petition of the owner defer at the time of final approval, subject
to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all public improvements are not required in the interests of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(2) Whenever a petition to defer the construction of any public improvement required under these regulations is
granted by the planning and zoning commission, the owner shall deposit in escrow the developer's share of the costs
of the future public improvements with the city prior to approval of the final plat, or the owner may execute a separate
improvement agreement secured by a cash escrow or, where authorized, a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of
the deferred public improvements upon demand of the city.
F. Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. No building permit shall be issued for a lot or building site unless
the lot or site has been officially recorded by a final plat approved by the City of Sachse, and all public improvements as required
for Final Plat approval have been completed, except as permitted below:
(1) Building permits may be issued for nonresidential and multi-family (apartments) development provided that a
preliminary plat is approved by the city and civil construction plans have been released by the city engineer. Building
construction will not be allowed to surpass the construction of fire protection improvements.
(2) The city engineer may authorize residential building permits for a portion of a subdivision, provided that a
preliminary plat has been approved and all public improvements have been completed for that portion of the
development, including but not limited to those required for fire and emergency protection. Notwithstanding, no lot
may be sold or title conveyed until a final plat approved by the city has been recorded.
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building or the use of property unless all subdivision
improvements have been completed and a final plat approved by the city has been recorded. Notwithstanding the
above, the city building official may authorize the occupancy of a structure provided that an agreement providing cash
escrow, a letter of credit, or other sufficient surety is approved by the city for the completion of all remaining public
improvements.
G. Utility connections. Utility connections for individual lots are not authorized until a final plat has been approved in
accordance with this chapter.
H. Withholding improvements.
(1) The city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city improvements of whatsoever nature,
including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewage facilities and water service from all additions which
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/448
have not been constructed and approved in accordance with this chapter.
(2) The City of Sachse may withhold the issuing of a street number or building permit for the erection of any
building in the City of Sachse on a newly subdivided parcel of land until all the requirements of these subdivision
regulations have been complied with, including installation of and acceptance by the city of all water works, sewage
and paving improvements for the area designated.
I. As-built plans.
(1) The developer or his engineer shall present the city with one reproducible (sepia) and three blue line or black
line complete “AS BUILT” sets of plans for all paving, drainage structures, water mains and sewer mains within 60
days after completion of each contract and before final acceptance of the new developments.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3594, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-15. General requirements and design standards.
A. Improvements. The improvements referenced herein must be constructed per the engineering design manual and accepted
by the city engineer prior to filing an associated plat for record with the county clerk, unless otherwise specified in an approved
improvement agreement.
B. Utilities.
(1) Generally. The sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, street improvements, with all appurtenances
pertaining to the above and facilities of other agencies as may be required, shall be constructed and installed in each
new subdivision in accordance with the engineering design manual.
(2) Water. All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved water system designed and constructed in
accordance with the master plan when available and in accordance with the engineering design manual. In the
corporate limits of the City of Sachse all subdivisions shall be connected with the City of Sachse water supply
distribution system.
(3) Sewer improvements.
(a) Sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided per the engineering design manual to adequately service the
subdivision and conform to the city wastewater master plan.
(b) The developer shall furnish and install the complete sewage system, including the mains, manholes,
cleanouts, Y-branches and service laterals for all lots, lift stations and appurtenances. The sewage system shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the master plan when available and in accordance with the
standard specifications and standard construction details of the City of Sachse.
(c) In locations where sanitary sewers are not available and where there is no immediate prospect for
installation of sanitary sewers, then septic tanks of approved type may be installed in conformity with the rules,
regulations and ordinances of the City of Sachse pertaining to public health, provided however that in no case
shall septic tanks be installed without the express approval and inspection of the City of Sachse.
(4) All public or privately owned underground utilities shall stub out all services from mains in all directions to the
property lines in streets; and in alleys the services shall be stubbed out 18 inches inside the rear property line of
platted lots and to the property line of unplatted property prior to commencing paving operations.
(5) Electric utilities to be underground.
(a) No subdivision plat or site plan filed with or submitted to the city shall be approved unless such plan or plat
requires all electric utility lateral and service lines to be constructed underground. In special or unique
circumstances or to avoid undue hardship, the city council may authorize variances and exceptions from this
requirement and permit the construction and maintenance of overhead electric utility lateral or service lines and
may approve any plat with such approved variances or exceptions. It is the intent of this section that no
overhead electric utility lateral or service lines be constructed without a variance or exception having been
obtained for the subdivision plat or site plan.
(b) That all wires and lines providing other utility services, and electric lines serving street lights, shall be
placed underground in all subdivisions and on all sites where the final subdivision plat or site plan approved by
the city requires electric utility lateral and service lines to be placed underground. Utility support equipment, such
as transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc., necessary for or used in connection with underground
installations shall be deemed to be placed underground if actually constructed underground or if pad-mounted
on the surface.
(c) Anything in this ordinance to the contrary not withstanding, temporary construction service may be
provided by overhead electric lines and facilities without obtaining a variance or exception.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/448
(d) That nothing herein set forth shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference
between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities. Each utility whose facilities are subject to the
provisions of this ordinance shall develop policies and cost reimbursement procedures with respect to the
installation and extension of underground service.
(e) As used in this chapter the terms “Utility service[s]”, “feeder lines”, “lateral lines”, and “service lines” shall
have the following meanings:
(i) “Utility services” shall mean the facilities of any person, firm or corporation providing electrical,
telephone, TV cable or any other such item or service for public use which services are not normally or
already required to be placed underground and are within the present or future city limits of the City of
Sachse, Texas.
(ii) “Feeder lines” shall mean those high voltage supply electric lines that emanate from substations
used to distribute power throughout an area.
(iii) “Lateral lines” shall mean those electric lines used to distribute power from a feeder line to an end
user. These electric lines are normally connected to a feeder line through a sectionalizing device such as a
fuse.
(iv) “Service lines” shall mean those electric lines used to connect between the utilities' supply system
and the end user's service entrance.
C. Drainage.
(1) An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes and other underground drainage structures with
approved outlets shall, at a minimum, be designed and constructed to the standards of the city's engineering design
manual where runoff of stormwater and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface
drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions as established by the city will not be considered for development
until adequate drainage has been provided. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
engineering design manual.
(2) No individual, partnership, firm or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, re-route or change the course or location
of any existing ditch, channel, stream or drainage way, without first obtaining written permission of the City of Sachse
or other agency having jurisdiction.
D. Streets and alleys.
(1) The planning, design, construction and standards of all streets, alleys, right-of-way improvements and any other
related roadway improvements by any person, firm, public utility, corporation, or business in the city shall conform to
the requirements of the engineering design manual, as it may now exist or may hereafter be amended.
(2) The engineering design manual shall be utilized by all persons designing streets, right-of-way improvements,
and any other related roadway improvements in the city, whether said person is subdividing property or constructing
without a subdivision.
E. Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and
shall be of such widths as may be reasonably necessary for the utility or utilities using same, with minimum width of
15 feet. Any easements so established shall be maintained by the property owner.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or street, there shall be provided a
storm easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with such course and of such additional width as
may be designated by the city administrative official that will be reasonably adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets
or parkways may be required in connection with this. The drainage shall be designed to eliminate erosion of adjoining
property and to facilitate routine maintenance.
(3) All easements may be included in the computation of lot sizes, with the exception of drainage easements, which
will be in addition to the specified lot size.
(4) Where adequate access for firefighting purposes may not otherwise be provided, easements for fire lanes shall
be required. Fire lane easements shall be maintained by the property owner, shall be marked as such on the ground,
and shall be kept free and clear at all times.
F. Blocks.
(1) The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
(a) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/448
(c) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
(2) In general intersecting streets, determining the blocks, lengths and widths shall be provided at such intervals as
to serve cross traffic adequately, and to meet exiting streets or customary subdivision practices. Block length and
block perimeter shall meet the minimum requirements of the established zoning district. Where no existing subdivision
controls and no block length or block perimeter is established for the zoning district, blocks shall not be less than 500
feet in length and the block lengths should not exceed 1,000 feet, with a maximum of 1,200 feet in length. However, in
cases where physical barriers or property ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards
be varied, the length may be increased or decreased to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting
streets, circulation of traffic and public safety.
(3) Where blocks in the vicinity of a school, park or shopping center are platted 1,000 feet or longer the council may
require a walkway near the middle of the block or at a street that terminates between the streets at the ends of the
block. The walkway shall not be less than four feet or more than eight feet in width, shall have a four foot concrete
walk through the block from sidewalk to sidewalk, or the rear property line.
(4) Where no existing subdivision controls, the block depth shall be platted to give lots with a depth to width ratio of
generally not more than two and one-half to one and in no case more than four to one, and the platting shall be such
that the block depth generally shall not exceed 350 feet nor be less than 215 feet. When possible, the block depth and
length shall be such to allow two tiers of lots back to back to an alley.
(5) Pedestrian walks not less than four feet wide shall be provided around the perimeter of all blocks. If the
pedestrian walks are part of the current master hike and bike trail plan, a walkway not less than eight feet wide shall
be provided.
G. Lots.
(1) Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district.
(2) Each lot shall be provided with adequate access to an existing or proposed street by frontage on such street, or
as provided for by an approved plat reflecting a series of mutual access easements connecting lots with no street
frontage to a public street.
(a) For all single-family and two-family (duplex) lots the following shall also apply:
(i) Lots shall abut a public street. On a case-by-case basis, residential lots located within the PGBT
Zoning District may be permitted to front onto a park, open space or common area provided that provisions
are in place for fire accessibility and parking.
(ii) Lots within the R-E single-family dwelling district may be served by private drives as permitted within
the R-E single-family dwelling zoning district.
(3) Where corner lots are key lots, that is where lots face the frontage street and also other lots face the side street,
the corner lot shall have a front building line on both streets, unless said key lot is separated from other lots by a
dedicated street or alley.
(4) Key lots or irregular shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet frontage requirements of
the appropriate zoning district. Also, the rear width shall be sufficient to provide access for all utilities including
garbage collection, but not less than ten feet.
(5) Except for lots located within the PGBT Zoning District, no lot shall be platted less than 100 feet in depth except
in cases where an irregular shaped tract is platted into lots and remnant piece of property is of sufficient area to plat
one or more lots, the council may waive the depth requirement to prevent a hardship on the developer. Single-family
detached residential lots located within the PGBT Zoning District may not be less than 90' in depth and townhome lots
shall not be less than 80' in depth.
(6) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
(7) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantage of topography and orientation.
Where lots have double frontage, a front building line shall be established for each street.
(8) In areas where city sewer is not immediately available, a lot shall be platted of such area as to meet the
minimum requirements of Dallas and/or Collin Counties and the guidelines of the Texas State Department of Health
pertaining to septic tank construction and operation.
(9) When an applicant exhibits a duly executed and recorded deed covering a lot having dimensions of 50 feet by
120 feet or more has been sold by metes and bounds prior to passage of this chapter and such lot is being assessed
for city taxes and conforms to the established lot pattern and zoning classification in the block where located, then a
building permit may be issued provided the requested use of such property conforms to the permanent zoning of the
property covered by the application.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/448
(10) All lots developed under this chapter shall be shaped, graded, and finished by the developer to a finished
grade elevation conforming with the lot grading plan and/or standard building code requirements providing for positive
drainage and access.
H. Building lines. The building line is a line beyond which buildings must be set back from a street right-of-way line or property
line. Building lines shall be determined by the appropriate zoning classification.
I. Monuments. In all subdivisions and additions corners shall be established at the corner of each block in the subdivision
consisting of an iron rod or pipe not less than three-quarter inch in diameter and 24 inches deep flush with the top of the
sidewalk. Lot corner monuments shall be placed at all lot corners except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron
rods or pipes of a diameter of not less than one-half inch and 18 inches deep set flush with the top of the sidewalk.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3594, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-16. Water and sewer main extensions.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
Consumer. The actual user of water from a city water connection.
Property owner. The record title holder of premises served with water from a connection by the city.
Pro rata. A charge made against the consumer or property owner to pay for installation of water and sanitary sewer mains as
provided in this section.
Standard size water main. A water main eight inches or greater in diameter. No water main less than six inches shall be
constructed unless approved by the city engineer.
Substandard size water main. A water main less than eight inches in diameter, unless approved by the city engineer.
B. Pro rata charges.
(1) Existing main exempt. All existing subdivisions which have existing internal water mains four inches in diameter
and larger, and all customers connected to the Sachse water system at the time of passage of this section, shall be
exempt from the water portion of the pro rata charges specified in this section. In unsubdivided areas with an existing
water connection, the area to be exempt from the water pro rata portion of this section shall be actual frontage, or 150
feet, whichever is less.
(2) Existing mains adjacent to property other than subdivisions.
(a) Where an area, lot or tract of land abuts any existing water or sanitary sewer main, and when said water
or sanitary sewer main spans the complete frontage of the area, lot or tract of land, then the following charges,
known as “Pro Rata” shall be made against the owner of the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to the
water or sanitary sewer main. A $5.00 permit fee shall be charged for each connection.
(i) Two dollars and fifty cents per front foot for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to an
existing water main.
(ii) One dollar and fifty cents per front foot for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to an
existing sanitary sewer.
(iii) Three dollars per foot front footage for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to new
construction of water main with a 250-foot maximum.
(iv) Three dollars per foot front footage for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to a new
construction of the sanitary sewer with a 250-foot maximum.
(b) All single-family residential lots, area or tracts of land located at a standard right angle street intersection
shall only be charged a pro rata on the shortest street frontage, regardless of the locations of the water main or
sanitary sewer.
(c) Where lots or tracts are intended to be used for apartments, business, commercial or industrial purposes
or have a depth greater than 150 feet from the street line, then the pro rata herein provided shall be paid on the
frontage for all streets which the property may abut minus 150 feet frontage for each corner of the property
abutting a street intersection. Should said property be re-subdivided, whereby water or sewer main extensions
are required to serve the same, the terms of this section shall apply and additional pro rata charges shall be
made based on such additional street frontage.
(d) On lots, areas or tracts of land which extend through from one street to another, with frontage on both
streets, and when the average distance of the property lines connecting the street lines is 255 feet or more, than
a pro rata shall be charged on both frontages when the owner seeks a connection to an existing water main or
sanitary sewer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/448
(e) Where lots, areas or tracts of land are irregular in size or shape, then the pro rata charges shall be based
upon the equivalent rectangular lots or tracts using one front foot for each 120 square feet of area, or the pro
rata charges provided by this section on the average frontage of such tracts, whichever is least.
C. Main extensions for individual property owners.
(1) Single-family residential.
(a) Upon request of the owner, or his agent, also referred to in this section as the applicant of a given lot or
tract of land, the city shall extend, lay or construct all necessary water mains and sanitary sewers and their
appurtenances, a maximum distance of 100 feet, plus the distance across the frontage necessary to provide the
service for which the application is made, providing the necessary funds are available. The property owner to be
served shall be required to pay the charges provided for in subsection B.(2)(a), at such time as their property is
connected to such mains. Where an applicant for service secures an extension and service under this particular
option for main extension, he shall pay the pro rata charges on all property owned by him and which is served
by the extension requested. In applying the 100-foot rule, the required extension of main shall be figured in such
manner as to leave out of the calculations that portion of any main adjacent to property already having other
than a temporary water service and for which the pro rata charges thereon have been paid, credited or exempt
under the terms of this section.
(b) In the event that the property seeking a water or sewer connection is outside the limits of the 100-foot rule,
then the applicant shall extend the said water main or sanitary sewer from the nearest standard size existing
water main or sanitary sewer as determined by the utility department. The extension, less the cost of 100 feet
per applicant as provided in subsection C.(1)(a), shall be constructed by the city at the owner's expense and
shall be extended across the complete frontage of said lot, area or tract of land seeking the connection when
said main extension is located in a street right-of-way, alley or existing easement. If an additional easement is
necessary to extend the water main or sanitary sewer across the said lot, area or tract of land, then the owner of
the property seeking a connection shall provide the city with an easement, as required by the utility department.
The owners of all intervening property served by the given main extension shall be required to pay the pro rata
charges as established in subsection B.(2)(a), at such time as their property is connected to such main, and the
pro rata charges collected by the city in accordance with this subsection, shall be refunded to the original
investor, up to a period of ten years from the date of the total cost of the installation.
(2) Business, industrial, commercial, apartment and property other than single-family residential.
(a) When the owner of an area, lot or tract of land zoned other than single-family residential, seeks a water or
sewer connection and no standard size water mains or sanitary sewers are adjacent to, upon or span the
complete frontage or distance required across the front of said area, lot or tract of land, the owner shall extend
the said water main or sanitary sewer from the nearest standard size existing main, as determined by the city
engineer. The extension shall be constructed either by the city, or by the owner's contractor at the owner's
expense and shall be extended across the complete frontage of said area, lot or tract of land when said main
extension is located in a street right-of-way, alley, or an existing easement. If an additional easement is
necessary to extend the water main or sanitary sewer across the said area, lot or tract of land, then the owner of
the property seeking a connection shall provide the city with an easement, as required by the utility department.
(b) The city engineer shall determine the size of the required main extension in accordance with the city's
master water and sewer plan, and shall also determine the location of all necessary appurtenances such as fire
hydrants, valves, manholes, cleanouts and other items which may be necessary for proper operation and use of
said water or sewer installation.
(c) All proposed water and sanitary sewer installations to be installed by the applicant's contractor shall be
designed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas in accordance with the engineering design
manual of the City of Sachse.
(d) When said main installations have been accepted by the city in accordance with the aforementioned
criteria, the city will agree to refund to the applicant any pro rata collected from other parties, firms or
corporations seeking a connection to the said water main or sanitary sewer installed by said applicant. The pro
rata shall be collected at the rates established in subsection B.(2)(a) of this section and the city will only be
responsible for refunding the collected pro rata funds for a period not to exceed ten years from the date of
acceptance of the said water and sewer installation. All refunds shall be made on a semi-annual basis on the
last day of June and December.
(e) Where extension is requested by an industrial or commercial user, such extension may be made at the
discretion of the city council, provided 40 percent of the estimated annual revenue for such customer will support
interest and principal payments on the total cost of the extension required to serve.
D. Main extension for developers and subdivisions.
(1) On-site extensions-Totally within property to be developed. A developer shall defray the entire cost of water and
sewer mains and all appurtenances that lie totally within a subdivision, except that the city will refund the oversize
cost as established in subsection E. of any main larger than eight inches in diameter, unless such larger size is
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/448
necessary to serve the developer's property in question. Size of mains necessary for adequate service shall be
determined by the utility department in accordance with the city's master water and sewer plan. Refunds for oversize
cost will be made upon final acceptance of the system by the city providing the funds are available.
(2) Along-site mains-Lying along one or more sides of a subdivision divided tract and serving property other than
the subdivision for which the extensions are made.
(a) For all water and sanitary sewer mains, the developer will be refunded any collected pro rata in
accordance with subsection B.(2)(a) of this section, as adjacent property develops and said refunds shall only
be made for a period not to exceed ten years from the date of acceptance of the said water and sewer
installation.
(b) For water and sanitary sewer mains, larger than eight inches in diameter, the developer will be refunded
the oversize cost as established in subsection G. and as adjacent property develops, the developer will be
refunded any collected pro rata as established in subsection B.(2)(a) of this section.
(c) Where along-site mains exist, the developer shall pay to the city a pro rata in the amount as established in
subsection B.(2)(a) of this section, and said pro rata payments shall be paid before any building permits are
issued for any lot, area or parcel of land situated inside the boundaries of said subdivisions.
(3) Off-site extensions-Totally outside of property to be developed.
(a) Where water and/or sanitary sewer facilities are not available to a tract to be developed, mains may be
extended by the city to the nearest subdivision property line at the expense of the developer requiring such
extension or the developer shall cause his contractor to install said water or sewer facilities in accordance with
subsection C.(2) of this section.
(b) Pro rata collections and refunds shall be made in the following manner:
(i) Water mains- As property adjacent to said water mains installation develops and pays all due pro rata
in accordance with subsection B.(2)(a) of this section, then all pro rata collected by the city shall be
refunded to the developer or investor who caused such water main to be installed. Refunds shall not
exceed the actual cost of said water main installation and said refunds shall only be made for a period of
ten years from the date of city's acceptance of said water main installation.
On all unplatted property which may connect to said water mains, a water main pro rata charge in the
amount of $100.00 per acre shall be collected from said property by the city and shall be refunded to the
developer or investor who caused such water main installation to be installed.
(ii) Sanitary sewers- As property adjacent to the sanitary sewer develops and connects to said sanitary
sewer installation and pays all due pro rata in accordance with subsection B.(2)(a) of this section, then all
pro rata collected by the city shall be refunded to the developer or investor who caused said sanitary sewer
installation to be installed.
As other property not adjacent to said sanitary sewer installation develops and connects to or produces
a flow of sewage, either directly or indirectly, through the said sanitary sewer installation, the sanitary
sewer acreage pro rata in the amount of $100.00 per acre shall be collected from said property by the city
and shall be refunded to the developer or investor who caused such sanitary sewer installation to be
installed.
In the event where a single sanitary sewer line has been developed and constructed in more than one
section and where more than one developer or investor is involved, then all acreage pro rata collected
from property not adjacent to said sanitary sewer installation shall be refunded to the developer or investor
who caused the initial section of said sanitary sewer facilities to be installed. As such time when the initial
installation has been retired, then all collected pro rata shall be refunded to the developer or investor who
caused the installation of said second section. This same procedure shall be followed with any number of
developers or investors who cause said sanitary sewer line to be installed. Refunds shall not exceed the
actual cost of said sanitary sewer main installation and said refunds shall only be made for a period of ten
years from the date of city's acceptance of said sanitary sewer main installation.
(4) Mains in place within the property to be developed. Should an existing water main or sanitary sewer lie in a
street, alley or easement within a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale, before extensions from or
connections to such line shall be made by a developer, he shall pay to the city the following pro rata:
(a) Five dollars per front foot for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to an existing water main.
(b) Three dollars per front foot for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to any existing sanitary
sewer.
(c) Should such mains lie along the subdivision and serve one side only, one-half of the above costs shall be
paid.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/448
(5) Methods by which water and sewer mains can be extended for subdivisions or development.
(a) On-site facilities. On-site water and sewer facilities shall be constructed by private contract at the
developer's expense in accordance with the city subdivision regulations and engineering design manual of the
City of Sachse.
(b) Off-site facilities.
(i) Private contract. Off-site water and sewer facilities shall be constructed by private contract at the
developer's expense in accordance with the city subdivision regulations and engineering design manual of
the City of Sachse.
(ii) City contract. A developer of a subdivision may deposit with the city the total estimated cost of such
extensions required to serve his property, including the cost of approach and off-site mains fronting
property not owned by the developer. The estimated cost of these extensions shall be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas and shall be approved by the city engineer.
Upon receipt of the required amount of money, the city will construct such mains and upon the
determination of final completion cost will refund any excess amount deposited, or require from developer
additional funds to defray the entire cost of the project. Refundable amounts for off-site costs or oversize
costs will be determined by the utility department as established in subsection D.(3) and subsection E. of
this section.
(6) Temporary lines. When temporary lines are constructed as an expediency to develop a particular area, such as
across easements within a subdivision of which no frontage can be connected, or where lines are constructed which
are not required by the final plan of development, the developer will bear the total cost without refund.
E. Establishing refunding procedure. All refunds provided for in this section shall be made at six-month intervals (June 31 and
December 31) of each year, and shall include funds then accrued to the credit of any developers and others. A refund contract
entered into by any property owner and the city under the provisions of this section, shall be effective only for a period of ten
years after the date of said contract. No refunds will be made by the city to any applicant or contracting party after this ten-year
period has expired, nor shall the city ever be liable for payment of interest on any deposits or refunds provided herein. This
section shall not affect or change any agreement or contract for providing water and sewer services which was entered into by
the city on or before the effective date of this section.
F. Water and sewer connections.
(1) Water service connection.
(a) The city shall install and maintain all water service connections in the streets, alleys and easements and
shall charge for the installation and maintenance of all such connections a sum sufficient to cover the cost
thereof; such sum is to be determined by using the most current market cost of materials and labor. An updated
list of these costs shall be kept in the water department billing office and made available upon request.
(b) The cost for the installation of service lines which require the boring of paved streets on alleys shall be
estimated by the utility department, and a deposit of the estimated amount will be required before work is started
on the installation of such connection. Should the final cost of the work be less than the amount of the deposit, a
refund of over-payment will be immediately made to the person from whom the deposit was received.
(c) No streets or alleys shall be open-cut for the installation of water lines without written permission from the
city engineer. The cost of extending water service lines under paved streets or alleys shall be paid by the owner
of the property.
(d) Where service lines have been installed by developers, the water service connection charge shall be
reduced by the amount of the tap charge as shown on current list kept in the water department billing office.
(e) All water service for construction purposes shall be subject to a standard deposit as determined by the
City of Sachse and metered and subject to the same regulations and billings as permanent water accounts.
(2) Sanitary sewer service connections.
(a) The city shall install all sanitary sewer service connections in the streets, alleys and easement both inside
and outside the city limits. Said service connections shall be installed from the main to the property line when
the sewer main is located in an alley or a street right-of-way; if the sewer main is in an easement, the service
connection shall be installed from the sewer main to the easement boundary line. The city shall charge for each
sewer lateral connection an amount whose sum is equal to the most current market cost for materials and labor.
An updated cost of these materials and labor shall be kept in the water department billing office and made
available upon request.
(b) The property owner shall install a service line at his expense to the city's lateral, in accordance with city
regulations and subject to the inspection of the city; and shall thereafter be responsible for normal maintenance
of said service line from the house to the property line.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/448
(c) No streets or alleys shall be open-cut for the installation of sewer lines without written permission from the
city engineer.
(d) The property owner shall install a service line at his expense to the city's lateral, in accordance with city
regulations and subject to the inspection of the city; and shall thereafter be responsible for normal maintenance
of said service line from the house to the property line.
(e) Each house or building within the city shall be served by a separate and independent water and sanitary
sewer connection. Where the service laterals have been installed by a developer to serve a lot or tract of land,
said lot or tract of land shall be exempt from a connection charge.
G. Evaluated prices for determination of oversize costs and off-site facilities. All costs for oversized water mains and
appurtenances and sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances shall be determined by using the most current market cost for
materials and labor, and approved by the city engineer prior to construction.
H. Purpose of section; where front foot rule inequitable. The intent and purpose of this section is to provide an equitable
charge for water and sanitary sewer connections as a proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main
extensions to serve property in the city on a front foot basis. In case property or a tract of land is so situated or shaped that the
front foot rule creates an inequitable basis as between it and other tracts of land in the city, then in that event, the city council
shall determine the proper charge in accordance with the intent and purpose of this section.
I. Method of enforcing payment. Nothing herein shall be deemed in anyway to be an exclusive methods of enforcing the
payment of the pro rata charges against the consumer and property owners, nor shall be deemed in any manner to be a waiver
of the city's right to validly assess the property owners and/or consumers concerned for cost of the installation of standard size
water and sewer mains, and to fix and enforce liens against said property. The method of enforcing payment of charges imposed
by this section shall be in the manner prescribed by law.
J. Crediting of collections. Any and all sums of money collected as a pro rata and/or service connection charge, as established
by this section, shall be credited to the water and sewer system funds of the city.
K. If no funds available. In no event may the city be required to install water or sewer main extensions under the provisions of
this section if there are no funds available for that purpose.
L. Sewage lift stations and other special installations. In the event a lift station or other special installations are required, the
same shall be installed under separate agreements between the city and the developer.
M. Procedure for variance. The city council may authorize a variance from the water and sewer line regulations when, in its
opinion, undue hardships will result from the requiring of strict compliance. In granting variance, the council shall prescribe only
conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest and making the findings herein below required. Pecuniary
hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. No variance will be granted unless
the council finds:
(1) There are special circumstances or conditions such that the strict application of the provisions of this subsection
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his property; and
(2) The variances are necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant;
and
(3) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to other
property in the area and substantial justice done; and
(4) The variance be granted only in harmony with the general purpose and intent of water and sewer line extension
ordinance.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3594, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-17. Street extensions and pro rata charges.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
(1) Developer or contractor. The terms developer or contractor shall mean any private person or firm which
constructs a street or streets to be dedicated to the City of Sachse, Texas, at his expense.
(2) City. The City of Sachse, Texas.
(3) Pro rata. A charge or fee to be collected from property owners other than the developer or contractor to defray
the cost of the street construction which serves such property owner.
(4) On-site street. A street which is totally within or adjacent to a tract of land which has been or is to be subdivided
and developed for resale.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/448
(5) Off-site street. A street totally outside the tract of land which has been or is to be subdivided and developed for
resale.
(6) Property owner. The record title holder of the lot or tract served by the street for which pro rata collections are
applicable.
B. Authority to make extensions. The city may extend or authorize extension of streets or alleys within the city limits in order to
provide connections to lots or tracts which have no frontage street and/or alley.
C. Pro rata charge established. A charge, which shall be known as pro rata, shall be made against each lot or tract of land and
the owner thereof whose property is served by the street and/or alley subject to pro rata collection as determined by the city.
(1) Charges will be one-half the average lineal foot cost of the construction of the street as determined by the city
engineer.
(2) Average actual costs will be revised semi-annually on April 1 and October 1 and filed with the city secretary.
The above front foot rates shall apply to property fronting on streets in areas platted into the usual rectangular lots or tracts of
land with a depth of not to exceed 150 feet. Where the lots or tracts have depths greater than 150 feet from the front street line
and are occupied or are to be occupied exclusively as dwelling places, then the additional depth shall not be assessed. If the
property is later subdivided, requiring an extension of streets to serve the same, then the terms of this section shall govern. On
lots or tracts of land which extend through from one street to another with frontage on both streets and where the distance
between the street lines is greater than 260 feet, then the pro rata charge herein provided for shall be paid on both frontages as
applicable. Where lots or tracts are irregular in size or shape, the pro rata charges shall be based upon equivalent rectangular
lots or tracts, using one foot for each 150 square feet of area or the pro rata charge provided herein on the average frontage of
the development, whichever is least.
D. Purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to provide an equitable charge for street construction as a proportionate
distribution of the cost of street or alley extensions to serve property in the city on which is owned by persons or firms other than
the developer or contractor which incurred the cost of the construction of the street or alley on a front foot basis. In case property
or a tract of land is so situated or shaped that the front foot rule creates an inequitable basis as between it and other tracts of
land in the city, then in that event, the city engineer shall determine the proper charges in accordance with the intent and purpose
of this section.
E. Extensions for property subdivided or platted for development basis.
(1) Generally. Where the extensions of the streets are required to serve property which has been subdivider or
platted for development for resale, streets may be extended to the properties on the following basis and in
accordance with minimum standards and procedures described in this section. It shall be unlawful to improve any
previously unimproved lot, tract or plot of land or any part thereof which fronts a street or alley for which pro rata
charges are applicable even if such lot, tract or plot was originally purchased before construction and assessment of
pro rata was accomplished.
(2) Extensions within property to be developed.
(a) Developers of such property will defray the entire cost of streets within their subdivision. The size and
construction of such streets and alleys shall be in conformance with this subdivision regulation and in
accordance with the engineering design manual of the City of Sachse.
(b) Streets lying along one or more sides of a subdivided tract which serve property other than the subdivision
for which the extensions are made:
The developer or contractor will be refunded one-half of the current average actual cost of the street
constructed when the adjacent property is developed.
(3) Where streets are in place in or adjacent to the property to be developed.
(a) Should an existing street or alley in or along an area or tract of land to be subdivided and developed for
resale before extensions from or connections to such street will be made by the developer, he shall pay the city
the current average actual cost per lineal foot of his property along said street. Should such street lie along the
subdivision on one side only, one-half these costs shall be paid unless such streets serve the subdivision in
question exclusively. Such money shall be paid to the city pro rata fund and will constitute a charge for the use
of such street in place.
(b) An exception to the normal pro rata charge for streets or alleys may be made on any existing street which
runs along one or more sides of a five-acre tract or larger, which has not been subdivided. Before any building
permit for a primary structure shall be given, the applicant shall pay a charge based on 100 feet of frontage and
in accordance with the above rates. This in no way will exempt the remainder of the property from being charged
pro rata charges under this section as such time as it is platted or developed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/448
(4) Off-site extensions required to serve property development. Where street facilities are not available to a tract to
be developed, the developer or contractor shall extend such facilities, his expense, to an existing street, as approved
by the city engineer.
F. Methods of construction.
(1) By private contract. The construction of streets may be awarded on a private contract in accordance with
provisions of the City of Sachse engineering design manual. Such streets or alleys, when constructed and dedicated,
shall become the property of the city free and clear of all encumbrances. The city specifically reserves the option to
advertise for bids and install any or all portions of the extensions.
(2) By city contract. Upon approval of the city, the developer or contractor of an addition or plat may design and
prepare construction plans of streets or alleys to serve the subdivision, including any access or off-site facility that
may be required. The developer of an addition or plat shall deposit with the city the total cost of such extensions
required to serve, including the cost of approach or off-site streets fronting property not owned by the developer if
required by the provisions of this section not covering off-site streets. The city will construct such streets, upon
determination of final completion costs, will refund any excess amount deposited, or require such developer additional
funds to defray the entire cost of the project on-site and of off-site facilities for which the developer or contractor is
responsible.
G. City not obligated to make extensions. In no event shall the city be obligated to proceed under the terms of this section if
funds are not available or if, at the discretion of the city, the extension may not be practical.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3594, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-18. Street design and construction costs.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
(1) Development shall mean any activity that requires the filing of a final subdivision plat, or first increment thereof,
or one lot plat.
(2) Escrow shall mean money placed in the possession of the city to accomplish the purposes set out in this section
including, but not limited to, the following: Purchase of right-of-way, design and construction of drainage facilities,
curb, gutter and pavement.
(3) Street, unimproved shall mean any street proposed to be constructed as part of a development or an existing
street without concrete curb and gutter, but not including state or federal highways.
(4) Street, internal shall mean any street whose entire width is contained within a development.
(5) Street, perimeter shall mean any street which abuts a development or one whose width lies partly within a
development and partly without.
B. Street, design construction costs and escrow requirement.
(1) The owner shall be responsible for the design and construction of all streets within his development and onehalf
of the same if an unimproved perimeter street.
(2) The owner shall be responsible for the construction of the following width perimeter streets to his development:
(a) When developing land zoned residential or “F”, the owner shall be responsible for the construction of onehalf
of a 37-foot collector street.
(b) When developing land zoned “C-1,” “C-2,” or “PD,” the owner shall be responsible for construction of onehalf
of a 45-foot concrete street or one-half of the actual width of the proposed street, whichever is less.
(c) When developing land zoned “I-1,” “I-2,” the owner shall be responsible for the construction of one-half of
the street actually proposed for construction, pursuant to the thoroughfare plan and engineering design manual
of the City of Sachse.
(3) The owner shall construct all internal and perimeter streets at the time of development unless, from an
engineering standpoint, it is not feasible to do so. Upon such determination, the owner shall be required to place an
amount equal to his share of the construction costs plus six percent of such sum for future engineering costs in
escrow with the city.
(4) The owner shall be responsible for all of the engineering and design costs of all internal streets and also of all
perimeter streets which are constructed either entirely by the owner or through participation.
(5) The responsibilities of the owner relative to perimeter streets, shall not exceed a linear footage requirement
equal to the square root of the area of the property expressed in feet. In the event the property is bound by more than
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/448
one unimproved perimeter street, such formula shall apply to each such street. A total waiver of perimeter street
responsibility is not within the contemplation of these rules and regulations.
(6) However, in any event, perimeter street escrow responsibility shall not exceed the factor of 0.0035 times the
current street cost per linear foot (one-half of the applicable street width, based on zoning) times the square footage
of the plat, plus six percent of such sum for future engineering costs.
C. Participation and escrow.
(1) If the owner chooses to construct a wider street than required by the city or these regulations, the owner shall
pay the entire cost for the street. However, in the event the city is required to participate in the construction costs as
provided in this chapter, the city shall reimburse its proportionate share to the owner upon completion and acceptance
of the streets and drainage improvements.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities delegated to the owner herein shall become those of the owner's
transferees, successors and assigns; and the liability therefore, shall be joint and several.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the first step of developing is the submission of a preliminary plat or the
submission of a final plat, as the requirements thereof may be.
(4) Payment of funds required to be placed in escrow shall be made after the preliminary plat is approved by the
planning and zoning commission and prior to the approval of the final plat.
(5) Escrows which have been placed with the city under this section which have been held for a period of ten years
from the date of such agreement, in the event that council has not authorized the preparation of plans and
specifications for construction of such street which the escrow was made, shall be returned to the owner, with such
interest as it has earned.
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3594, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14; Ordinance 3921 adopted 5/6/19)
Sec. 8-19. Park land dedication by developers.
A. Assessment for park development. An owner shall pay to the City of Sachse the sum of $1,100.00 for each lot contained
within a residential subdivision and $600.00 per multifamily dwelling unit. Such payment shall be made prior to recording the
approved final subdivision plat. Such fund shall be deposited by the city into an account designated exclusively for park
assessment fees, and used thereafter by the City of Sachse only for the purchase of land to be used for park purposes, or for the
development, re-development or maintenance of existing parks within the City of Sachse.
B. Dedication of land in lieu of cash assessment. In lieu of the cash assessment provided in subsection A. of this section, an
owner may dedicate land for public park purposes to the City of Sachse calculated at the rate of not less than one acre of
parkland for each 100 proposed dwelling units. Such land may be within or outside the proposed subdivision. If the actual
number of completed dwelling units exceeds the figure upon which the original dedication was based, such additional dedication
shall be required, and should be made by payment of money in lieu of land as provided in subsection A. of this section or by fee
simple dedication of land to the city by separate instrument in the form of a warranty deed approved by the city. The city deems
that the development of an area where the buildable area of public park is smaller than one acre in size is impracticable.
Therefore, if fewer than 100 units are proposed by a plat filed for approval, the developer may be required to pay the applicable
cash in lieu of park land dedication as provided in subsection A. of this section. Prior to such dedication, the owner shall submit
his or her proposal for dedication to the city manager, along with a comprehensive narrative appraisal of the fair market value of
such property prepared by an MAI appraiser. Acceptance of such policy in lieu of the cash assessment provided in subsection A.
of this section shall be at the sole discretion of the city council. Should the city council agree to accept such offer of dedication,
and should the fair market value of the property (as determined by the city council) be less than the amount the owner would be
required to pay pursuant to the provisions of subsection A. of this section, then the owner shall pay to the city the difference in
cash pursuant to the provisions of subsection A. of this section.
C. Recommendation from the parks and recreation commission. In all instances, the city council shall have the right to accept
the dedication for approval on the final plat or accept the fee in lieu of land dedication. That determination shall be based upon
existing circumstances at the time, and upon recommendation from the parks and recreation commission, and in accordance
with the parks, recreation, and open space plan adopted by the city. Details of proposed dedication property may be submitted to
the parks board for review and consideration prior to the preliminary plat process.
D. Park dedication fund. The park dedication fund will be administered by the city council to best benefit the development,
provided that the establishment of a park site shall be within the discretion of the city council. The money paid by the applicant
will be expended on such park site. All sums deposited to the fund shall be accounted for by the city and expended for such
purposes as land acquisition, construction of improvements, and purchase of equipment (at the city's discretion).
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12)
Sec. 8-20. Impact fees.
A. Purpose. This section is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the city
by requiring each such development to pay its share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/448
new development.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this subsection:
Advisory committee. The members of the planning and zoning commission, and the representatives appointed by the city council
as required by the state law.
Assessment. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee which can be imposed on new development pursuant
to this section.
Capital improvement. Any of the following facilities that have a life expectancy of three or more years and are owned and
operated by or on behalf of the city:
(1) Water supply, treatment, and distribution facilities; wastewater collection and treatment facilities; and storm
water, drainage, flood control facilities as they relate to the construction of roadway facilities, whether or not they are
located within the service area; and
(2) Roadway facilities.
Capital improvements plan. A plan contemplated by this section that identifies capital improvements or facility expansions for
which impact fee may be assessed, adopted by the city from time to time, and on file in the city secretary's office.
City. The City of Sachse, Texas.
Credit. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payments, or charges for or construction of the same type of
facility.
Facility expansion. The expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an otherwise necessary
new capital improvement in order that the existing facility may serve new development. The term does not include the repair,
maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development.
Final plat approval or approval of a final plat. The point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval and
the plat has been released for filing with the county clerk.
Impact fee. A charge or assessment imposed as set forth in this section against new development. The term does not include:
(1) Required dedications of land for public parks or payments in lieu thereof;
(2) Dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site or off-site water distribution,
wastewater collection or drainage facilities, or streets, sidewalks, or curbs, if the dedication or construction is required
by a valid ordinance and is necessitated by and attributable to the new development;
(3) Lot or acreage fees, or pro rata fees, to be placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing developers for
over-sizing or constructing water or wastewater mains or lines; or
(4) Other pro rata fees for reimbursement of water or wastewater mains or lines extended by the city.
Land use assumptions. A description of the service area and projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities, and
population and employment growth in the service area over at least a ten-year period, and adopted by the city, as may be
amended from time to time, upon which the capital improvements plans are based, adopted by the city from time to time, and on
file in the city secretary's office.
New development. A project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land, any of which has the effect of increasing
the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by
such activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, the issuance of a
building permit or connection to the city's water or wastewater system, and which has not been exempted from these regulations
by provisions of this section. Installation of a larger water meter will constitute new development.
Off-site. A facility or expansion that is not a site-related facility, as defined herein. Located entirely on property which is not
included within the bounds of the plat being considered for impact fee assessment.
On-site. An improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary
purpose of safe and adequate provision of water and wastewater facilities to serve the new development and which is not
included in the impact fee capital improvements plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under
Subdivision and other applicable regulations.
Roadway facilities. Arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on the city's officially adopted roadway plan,
together with all necessary appurtenances. The term includes, but is not limited to, the city's share of costs for roadways and
associated improvements designated on the Federal or Texas Highway System, including, but not limited to, local matching funds
and costs related to utility line relocation and the establishment of curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drainage appurtenances. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/448
term also includes but is not limited to interests in land, traffic lanes, curbs, gutters, intersection improvements, traffic control
devices, turn lanes, drainage facilities associated with the roadway or street lighting.
Service area. The area within the city and/or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as identified in the land use assumptions, to be
served by the capital improvements or facilities expansions specified in the capital improvements plan, for roadway facilities
service area means any one of the individual services areas within the city's corporate boundaries as identified in the land use
assumptions and the capital improvements plan.
Service unit. The standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of
development, that had been calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering and/or planning standards, as
indicated in the land use equivalency tables located in the “2011-2021 Capital Improvements Plan and Impact Fee Analysis for
Water, Sanitary Sewer and Thoroughfares”, which is attached hereto as Exhibit “D” and incorporated by reference herein, as may
be amended from time to time.
Sanitary sewer facility. An improvement for providing wastewater collection, including, but not limited to, land or easements, lift
stations, or interceptor mains. Sanitary sewer facility excludes sanitary sewer lines or mains which are reimbursed from pro rata
charges paid by developers or owners of property in other subdivisions as a condition of connection to or use of such facility.
Site-related facility or on-site. An improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or
which is the for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of water and wastewater facilities to serve the new
development and which is not included in the impact fee capital improvements plan and for which the property owner is solely
responsible under subdivision and other applicable regulations, or which is located at least partially on the plat which is being
considered for impact fee assessment. Site-related facility includes that portion of an off-site water or wastewater main,
equivalent to a standard size water or wastewater main, which is necessary to connect any new development with the city's
water or wastewater system, the cost of which has not been included in the city's impact fee capital improvements plan.
Water facility. A water interceptor or main, pump station, storage tank or other facility or improvement used for providing water
supply, treatment and distribution service included within the city's water storage or distribution system. Water facility includes,
but is not limited to, land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. Water facility excludes a site-related facility.
Utility connection. A connection of an individual meter to the city's water or wastewater system, or an increase in the size of an
existing meter.
Wastewater facility. A wastewater interceptor or main, lift station or other facility or improvement used for providing wastewater
collection and treatment included within the city's collection system for wastewater. Wastewater facility includes, but is not limited
to, land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. Wastewater facility excludes a site-related facility.
Water meter. A device for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for domestic or for irrigation purposes.
C. Advisory committee.
(1) The advisory committee shall consist of the planning and zoning commission. If the committee does not include
at least one representative of the real estate, development or building industry who is not an employee or official of a
political Subdivision or governmental entity, the city council shall appoint at least one such representative as an ad
hoc voting member of the advisory committee. If any impact fee is to be applied in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city, a representative from that area shall be appointed by the city council.
(2) The advisory committee serves in an advisory capacity and is established to:
(a) Advise and assist the adoption of land use assumptions;
(b) Review the capital improvements plan and file written comments;
(c) Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan;
(d) File semi-annual reports with respect to the progress of the capital improvements plan and report to the
city council any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the impact fee; and
(e) Advise the city staff and council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital
improvements plan, and impact fee.
(3) All professional reports concerning the development and implementation of the capital improvements plan shall
be made available to the advisory committee.
(4) The advisory committee shall elect a chairperson to preside at its meetings and a vice-chairperson to serve in
his or her absence. All meetings of the committee shall be open to the public and posted at least 72 hours in advance.
A majority of the membership of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
(5) In the event of any conflict between this subsection 8-6(c) and applicable state law, state law shall control.
D. Periodic updates required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/448
(1) The city shall update the land use assumptions and capital improvements plan upon which impact fees are
based at least every five years, beginning with the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact
fees based thereon in accordance with provisions set forth in Chapter 395, Texas Local Government Code, or any
successor statute.
(2) The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors, such
as market conditions, more frequently than provided in subsection (1) above to determine whether the land use
assumptions and capital improvements plan should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly.
(3) If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (1) above, the city council determines that no change
to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such update by
following the procedures in Local Government Code, Section 395.0575, or its successor statute.
E. Impact fee as a condition of development approval/permit issuance. No final plat for new development shall be released for
filing with the appropriate county, nor may any new development be connected to the city's water or wastewater system, nor may
an application of a utility connection be approved, without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this section. No building
permit shall be issued or utility connection made for new development until the property owner has paid the impact fee imposed
herein.
F. Assessment of impact fees.
(1) For land which is un-platted at the time of application for a building permit or utility connection, or for a new
development which received final plat approval prior to the effective date of this article, and for which no re-platting is
necessary pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur
at the time application is made for the building permit or utility connection, whichever first occurs, and shall be the
amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit in effect, as set forth in Exhibits A, B and C, attached hereto and
made part hereof for all purposes. [Exhibits A-C are located at the end of this chapter.]
(2) For a new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations on or after
the effective date of this section, or for which re-platting results in an increase in the number of service units after such
date, assessment of impact fees shall be at the time of final plat recordation, and shall be the amount of the maximum
impact fee per service unit in effect as set forth in Exhibits A, B and C.
(3) Following the initial assessment of impact fees for new development pursuant to subsection (1) above, the
amount of impact fee assessment per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner
proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval or other
development application that results in approval of additional service units, in which case the impact fee will be
reassessed for the increased meter size or additional meters or service units at the impact fee rate then in effect.
(4) Following the vacating of any plat or approval of any re-plat, a new assessment must be made in accordance
with subsection (1) above.
(5) An application for an amending plat made pursuant to V.T.C.A. Texas Local Government Code, sec. 212.016
and the City Subdivision Ordinance, and for which no new development is proposed, is not subject to reassessment
for an impact fee.
(6) Except for roadway facilities, impact fees-may be assessed but not collected for property where service is not
available unless:
(a) The city commits to commence construction of necessary facilities identified in the capital improvements
plan within two years and have service available in a reasonable time not exceeding five years; or
(b) The city agrees in writing to permit the owner of the property to construct or finance the required capital
improvement or facility expansion and agrees that the costs incurred or funds advanced will either:
(i) Be credited against the impact fees otherwise due from the new development;
(ii) Reimburse the owner for such costs from impact fees paid from other new developments that will use
such capital improvements or facility expansions in which case fees shall be reimbursed to the owner at
the time collected as other new development plats are recorded; or
(iii) The owner voluntarily requests that the city reserve capacity to serve future development and the
city and the owner enter into agreement.
(7) Church facilities for the worship of a Supreme Being, and related religious training shall be exempt from the
assessment of impact fees. These facilities shall include auditorium type buildings where worship services are
conducted and class room type buildings in which the primary purpose of the room is for religious instruction. The
definition of church facility shall exclude church-related schools, day care/child care functions, gymnasium, and other
recreational facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/448
(8) Assessment of water or wastewater impact fees may be deferred for developments in the city which are not
planned to connect to the city's water system or wastewater system due to the unavailability of the water or
wastewater lines. These impact fees will be imposed on the property owner at the prevailing rates in the event of a
subsequent connection to the city services.
G. Calculation of impact fees.
(1) Impact fees shall be determined by multiplying the number of service unit equivalents in the proposed
development by the amount per service unit equivalent due under Exhibits A, B and C.
(2) The determination of impact fees shall be reduced by any allowable credits for the category of capital
improvements as provided in this section.
(3) The total amount of unpaid impact fees shall be attached to the development application, or if to be paid at
some later date, to the request for other permit or connection.
(4) Re-platting shall not require recalculation of impact fees unless the number of service units is increased or land
uses change. If a proposed development increases the number of service units, the impact fee shall be recalculated
as provided in this section.
H. Calculation and collection of impact fees.
(1) Impact fees for new development shall be collected at the time the city issues a building permit, or if a building
permit is not required, at the time an application is filed for a new connection, to the city's water or wastewater system,
or for an increase in water meter size, unless an agreement between the property owner and the city has been
executed providing for a different time of payment.
(2) At the time of final plat approval, or the request for a utility connection for an area in the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction for which a final plat was not submitted to the city, for all new developments, the city shall compute the
impact fees due for the new development in the following manner:
(a) The amount of each type of impact fee due (roadway, water, and/or wastewater) shall be determined by
multiplying the number of each type of service units generated by the new development by the impact fee due
for each type of service unit as set forth in Exhibits A, B and C respectively.
(b) The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable credits for that category of capital
improvements in the manner provided by this section.
(3) Whenever a property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a new development, the
additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using the amount of impact fee per
service unit in Exhibits A, B and C, then in effect, and such additional fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
a new building permit, or for an area in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for which a final plat was not required to be
submitted to the city, prior to or at the time of enlargement of the connection to the city's water or wastewater system.
I. Credits.
(1) Any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of any facility appearing in the capital improvements plan
that is required by the city to be constructed by the owner as a condition of development shall be credited against the
impact fees otherwise due from the same category (roadway, water or wastewater) of impact fees assessed on the
development.
(2) The amount of each credit for required construction of a facility in the capital improvements plan shall be
calculated by multiplying the value of the facility assessed for the capital improvements plan by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the impact fee per service unit equivalent due for the new development computed using the
denominator of which is the maximum impact fee per service unit computed using the capital improvements plan.
(3) All credits against impact fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this
section and any additional administrative guidelines that may be adopted by the city.
(a) No credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities.
(b) No credit shall exceed an amount equal to the assessed impact fee.
(c) If a credit applicable to a final plat has not been exhausted within ten years, from the acquisition of the first
building permit issued or utility connection made, after the effective date of the adoption of the applicable impact
fees, or within such period as may otherwise be designated by contract, such credit shall lapse.
(d) In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for a credit when impact fees for the
new development can be collected pursuant to this section or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees
collected or due for the new development for the category of capital improvement, unless otherwise agreed to by
the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/448
(4) The available credit associated with new development shall be applied against an impact fee in the following
manner:
(a) For single-family residential lots in a new development consisting only of single-family residential
development, such credit shall be prorated equally among such lots, to be applied at the time of application of a
building permit for each lot, against impact fees to be collected at the time the building permit is issued.
(b) For all other types of new development, including those involving mixed uses, the credit applicable to the
new development shall be applied to the impact fee due at the time of approval.
(c) At its sole discretion, the city may authorize alternative credit agreements upon written agreement with the
property owner in accordance with the city's administrative guidelines.
J. Establishment of accounts.
(1) All impact fees collected shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital
improvements or facility expansions within the service area for which the fee is collected.
(2) Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited, shall be considered funds of the
account and shall be used only in the same manner as which the underlying funds may be used.
(3) Impact fees and the interest earned thereon may be spent only for the purposes for which such fees were
imposed as shown in the capital improvements plan.
(4) The records of the accounts into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and
copying during ordinary business hours.
K. Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts.
(1) The impact fees collected for each service area may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital
improvements or facility expansion identified in the capital improvements plan for the service area, including but not
limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land
purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees and expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used to pay the
principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the
city to finance such capital improvements or facility expansion.
(2) Impact fees collected pursuant to this section shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
(a) Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities or assets other than capital improvements or
facility expansions identified in the capital improvements plan;
(b) Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansions;
(c) Upgrade, update, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service to
existing development; or
(d) Administrative and operating costs of the city.
L. Refunds.
(1) Upon application by an owner of property, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to city ordinance,
which: (i) has not been expended within the service area within ten years from the date of payment, or (ii) existing
facilities are available and service is denied, or (iii) the city has, after collecting the impact fee when service was not
available, failed to commence construction within two years or service is not available within a reasonable period
considering the type of improvement or expansion, but in no event later than five years from the date of payment,
shall be refunded to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the impact fee was paid
by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of
payment to the date of refund at the statutory rate set forth in the Texas Finance Code, sec. 302.002, or its successor
statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted within 60 days after the expiration of the
ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. An impact fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out basis.
(2) An impact fee collected pursuant to this section shall also be considered expended if the total expenditures for
capital improvements or facilities expansion within the service area within ten years following the date of payment
exceed the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements or facilities expansion during such
period.
(3) If a refund is due pursuant to subsection (1) above, the city shall divide the difference between the amount of
expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service
area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by
multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was
paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/448
(4) Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital improvements
plan for the service area, the city shall recalculate the impact fee per service unit using the actual costs for the
improvements or facilities expansions. If the impact fee per service unit based on actual cost is less than the impact
fee per service unit paid, the city shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the impact fee paid by more
than ten percent. If the difference is less than ten percent, no refund shall be due. The refund to the record owner
shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the development for which the fee
was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
M. Appeals.
(1) The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following decisions to the city council: (a)
the applicability of an impact fee to the new development; (b) the method of calculating the amount of the impact fee
due; (c) the availability or the amount of an offset, credit or rebate; (d) the application of an offset or credit against an
impact fee due; or (e) the amount of a refund due, if any.
(2) The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the
offset credit or rebate was not calculated according to the provisions of this article.
(3) The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the city secretary within 30 days following the determination of
the amount of the impact fees to be paid by the development. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or
other sufficient surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact
fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending.
N. Use of other financing mechanisms.
(1) The city may finance capital improvements or facilities expansions designated in the capital improvements plan
through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public utility districts or other assessment districts, or through
any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in
addition to the use of impact fees.
(2) Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and
supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and
due against the property.
O. Impact fees as additional and supplemental regulations. Impact fees established by this section are additional and
supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the
issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such fees are intended to be consistent with and to further the policies
of the city's comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and
other city policies, ordinances, codes and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities
in conjunction with the development of land.
Exhibit “A”
Maximum Roadway Impact Fees
LAND USE CATEGORY DEVELOPMENT
UNIT
MAXIMUM
IMPACT FEE
% OF MAXIMUM
FEE
ADOPTED
IMPACT FEE
Port and Terminal
Truck Terminal Acre $15,880.78 100% $15,880.78
Industrial
General Light Industrial 1,000 SF GFA $2,356.57 100% $2,356.57
General Heavy Industrial 1,000 SF GFA $458.80 100% $458.80
Industrial Park 1,000 SF GFA $2,085.46 100% $2,085.46
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/448
Warehousing 1,000 SF GFA $771.62 100% $771.62
Mini-Warehouse 1,000 SF GFA $625.64 100% $625.64
Residential
Single-Family Detached Housing Dwelling Unit $2,450.42 100% $2,450.42
Apartment/Multi-Family Dwelling Unit $1,501.53 100% $1,501.53
Residential
Condominium/Townhome
Dwelling Unit $1,261.70 100% $1,261.70
Mobile Home Park/Manufactured
Housing
Dwelling Unit $1,428.54 100% $1,428.54
Senior Adult Housing-Detached Dwelling Unit $656.92 100% $656.92
Senior Adult Housing-Attached Dwelling Unit $385.81 100% $385.81
Assisted Living Beds $531.79 100% $531.79
Lodging
Hotel Room $1,428.54 53.31% $761.55
Motel/Other Lodging Facilities Room $1,136.58 67.00% $761.51
Recreational
Golf Driving Range Tee $3,034.34 100.00% $3,034.34
Golf Course Acre $729.91 100.00% $729.91
Recreational Community Center 1,000 SF GFA $3,514.00 58.72% $2,063.42
Ice Skating Rink Seats $291.96 100.00% $291.96
Miniature Golf Course Hole $802.90 100.00% $802.90
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/448
Multiplex Movie Theater Screens $33,064.97 48.62% $16,076.19
Racquet/Tennis Club Court $8,122.87 100.00% $8,122.87
Institutional
Church 1,000 SF GFA $1,334.69 0.00% $0
Day Care Center 1,000 SF GFA $24,170.48 10.50% $2,537.90
Primary /Middle School(1-8) Students $385.81 100.00% $385.81
High School Students $312.82 100.00% $312.82
Junior/Community College Students $291.96 100.00% $291.96
University/College Students $510.94 100.00% $510.94
Medical
Clinic 1,000 SF GFA $12,554.47 50.00% $6,277.74
Hospital Beds $3,180.33 69.18% $2,200.15
Nursing Home Beds $531.79 100.00% $531.79
Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic 1,000 SF GFA $9,155.17 50.00% $4,577.59
Office
Corporate Headquarters Building 1,000 SF GFA $3,399.30 75.00% $2,549.48
General Office Building 1,000 SF GFA $3,607.85 75.00% $2,705.89
Medical-Dental Office Building 1,000 SF GFA $8,383.55 75.00% $6,287.66
Single Tenant Office Building 1,000 SF GFA $4,191.77 75.00% $3,143.83
Office Park 1,000 SF GFA $3,586.99 75.00% $2,690.24
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/448
Commercial-Automobile Related
Automobile Care Center 1,000 SF Occ. GFA $4,921.69 100.00% $4,921.69
Automobile Parts Sales 1,000 SF GFA $8,258.42 100.00% $8,258.42
Gasoline/Service Station Vehicle Fueling
Position
$19,373.92 100.00% $19,373.92
Gasoline/Service Station w/Conv
Market
Vehicle Fueling
Position
$14,274.97 100.00% $14,274.97
Gasoline/Service Station w/Conv
Market and Car Wash
Vehicle Fueling
Position
$14,869.33 100.00% $14,869.33
New Car Sales 1,000 SF GFA $5,025.96 100.00% $5,025.96
Quick Lubrication Vehicle Shop Servicing Bays $6,287.66 100.00% $6,287.66
Self-Service Car Wash Stall $6,715.18 100.00% $6,715.18
Tire Store 1,000 SF GFA $7,246.97 100.00% $7,246.97
Commercial-Dining
Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-
Thru Window
1,000 SF GFA $40,583.05 29.71% $12,057.22
Fast Food Restaurant without
Drive-Thru Window
1,000 SF GFA $31,698.99 14.01% $4,441.03
High Turnover (Sit-Down)
Restaurant
1,000 SF GFA $15,411.55 12.35% $1,903.33
Quality Restaurant 1,000 SF GFA $10,166.62 12.48% $1,268.79
Coffee/Donut Shop with Drive-
Thru Window
1,000 SF GFA $52,042.65 20.73% $10,788.44
Commercial-Other Retail
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/448
Free-Standing Retail Store 1,000 SF GFA $8,727.65 50.00% $4,363.83
Nursery (Garden Center) 1,000 SF GFA $7,372.10 50.00% $3,686.05
Home Improvement Superstore 1,000 SF GFA $2,992.64 50.00% $1,496.32
Pharmacy/Drugstore w/o Drive-
Thru Window
1,000 SF GFA $9,593.12 50.00% $4,796.56
Pharmacy/Drugstore w/Drive-
Thru Window
1,000 SF GFA $12,794.30 50.00% $6,397.15
Shopping Center 1,000 SF GFA $5,964.42 50.00% $2,982.21
Supermarket 1,000 SF GFA $16,287.44 50.00% $8,143.72
Toy/Children's Superstore 1,000 SF GFA $8,466.97 50.00% $4,233.49
Department Store 1,000 SF GFA $3,023.92 50.00% $1,511.96
Video Rental Store 1,000 SF GFA $16,485.56 100.00% $16,485.56
Services
Walk-In Bank 1,000 SF GFA $17,642.99 100.00% $17,642.99
Drive-In Bank Drive-In Lanes $33,179.67 100.00% $33,179.67
Hair Salon 1,000 SF GFA $2,815.37 100.00% $2,815.37
Exhibit “B”
Water Impact Fee
Meter Type Meter Size Ratio to 5/8"
Meter (Equiv # of
EDU's)
Maximum Impact
Fee
Adopted Impact Fee
(70%)
Simple 5/8" × 3/4" 1.0 $3,602.42 $2,521.69
Simple-Residential 3/4" 1.0 $3,602.42 $2,521.69
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/448
Simple-Commercial ¾" 1.5 $5,403.63 $3,782.54
Simple 1" 2.5 $9,006.06 $6,304.24
Simple 1-1/2" 5.0 $18,012.11 $12,608.48
Simple 2" 8.0 $28,819.38 $20,173.57
Compound 2" 8.0 $28,819.38 $20,173.57
Turbine 2" 10.0 $36,024.22 $25,216.95
Compound 3" 16.0 $57,638.76 $40,347.13
Turbine 3" 24.0 $86,458.14 $60,520.70
Compound 4" 25.0 $90,060.56 $63,042.39
Turbine 4" 42.0 $151,301.74 $105,911.22
Compound 6" 50.0 $180,121.12 $126,084.78
Turbine 6" 92.0 $331,422.85 $231,996.00
Compound 8" 80.0 $288,193.79 $201,735.65
Turbine 8" 160.0 $576,387.57 $403,471.30
Compound 10" 115.0 $414,278.57 $289,995.00
Turbine 10" 250.0 $900,605.58 $630,423.91
Turbine 12" 330.0 $1,188,799.37 $832,159.56
Exhibit “C”
Maximum Impact Fee per 5/8 Inch Meter Equivalent - Wastewater
Meter Type Meter Size Ratio to 5/8"
Meter (Equiv # of
EDU's)
Maximum Impact
Fee
Adopted Impact Fee
(100%)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/448
Simple 5/8" × 3/4" 1.0 $1,857.68 $1,857.68
Simple-Residential 3/4" 1.0 $1,857.68 $1,857.68
Simple-Commercial 3/4" 1.5 $2,786.53 $2,786.53
Simple 1" 2.5 $4,644.21 $4,644.21
Simple 1-1/2" 5.0 $9,288.42 $9,288.42
Simple 2" 8.0 $14,861.47 $14,861.47
Compound 2" 8.0 $14,861.47 $14,861.47
Turbine 2" 10.0 $18,576.83 $18,576.83
Compound 3" 16.0 $29,722.94 $29,722.94
Turbine 3" 24.0 $44,584.40 $44,584.40
Compound 4" 25.0 $46,442.09 $46,442.09
Turbine 4" 42.0 $78,022.71 $78,022.71
Compound 6" 50.0 $92,884.17 $92,884.17
Turbine 6" 92.0 $170,906.88 $170,906.88
Compound 8" 80.0 $148,614.68 $148,614.68
Turbine 8" 160.0 $297,229.36 $297,229.36
Compound 10" 115.0 $213,633.60 $213,633.60
Turbine 10" 250.0 $464,420.87 $464,420.87
Turbine 12" 330.0 $613,035.55 $613,035.55
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/448
(Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3443, sec. 1, adopted 12/3/12)
Sec. 8-21. Inspection fees.
A. Each plat applicant shall pay to the city an inspection fee equal to set proportion of the estimated cost of public
improvements in and adjacent to the requested plat. The inspection fee shall be in accordance with the City of Sachse Master
Fee Schedule established by resolution of the city council. Public improvements include, but are not limited to, water, sewer,
streets, and drainage. The determination of the inspection fee shall be based upon contracts provided by the applicant to
estimate the construction costs of public improvements. The fee shall be paid before the release of engineering plans and/or site
plans. (Ordinance 3401, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/12; Ordinance 3443, sec. 2, adopted 12/3/12)
CHAPTER 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sec. 9-1. Uniform Act adopted.
For the purpose of regulating traffic on the streets, alleys, and thoroughfares of the City of Sachse, there is hereby adopted the
State Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, codified as state motor vehicle laws, which act and laws, together with the
provisions contained in this chapter, shall be controlling in the regulation of traffic in the city. A violation of said act or any state
motor vehicle law for which the municipal court has jurisdiction shall constitute and be punishable as a violation of this Code of
Ordinances. (1988 Code)
Sec. 9-2. Traffic control devices.
A. Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted. All traffic control devices including signs, signals, and markings
(pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the City of Sachse shall conform
with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, hereinafter called the manual. Article 6701d, Vernon's Civil Statutes
states that all signs, signals, and markings erected or used by the City of Sachse shall be uniform and be located as far as
practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the city.
B. Ratification of existing traffic control devices. All traffic control devices and those erected in the future by the city being
consistent with the manual, state law, and this section shall be official traffic control devices.
C. Unauthorized traffic control devices.
(1) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street, or alley any unauthorized
sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device
or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes
with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(2) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street, or alley any
traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(3) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets, or
alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(4) Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police
is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice.
D. Tampering with traffic control devices. No person shall without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure,
knock down, or remove any official traffic control device, sign, or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or
insignia thereof, or any street name sign or any part thereof.
E. Installation of traffic control devices.
(1) The city council of the City of Sachse shall, by ordinance, direct that the city manager shall have the duty of
erecting or installing upon, over, along, or beside any highway, street, or alley, signs, signals, and markings, or cause
the same to be erected, installed, or placed in accordance with this section and consistent with the manual. Said
traffic control devices shall be installed immediately or as soon as such specific device, sign, or signal can be
procured.
(2) Whenever the city manager has erected and installed any official traffic control device, signal or sign at any
location in the City of Sachse, or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to this section, the
manual, or another ordinance directing the erection of such device, sign or signal, he shall thereafter file a report with
the city secretary in writing and signed officially by the city manager, stating the type of traffic control device, sign or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/448
signal and when and where the same was erected or installed. The city secretary shall file and maintain such report of
the city manager among the official papers in the office of the city secretary.
F. Prima facie evidence of proper installation. It being unlawful for any person other than the city manager, acting pursuant to
an ordinance of the city, to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign, or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or
the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this
section or any traffic ordinance of the City of Sachse, that any traffic control device, sign, signal, or marking was actually in place
on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the city manager pursuant to the authority of
this section and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device, signal, or marking.
(Ordinance 603 adopted 8/8/87)
Sec. 9-3. Arrest procedures.
A. Information to be taken by arresting officer; release of violator on notice to appear; distribution of copies of notice.
Whenever any person is arrested for violating any provision relating to motor vehicle violations, except as otherwise provided in
this section, the arresting officer shall take the violator's name, address, make of car and the registration or license number of the
motor vehicle involved, and issue to such violator, in writing on a form to be provided by the city, a notice to answer to the charge
against him within not more than ten days, during the hours and at the place specified in the notice. The officer shall thereupon
have the violator give his written promise to answer as specified in the notice, and upon securing such written promise shall
release such violator from custody. The arresting officer shall retain one copy of such notice to be furnished to the state and one
copy to be delivered to the court clerk, and the third copy shall be provided to the arrested party.
Editor's note – The disposition of copies of notice was revised as reflected above with the adoption of this Code of Ordinances.
B. Failure to answer charges of traffic violation.
(1) In the event that any person charged with a traffic violation shall fail to appear at the time designated in the
notice provided for in subsection A, the chief of police shall proceed as in all other criminal cases, and upon the filing
of a complaint, to arrest such violator and bring him before the city court.
(2) Any person who violates his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation,
is guilty of contempt of court, regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally arrested.
(3) Any driver or owner of a motor vehicle who willfully neglects to answer to the charges set forth in a notice affixed
to such motor vehicle by a police officer is guilty of the charge for which the notice was originally issued.
C. Giving false name or address upon arrest for traffic violation.
(1) No person, upon being arrested by a police officer of the city for a violation of this chapter, shall give such
arresting officer, as his name, any other name than his true and correct name.
(2) No person, upon being arrested by a police officer of the city for a violation of this chapter shall give such
arresting officer, as his address, any other address than his true and correct address.
D. Fines; designation of amounts to be paid. The judges of the city court shall designate the fines to be paid for the first,
second and third offenses, which may be satisfied by payment of the same at the traffic violations bureau.
E. Fines; method of payment. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this
chapter may, within the time specified in the notice, appear at the municipal court and answer the charge set forth in such notice
by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney
to the person in charge of the bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in court.
F. Disposition of fines collected. All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person
charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general
fund of the city.
G. Authority to impound vehicles. In the event any property of any description, motor vehicle, vehicle, horse or any obstruction
shall be found existing, standing, parked, ranked, erected or lying in or upon any part of any public street, alley or other public
place within the city in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city now or hereafter placed in effect, the same shall
be a nuisance per se, or in the event that the owner or operator thereof is placed under arrest and the vehicle left unattended, the
same may be removed and impounded by the chief of police, or any peace officer, at his discretion in such place as the chief of
police may select and kept there until redeemed by its owner or his authorized agent, who shall pay all costs of removal and
storage that may have accrued thereon, and such payment of removal and storage shall be cumulative of all fines that may be
assessed by the city and shall be paid directly to the person removing and storing the same.
(Ordinance 268 adopted 3/24/80)
Sec. 9-4. Speed limits.
A. Generally.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/448
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or operate a vehicle on any street or alley in the city limits of the
City of Sachse at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the
actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering a highway in compliance with legal
requirements and it shall be the duty of all persons to use due care.
(2) If any person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of Sachse on any
street at a greater speed than 30 miles per hour, or in any alley or park at a greater speed than ten miles per hour, it
shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section, unless signs are erected designating another speed limit.
(3) Whenever the city shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation that the 30 miles
per hour speed limit is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection
or other place, or upon any part of the street or highway, the city shall, upon authorization by the city council by
appropriate ordinance, establish such speed limit as shall be effective at all times when appropriate signs giving
notice thereof are erected at such intersections or other place or part of the street or highway.
(4) No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law, or at the direction of a
police officer. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by direction to drivers and, in the event of
apparent, willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with the direction of an officer in accordance
herewith, the continued slow operation of a motor vehicle by a driver shall be a misdemeanor.
B. Special speed zones. Pursuant to subsection A(3) above, the following streets, or portions thereof, are designated as
special speed zones. A person commits an offense if he or she drives a vehicle in a special speed zone at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower
speeds for compliance with the preceding sentence, the limits specified in this subsection shall be lawful, but any speed in
excess of the limits specified in this subsection shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that
it is unlawful:
(1) Sachse Road:
Eastbound from Highway 78 to Miles Road to be 35 MPH
Eastbound from Miles Road to Merritt Road to be 40 MPH
Westbound from city limits to Merritt Road to be 45 MPH
Westbound from Merritt Road to Miles Road to be 40 MPH
Westbound from Miles Road to Highway 78 to be 35 MPH
(2) State Highway No. 78:
No motor vehicle shall be operated along and upon S.H. No. 78 within the corporate limits of the City of Sachse in
excess of 45 miles per hour.
(3) Murphy Road:
Southbound from Blackburn Road to S.H. 78 to be 40 MPH except areas designated during certain hours as a
school zone.
Northbound from State Highway 78 to north city limits to be 40 MPH except areas designated during certain hours
as a school zone.
(4) Blackburn Road:
Eastbound from Murphy Road to Third Street to be 35 MPH
Westbound from Third Street to Murphy Road to be 35 MPH
(5) Pleasant Valley Road:
Eastbound from west city limits to east city limits to be 30 MPH
Westbound from east city limits to west city limits to be 30 MPH
(6) Bunker Hill Road:
Southbound from S.H. 78 to Miles Road to be 40 MPH
Northbound from Miles Road to S.H. 78 to be 40 MPH
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/448
(7) Ben Davis Road:
Southbound from S.H. 78 south city limits to be 35 MPH, except areas designated during certain hours as a school
zone
Northbound from south city limits to S.H. 78 to be 35 MPH, except areas designated during certain hours as a
school zone
(8) Merritt Road:
Southbound from Sachse Road to south city limits to be 40 MPH
Northbound from south city limits to Sachse Road to be 40 MPH
(9) Miles Road:
Southbound from Sachse Road to south city limits to be 45 MPH except areas designated during certain hours as
a school zone.
Northbound from south city limits to Sachse Road to be 45 MPH except areas designated during certain hours as
a school zone.
(10) Maxwell Creek Road:
Southbound from north city limits to Ingram Road to be 35 MPH
Northbound from Ingram Road to north city limits to be 35 MPH
(11) 3rd Street:
Eastbound from Blackburn Road to DeWitt Road to be 35 MPH
Westbound from DeWitt Road to Blackburn Road to be 35 MPH
(12) Hudson Drive:
Eastbound from Miles Road for a distance of approximately 1,760 feet east to be 30 MPH
Westbound from approximately 1,760 feet east of Miles Road to Miles Road to be 30 MPH
(13) Creek Crossing Lane:
The portion of Creek Crossing Lane from the intersection with Bailey Road to a point 150 linear feet east of the
centerline of Royal Oaks Estates Drive to be 20 MPH.
(14) 5th Street:
Northbound from State Highway 78 to Dewitt Road to be 40 MPH
Southbound from Dewitt Road to State Highway 78 to be 40 MPH
(15) Dewitt Road:
Northbound from 5th Street to Ranch Road to be 40 MPH
Southbound from Ranch Road to 5th Street to be 40 MPH
(16) Maxwell Creek Road:
Northbound from Ranch Road to the north city limit to be 40 MPH
Southbound from the north city limit to Ranch Road to be 40 MPH
(17) Woodbridge Parkway:
Northbound from State Highway 78 to the north City Limit to be 35 MPH
Southbound from the north city limit to State Highway 78 to be 35 MPH
(18) Ranch Road:
Eastbound from Maxwell Creek Road to State Highway 78 to be 40 MPH
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/448
Westbound from the State Highway 78 to Maxwell Creek Road to be 40 MPH
C. School zones.
(1) The prima facie maximum speed limit for operation of motor vehicles in school zones as defined herein shall be
20 miles per hour, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable
or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(2) For the purpose of this section, “school zone” shall be defined to mean any of the designated areas during
certain hours, as specified herein, on all official school days. The designation of the areas and effective times will be
shown by use of flashing amber lights and/or supplemental signs with the effective time periods posted. At all other
times the otherwise established prima facie maximum speed limits will be applicable. The designated areas and hours
shall be as follows:
(a) The portion of Creek Crossing Lane, both eastbound and westbound, that falls within the area from 200
feet east of its intersection with Woodbridge Parkway to a point 200 feet west of the most western driveway of
the Cheri Cox Elementary School, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(b) The portion of Miles Road, both northbound and southbound, that falls within the area 2,395 feet north and
588 feet south of the intersection of Miles Road and Hudson Drive, during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:15 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 4:25 p.m.
(c) The portion of Ben Davis Road, both northbound and southbound, that falls within the area 295 feet north
of the intersection of Highridge Drive and Ben Davis Road then northbound and southbound to the intersection
of Ben Davis Road and Bunker Hill Road, to include the Ben Davis Road extension, during the hours of 7:30
a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m.
(d) The portion of Woodbridge Parkway, both north and southbound that falls within the area 200 feet south of
Creek Crossing to 200 feet north of Club House Drive, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
(e) The portion of Bradford Estates Drive, both northbound and southbound, that falls within the area from its
intersection with Creek Crossing Lane to a point 200 feet south of the intersection, during the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(f) The portion of Magnolia Estates Court, both northbound and southbound, that falls within the area from its
intersection with Creek Crossing Lane to a point 200 feet south of that intersection, during the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(g) The portion of Ranch Road, both eastbound and westbound, that falls within the area from 300 feet west
of Woodcreek Way to a point 1,020 feet east of Woodcreek Way, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:45 a.m. and
2:15 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(h) The portion of Woodcreek Way, both northbound and southbound, that falls within the area from Ridge
Glen Drive to Ranch Road, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(i) The portion of Hudson Drive, both eastbound and westbound, that falls within the area from a point 1,760
feet east of Miles Road to the intersection with Miles Road, during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:15 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 4:25 p.m.
(j) The portion of Canyon Crest Drive, both eastbound and westbound, that falls within the area from a point
500 feet west of Woodcreek Way to a point 600 feet east of Woodcreek Way, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
7:45 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(Ordinance 300 adopted 10/26/81; Ordinance 472 adopted 3/3/86; Ordinance 483 adopted 5/19/86; Ordinance 505 adopted
9/22/86; Ordinance 845 adopted 12/18/89; Ordinance 865 adopted 12/18/89; Ordinance 1038, secs. I, II, adopted 9/9/92;
Ordinance 1084 adopted 4/19/93; Ordinance 1271 adopted 6/5/95; Ordinance 1358 adopted 5/6/96; Ordinance 1569 adopted
4/6/98; Ordinance 1953, secs. 1, 2, adopted 8/5/02; Ordinance 2077, sec. 1, adopted 5/3/04; Ordinance 2563, sec. 1, adopted
2/5/07; Ordinance 3071, sec. 1, adopted 8/4/08; Ordinance 3210, sec. 1, adopted 5/3/10; Ordinance 3288, sec. 1, adopted
4/18/11; Ordinance 3334, sec. 1, adopted 11/7/11; Ordinance 3408, sec. 1, adopted 8/6/12; Ordinance 3536, sec. 1, adopted
10/7/13; Ordinance 3625, sec. 1, adopted 11/3/14; Ordinance 3708, sec. 1, adopted 1/4/16; Ordinance 3709, sec. 1, adopted
1/4/16; Ordinance 3710, sec. 1, adopted 1/4/16; Ordinance 3737, sec. 1, adopted 5/16/16; Ordinance 3808, sec. 1, adopted
8/7/17; Ordinance 3855, sec. 1, adopted 2/19/18)
Sec. 9-5. Temporary speed limits.
In the event of construction on any street or highway, the city engineer is authorized to conduct an engineering and traffic
investigation to determine if the maximum lawful prima facie speed limit established by this chapter should be temporarily
reduced in order to preserve and protect the public safety. If the city engineer determines that such speed limit should be
reduced, he shall enter a written finding and order to that effect and, upon approval of that order in writing by the city manager or
his designated representative, temporary official traffic-control devices shall be erected in proper position and sufficiently legible
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/448
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person prior to any enforcement action against an alleged violator. The finding and order of
the city engineer and city manager or his designated representative shall estimate the length of time for which such temporary
speed limit shall be in effect and, if necessary, an additional order in writing shall be entered in the event it is necessary to extend
such time. No such temporary speed limit shall be effective longer than is provided in such written order, nor in any event longer
than is necessary to complete the construction for which the speed limit was ordered. A certified copy of the order shall be
admissible in evidence in municipal court to establish the authority of such temporary speed limit, and it is hereby determined
and declared that any such temporary speed limit found and ordered in accordance with this section shall be the speed which is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing, and any
violation of such temporary speed limit shall be considered a violation of this Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance 3115, sec. 1,
adopted 3/2/09)
Sec. 9-6. Parking.
A. Truck parking.
(1) Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner to leave, park or stand any truck-tractor, road tractor,
semi-trailer, bus, truck or trailer with a rated capacity in excess of one ton, according to the manufacturer's
classification, upon any public street or highway within any area zoned as either single-family dwelling district, duplex
district, multiple family district, commercial district or industrial district, according to the zoning ordinance of the city.
(2) Exceptions. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in said zoned
areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, but not otherwise,
and provided, however, that not more than one truck-tractor or semi-trailer cab may be parked upon a residential lot in
said zoned districts.
B. No parking areas. Certain areas or portions of the public streets described in this section have been, are hereby and shall
hereafter be set apart, marked and designated as no parking for all vehicles owned by or operated by any person within said
areas or portions of said public streets. The parking of any vehicle within any space within the designated area which is or shall
be marked “No Parking” shall be prohibited on each and every day of the year between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 12:00
midnight.
(1) Violation. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to cause, allow,
permit or suffer any vehicle operated by such person to be parked within the area herein designated as “No Parking.”
(2) Areas designated. The area of the public streets of the city within which certain areas or spaces shall be marked
or designated as “No Parking” shall and does hereby include:
a. Ben Davis Road.
i. The west side of Ben Davis Road from Old Ben Davis Road to Highridge Drive.
ii. The east side of Ben Davis Road from Highridge Drive to a point 385 feet south of Highridge Drive.
b. Brookhollow Drive.
i. The south side of Brookhollow Drive from a point 130 feet south of Brookhollow Court to a point 120
feet east of Alexander Street.
c. Brookview Drive.
i. The east side of Brookview Drive from a point 120 feet south of Brookhollow Drive to a point 150 feet
south of Brookhollow Drive.
d. Hudson Drive.
i. The north side of Hudson Drive from Miles Road to a point 295 feet east of Miles Road.
ii. The north side of Hudson Drive from Miles Road to Mitchell Court.
iii. Both sides of Hudson Drive from a point 550 feet east of Miles Road to a point 605 feet east of Miles
Road.
iv. The north side of Hudson Drive from a point 900 feet east of Miles Road to a point 970 feet east of
Miles Road.
v. The south side of Miles Road to a point 255 feet west of Miles Road.
e. Jewel Street.
i. The south side of Jewel Street along its entire length in the city.
f. Salmon Street.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/448
i. Both sides of Salmon Street from Sachse Road to the alley between Sachse Road and 6th Street.
ii. The west side from the alley between Lillie Street and 7th Street to a point 30 feet south of said alley.
g. Seventh Street.
i. The north side of 7th Street from Jewel Street to a point 55 feet east of Jewel Street.
ii. The west side of 7th Street from Jewel Street to a point 90 feet south of Jewel Street.
h. Ridgebluff Lane.
i. Both sides of Ridgebluff Lane from Ranch Road to the alley between Ranch Road and Paddock Trail.
i. Clearmeadow Lane.
i. Both sides of Clearmeadow Lane from Ranch Road to the alley between Ranch Road and
Meadowview Lane.
j. Cody Lane.
i. The southeast side of Cody Lane from a point 450 feet northeast of Ranch Road to a point 1125 feet
northeast of Ranch Road.
ii. The northwest side of Cody Lane from a point 200 feet south of Canyon Crest Drive to a point 200
feet north of Canyon Crest Drive.
(3) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle along either curb of
the 4300 and 4400 blocks of Haverhill Lane, Briarcrest Lane, and Hunter's Ridge Drive, for longer than two hours,
between the hours 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on school days.
(4) Portion of the 4000 block of Hudson Drive as no parking and hereby directs the city manager to cause the
placement of no parking signs for affected traffic, such signs to conform to the manual and specification adopted
under Texas Transportation Code sec. 544.001 and located in accordance with Texas Transportation Code sec.
544.002.
(5) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to stop, stand, leave, or park any motor vehicle along any
curb of Miles Road from KOA Wood Road to Hudson Drive.
C. Parking for disabled persons.
(1) Designation of parking spaces by owner. The city council or a person who owns or controls property within the
city, used for parking, may designate one or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles
transporting persons temporarily or permanently disabled by reason of mobility problems that substantially impair the
person's ability to ambulate, or who are legally blind. The city council or person who owns or controls property within
the city used for parking, that designates parking spaces for disabled persons shall erect vertical signs that
substantially conform to the design established and approved or which may hereinafter be established and approved
by the state department of highways and public transportation.
(2) Vehicles using space reserved for disabled must be marked. Any vehicle displaying a symbol, tab, or other
device authorized by the state department of highways and public transportation attached to the license plate or in
which a disabled identification card issued by the state department of highways and public transportation is placed on
the lower left-hand side of the front windshield of said vehicle, when operated by or for the transportation of a disabled
person, shall be allowed to park for unlimited periods in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for
the physically handicapped. A vehicle properly displaying the above symbol, tab, device attached to the license plate
or identification card is exempt from the payment of any penalties imposed by city ordinances which regulate parking
in spaces which have a limit on the length of time allowed for parking. However, to qualify for this exemption the
vehicle must be parked at the time by or for the transportation of a handicapped person. This exemption does not
apply to fees or penalties imposed by a branch of the United States Government. This subsection does not permit
parking a vehicle at a place or time that parking is prohibited.
(3) Specific offenses. A person commits an offense if the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor
transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks a vehicle with such special device or displaying
a temporarily disabled person identification card in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for the
disabled. A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle neither displaying the special device nor
displaying a temporarily disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically
for the disabled. A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or
curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled. A person commits an offense if he
lends an identification card issued to him under Article 6675a-5e-1 Texas Revised Civil Statutes, as amended, to a
person who used the identification card in violation of this subsection. An offense under this section is punishable by a
fine of not more than $500.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/448
D. Parking of vehicles for sale prohibited. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to stand or park a vehicle on any
public street, shopping center, parking lot, playground, athletic field, vacant lot or public or private school for the principal purpose
of displaying it for sale.
(Ordinance 300 adopted 10/26/81; Ordinance 709 adopted 9/19/88; Ordinance 1473 adopted 5/5/97; Ordinance 3040, sec. 1,
adopted 3/17/08; Ordinance 3040, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/08; Ordinance 3154, sec. 1, adopted 8/3/09; Ordinance 3281, sec. 1,
adopted 3/7/11; Ordinance 3633, sec. 1, adopted 12/1/14; Ordinance 3703, sec. 1, adopted 11/16/15; Ordinance 3779, sec. 1,
adopted 2/6/17)
Sec. 9-7. Abandoned and junked motor vehicles.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this subsection:
Abandoned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle that:
(1) Is inoperable, is more than five years old, and has been left unattended on public property for more than 48
hours; or
(2) Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; or
(3) Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property for more
than 48 hours; or
(4) Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway for more than 48
hours; or
(5) Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed and
maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority Division of the Texas Department of Transportation or a controlled access
highway; or
(6) Is considered an abandoned motor vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 644.153(r).
Antique vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Inoperable. Means not capable of being used or operated due to legal or mechanical incapability.
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Displays an expired/invalid motor vehicle registration certificate, or does not display a motor vehicle registration;
(2) Is:
a. Wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
b. Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
i. Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
ii. Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor vehicle. A vehicle that is subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code Ch. 501, as amended or superseded.
Motor vehicle collector. A person who:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
(2) Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest
vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Outboard motor. An outboard motor subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code Ch. 31, as amended or
superseded.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and,
because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
Watercraft. A vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code Ch. 31, as amended or superseded.
B. Public nuisance. A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle that is visible at any time of the year from a public
place or public right-of-way:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/448
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates a fire hazard;
(5) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and
(7) Is a public nuisance.
C. Offense.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by subsection B. of this
section.
(2) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00.
D. Procedure for disposition of junked vehicle. The procedure for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle thereof as a
public nuisance from private property, public property, or public right-of-way shall be as follows:
(1) Notice. After a determination is made by the city manager or his/her designee, or other appropriate city
employee (each such person being a regularly salaried, full time employee of the city) that a particular vehicle is a
junked vehicle, or after an order is issued by the municipal court pursuant to subsections D.(2) and D.(3) of this
section, there shall be provided not less than ten days' notice of the nature of the nuisance.
(a) Such notice must be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to:
i. The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
ii. Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
iii. The owner or occupant of:
a. The property on which the nuisance is located; or
b. If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way.
If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be
placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. If the notice is returned undelivered,
action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the
return.
(b) The notice must state that:
i. The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the
notice was personally delivered or mailed;
ii. Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires;
iii. If the vehicle is not removed and abated within the said ten-day period, a public hearing will be held
on the abatement and removal (which hearing, if requested by a person for whom notice is required under
subsection (1)(a)iii. shall not be earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of the notice); and
iv. The date, time and place of the hearing (if known at the time the notice is sent).
(2) Hearing.
(a) If the junked vehicle is not removed and abated within the prescribed time period, the municipal court
judge of the city shall hold a public hearing on the abatement and removal of the junked vehicle. At the hearing,
the municipal court judge shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive
testimony from owners, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to such alleged public
nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
(b) At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be
inoperable.
(c) Following the hearing, the municipal court judge shall consider all evidence and determine whether the
vehicle or any part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the municipal court judge finds that a
public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, and that the notice
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/448
requirements provided in this article have been met, the municipal court judge shall make a written order setting
forth the judge's findings and ordering that the nuisance be abated.
(d) If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the order requiring removal of the nuisance
must include the vehicle's:
i. Description;
ii. Vehicle identification number; and
iii. License plate number.
In addition, the order must state that the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with the Texas
Transportation Code.
(e) The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the corporate limits of
the city after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect
on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(3) Abatement of nuisance.
(a) In the event the municipal court judge orders abatement of the nuisance, the city or any duly authorized
person may abate such public nuisance by removal and disposal of the junked vehicle.
(b) Not later than the fifth day after the date of the removal, notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle
must be given to the Texas Department of Transportation.
E. Junked vehicles need not to be reconstructed or made operable after removal. After any junked vehicle has been removed
under the authority of this article, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable again.
F. Disposal of junked vehicles. Any junked vehicle taken into custody by the city, or any duly authorized person pursuant to this
article, shall be disposed of in accordance with application provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code Ch. 683, as amended or
superseded.
G. Application. The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is:
(1) Completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private
property; or
(2) Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle
dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's
property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are:
(a) Maintained in an orderly manner;
(b) Not a health hazard; and
(c) Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence. For purposes hereof, a car
cover is not an appropriate means to screen a vehicle or vehicle part.
H. Enforcement.
(1) The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to enforce this section. Such employee may issue a warning
or a citation before issuing a notice.
(2) Upon conviction on a citation issued under this section, the municipal court judge shall order that the vehicle be
abated and removed within a prescribed period of time, subject to the terms and provisions of this section.
(3) The enforcement remedies authorized under this section shall not be deemed exclusive, and the city reserves
the right to seek any enforcement remedy available at law, in equity, or otherwise. The failure of the city to seek
enforcement of this section by any means provided for hereunder shall not foreclose the enforcement of this section
by any other means.
I. Taking into custody. The police department of the city may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or
outboard motor found on public or private property. The police department may use its own personnel, equipment, and facilities
or contract for other personnel, equipment, and facilities, to remove, preserve, store, send notice regarding, and dispose of an
abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor it takes into custody.
J. Notice. The police department shall send notice of abandonment of a vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into
custody to:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/448
(1) The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor (i) taken into custody by
the police department, or (ii) for which a report is received pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.031, as
amended or superseded; and
(2) Each lienholder recorded under V.T.C.A, Transportation Code Ch. 501 (as amended or superseded) for the
motor vehicle or under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code Ch. 31, (as amended or superseded), for the watercraft or
outboard motor.
K. Contents of notice. The notice under subsection J. must:
(1) Be sent by certified mail not later than the tenth day after the date the police department:
(a) Takes the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor into custody; or
(b) Receives the garagekeeper's report under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.031;
(2) Specify the year, make, model, and identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or
outboard motor;
(3) Give the location of the facility where the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is being held;
(4) Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor
not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice on payment of:
(a) Towing, preservation, and storage charges; or
(b) Garagekeeper's charges and fees under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.032, and if the vehicle is
a commercial motor vehicle impounded under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 644.153(q) (as amended or
superseded), the delinquent administrative penalties and costs; and
(5) State that failure of the owner or lienholder to claim the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor
during the period specified by subsection K.(4) is:
(a) A waiver by that person of all right, title, and interest in the item; and
(b) Consent to the sale of the item at a public auction.
L. Notice by publication. Notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the city is sufficient notice under this
section if:
(1) The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined;
(2) The registration has no address for the owner; or
(3) The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is impossible.
Notice by publication (i) must be published in the same period that is required by subsection K. for notice by certified mail and
contain all of the information required by that subsection, and (ii) may contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle,
watercraft, or outboard motor.
M. Storage fees. The police department or the agent of the police department that takes into custody an abandoned motor
vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is entitled to reasonable storage fees:
(1) For not more than ten days, beginning on the day the item is taken into custody and ending on the day the
required notice is mailed; and
(2) Beginning on the day after the day the police department mails notice and ending on the day accrued charges
are paid and the vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is removed.
N. Auction or use of abandoned items; waiver of rights.
(1) If an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is not claimed after providing the required notice
as set forth in this section:
(a) The owner or lienholder:
i. Waives all rights and interests in the item; and
ii. Consents to the sale of the item by public auction or the transfer of the item, if a watercraft, as
provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.014(d) (as amended or superseded); and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/448
(2) The police department may sell the item at a public auction, transfer the item, if a watercraft, as provided in
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.014(d) (as amended or superseded), or use the item as provided by
subsection O. of this article.
(3) Proper notice of the auction shall be given. A garagekeeper who has a garagekeeper's lien shall be notified of
the time and place of the auction.
(4) The purchase of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor:
(a) Takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership;
(b) Shall receive a sales receipt from the police department; and
(c) Is entitled to register the motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor and receive a certificate of title.
O. Auction proceeds.
(1) The police department is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of sale of an abandoned motor vehicle,
watercraft, or outboard motor for:
(a) The cost of the auction;
(b) Towing, preservation, and storage fees resulting from the taking into custody; and
(c) The cost of notice or publication as required by subsections I., J., and L. of this section.
(2) After deducting the reimbursement allowed under subsection (1) of this section, the proceeds of the sale shall
be held for 90 days for the owner or lienholder of the item.
(3) After the 90-day period provided in subsection (2) of this section, proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lienholder
shall be deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of auction, towing, preservation, storage, and
notice and publication fees resulting from taking other vehicles, watercraft, or outboard motors into custody if the
proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to meet those fees.
(4) The city may transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account described in subsection (3) of this section
to the city's general revenue account to be used by the police department.
P. Police department use of certain abandoned motor vehicles.
(1) The police department may use an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor for department
purposes if the item is not claimed as provided for in this article.
(2) If the police department discontinues the use of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor, the
department shall auction the item.
(3) This section does not apply to a vehicle on which there is a garagekeeper's lien.
Q. Disposal of vehicle abandoned in storage facility.
(1) The police department shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility (as described in
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.031, as amended or superseded) that has not been claimed in the period
provided by notice required under subsections I. and J. of this section.
(2) The police department may use such a vehicle as authorized by subsection P. or sell the vehicle at auction as
provided by subsection N. If the vehicle is sold, the proceeds of the sale shall first be applied to garagekeeper's
charges for providing notice regarding the vehicle and for service, towing, impoundment, storage, and repair of the
vehicle.
(3) As compensation for expenses incurred in taking the vehicle into custody and selling it, the police department
shall retain:
(a) Two percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of the vehicle; or
(b) All the proceeds if the gross proceeds of the sale are less than $10.00.
(4) Surplus proceeds from the sale shall be distributed as provided by subsection N. of this section.
(5) If the police department does not take the vehicle into custody before the 31st day after the date the vehicle was
reported abandoned under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.031 (as amended or superseded), the police
department may not take the vehicle into custody, and the storage facility may dispose of the vehicle as set forth in
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.034(e) (as amended or superseded).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/448
R. Demolition of abandoned motor vehicles. The procedures for handling the demolition of an abandoned motor vehicle shall
be in accordance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code Ch. 683, Subch. D, as amended or superseded.
(Ordinance 126 adopted 11/9/71; Ordinance 3789, sec. 1, adopted 4/3/17)
Sec. 9-8. Truck routes and vehicle weights.
A. Operation of truck in residential area. No tractor or truck-tractor combination shall be operated on any predominantly
residential street between the hours of 9:30 p.m. to 6:30 a.m.
B. Truck routes established. Every U.S. and state highway and the following streets within the city are hereby designated as
truck routes under the terms of this section and limited to the following maximum city designated gross weights:
(1) U.S. Highways No maximum weight limits
(2) State Highways No maximum weight limits
(3) Park Lane No maximum weight limits
(4) Industrial Drive No maximum weight limits
(5) Murphy Road 60,000 lbs. maximum weight limit
(6) Merritt Road from Pleasant Valley to South City Limits No maximum weight limits
(7) Pleasant Valley Road No maximum weight limits
(8) Miles Road from Bunker Hill to South City Limits No maximum weight limits
C. Specified load-limited streets. It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicles with a gross weight in excess of 15,000
pounds upon the following streets:
(1) Williford Road.
(2) DeWitt Road.
(3) Bailey Road.
D. Specified load-limited bridges. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle with a registered weight in excess of 80,000 pounds to
traverse and cross, or travel upon:
(1) Sachse Road Bridge, 5900 Block of Sachse Road, crossing Longbranch Creek.
E. General maximum vehicle local load limit. Except where specifically provided in this section, the maximum vehicle load limit
on any street of the city, other than those streets designated as U.S. and state highways and city designated truck routes, shall
not exceed a single axle load of 12,000 pounds, a tandem axle load of 36,000 pounds, and a gross vehicle weight of 48,000
pounds.
F. Exceptions. The provisions and/or restrictions of this section shall not apply to Sachse Road Bridge crossing Longbranch
Creek. Ambulance, police, fire and school vehicles may use the bridge at any time. All other vehicles must be under the load limit
posted for Sachse Road Bridge (as identified in section D. specified load-limited bridges) or use the designated truck route.
(1) Permitted vehicles. To owners and/or operators of commercial motor vehicles, truck-tractors, semi-trailers, or
any combination thereof, who have secured a permit to drive, operate or move, or cause to be driven, operated or
moved, a vehicle pursuant to the permit requirements of this section. In order for this exception to apply, the owner
and/or operator of any such “permitted vehicle” shall carry evidence of the secured permit at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/448
(2) Emergency vehicles. To emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
(3) Public utility vehicles. To any city, county and/or state vehicles or vehicles operated by a public utility while
cruising in any assigned area for the purpose of inspecting the facilities of a public utility or public improvement and/or
providing maintenance or construction service to said public improvements or facilities.
(4) Solid waste transport. To vehicles used exclusively to transport solid waste (except hazardous waste), as
defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act (Article 4477-7, V.T.C.S.), which may be operated upon the city streets with a
tandem axle gross load not to exceed 44,000 pounds, a single axle gross load not to exceed 20,000 pounds and a
gross load for the vehicle not to exceed 64,000 pounds, provided that where the vehicle is to be operated with a
tandem axle gross load in excess of 34,000 pounds, the owner, except if the owner is a municipality, of such vehicle
shall first file with the city a surety bond in the principal sum of $15,000.00 for each vehicle; said bond to be
conditioned that the owner of such vehicle will pay to the city, within the limit of such bond, all damages done to the
city streets by reason of the operation of such vehicle with a tandem axle gross load in excess of 34,000 pounds;
such bonds shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. All bonds shall expire on August 31st of each year.
(5) Ready-mix concrete transport. To vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mix concrete, which is hereby
defined as a perishable product, which may be operated upon the public streets of this city with a tandem axle load
not to exceed 44,000 pounds, a single axle load not to exceed 20,000 pounds and a gross load not to exceed 64,000
pounds, provided that where the vehicle is to be operated with a tandem axle load in excess of 34,000 pounds, the
owner of such vehicle shall first file with the city a surety bond in the principal sum as fixed by the city, which sum shall
not be set at a greater amount than $15,000.00 for each vehicle, said bond to be conditioned that the owner of such
vehicle will pay to the City of Sachse, Texas within the limit of such bond, all damages done to the city streets by
reason of the operation of such vehicle with a tandem axle load in excess of 34,000 pounds; such bond shall be
subject to the approval of the city attorney. All bonds shall expire on August 31st of each year.
(6) Household uses. To vehicles operated for a limited personal household use such as moving furniture, or like
limited uses.
G. Permit required for overweight or oversized equipment; procedures therefor.
(1) Permit required. A permit shall be required for the operation and/or movement over any public street of the city,
of any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof, when such vehicle
cannot comply with one or more of the maximum weight load restrictions set forth in subsection E of this section.
(2) Permit application: Contents. Application for permit shall be made to the chief of police and shall include the
following:
(a) Name of vehicle owner, with business address (if different from vehicle operator).
(b) A descriptive statement of the kind, type and character of the goods and/or materials to be transported.
(c) An affidavit, duly sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, showing the weight of said
vehicle, the maximum load to be transported thereon, and the total gross weight for which said vehicle is to be
permitted.
(d) A statement specifying destination and time of delivery of goods and/or materials.
(3) Issuance of permit. The permit issued to the applicant shall show:
(a) The total gross weight for which said vehicle is registered.
(b) The specific route through the city which the vehicle is permitted to traverse.
(c) A descriptive statement of the kind, type and character of the goods and/or materials to be transported.
(d) A specific time period during which operation and/or movement of the vehicle is permitted.
The permit and/or a copy thereof shall be carried at all times in any such vehicle while same is upon the city
streets. Any violation of any of the terms and/or conditions of the permit, as issued, shall render the permit void.
The copy of the permit above required shall be admissible in evidence in any cause in which the gross registered
weight of such vehicle is an issue, and shall be prima facie evidence of the gross weight for which such vehicle is
permitted. Such copy of the permit shall be displayed to any officer authorized to enforce this section, upon request by
such officer.
The issuance of a permit for an overweight movement shall not be a guarantee by the city that the streets can
safely accommodate such movement, and the owner of any vehicle involved in any overweight movement, whether
with or without permit, shall be strictly liable for any damage such movement shall cause the streets or any of its
structures or appurtenances.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/448
(4) Permit fees. It is recognized that the movement of such overweight vehicles is a privilege not accorded to every
user of the city streets, and it is logical and proper that the fees to be charged for special transportation will be
$100.00.
H. Weighing loaded vehicles by police officers. Any police officer having reason to believe that the gross weight or axle load of
a loaded motor vehicle is unlawful, is authorized to weigh the same by means of portable or stationary scales furnished or
approved by the department of public safety, or cause the same to be weighed by any public weigher, and to require that such
vehicle be driven to the nearest available scales for the purpose of weighing. In the event the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds
the permitted gross weight, the police officer shall cite the operator/owner of such vehicle for being in violation of the provisions
of this section. Provided, however, that if such load consists of livestock or perishable merchandise then such operator or owner
shall be permitted to proceed with his vehicle to the nearest practical point in the direction of his/her designation where his/her
load may be protected from damage or destruction in the event he/she is required to secure an additional permit before being
allowed to proceed. It shall be conclusively presumed and deemed prima facie evidence that where an operator or owner is
apprehended and found to be carrying a greater gross load than that for which he/she is permitted, he/she has been carrying
similar loads from the date of purchase of such permit.
(Ordinance 798 adopted 6/5/89; Ordinance 1772 adopted 9/5/00; Ordinance 2080, sec. 1, adopted 6/7/04; Ordinance 3408, sec.
1, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 9-9. Neighborhood electric vehicles and motor assisted scooters.
(a) For purposes of this section the terms “neighborhood electric vehicle” and “motor assisted scooter” shall have the same
meaning assigned by Transportation Code Section 551.301, as amended.
(b) For purposes of this section the term “helmet” means properly fitted headgear that is not structurally damaged and that
conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell
Memorial Foundation or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets at the time of the manufacturing of
the helmet.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle or motor assisted scooter upon any roadway
with a posted speed limit greater than 35 mph. Additionally it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood electric
vehicle or motor assisted scooter upon the following streets within the City of Sachse:
(1) Bailey Road;
(2) Ben Davis Road;
(3) Blackburn Road;
(4) Club House Drive;
(5) Country Club Drive;
(6) Creek Crossing Drive;
(7) DeWitt Road;
(8) 5th Street;
(9) Hooper Road;
(10) Hudson Drive;
(11) Ingram Road;
(12) Maxwell Creek Drive;
(13) Ranch Road;
(14) Rosewood Drive;
(15) Sachse Road;
(16) Salmon Street;
(17) 3rd Street;
(18) West Creek Drive; and
(19) Woodbridge Parkway.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/448
(d) Any person 17 years of age and under shall wear a protective helmet when operating a motor assisted scooter within the
city. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section, upon first offense only for not wearing a helmet, that the person
owns or has acquired a helmet prior to the court hearing and promises the court that the helmet will be used in the future.
(e) A person may not operate a neighborhood electric vehicle or motor assisted scooter after dark within the city.
(Ordinance 2065, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/04)
Sec. 9-10. Use of hand-held mobile telephones in school zones.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply, unless clearly indicated to the contrary.
(1) Engaging in a call shall mean talking into, dialing or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not
include holding a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone.
(2) Hands-free mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is
equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, or is a part of the
motor vehicle, by which the user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the
case of a physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to
activate, deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
(3) Hand-held mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least
one hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
(4) Immediate proximity shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear
telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such
operator's ear.
(5) Mobile telephone shall mean a device used for wireless telephone service and/or a personal digital assistant for
data or telecommunication services other than voice.
(6) Personal digital assistant shall mean a device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that
provides for data communication other than by voice.
(7) Wireless telephone service shall mean two-way real time voice telecommunications service that is
interconnected to a public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as a cellular service or personal
communication service.
B. Restrictions; exemptions.
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a
school zone, as designated pursuant to section 9-4 on official school days, during the hours when school zones are in
effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand-held mobile telephone use are posted in place, while
using a hand-held mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages or data.
(2) An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of the operator's
ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section.
(3) This subsection shall not apply to:
(a) The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding
an emergency situation: an emergency response operator; a hospital, a physician's office or health clinic; a
public safety department;
(b) Any law enforcement, police officer, emergency services official, first aid, emergency medical technicians
and personnel, or any fire safety official in the performance of duties arising out of and in the course of his or her
employment as such; or
(c) The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner.
C. Liability. The violation of this section is a strict liability offense.
(Ordinance 3062, sec. 1, adopted 7/7/08)
CHAPTER 10
UTILITIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/448
Sec. 10-1. Water service fees.
The rates and charges for services of the waterworks system of the City of Sachse, Texas, shall consist of a minimum rate for
usage and a meter deposit fee as required by this section.
A. Water rate schedule. Each residential, business, and industrial user of the waterworks system shall be charged a
monthly rate of the user's consumption and collected by the city from all customers obtaining service from the
waterworks system and according to the rate schedule adopted in the Master Fee Schedule.
B. Meter deposits. Meter deposits are established by meter size according to the rate schedule adopted in the
Master Fee Schedule:
(1) A deposit for an additional water meter at a single address will not be required if the original deposit has
been refunded for good pay. If the original deposit has not been refunded, a deposit for each additional meter at
a single address will be required.
(2) Floating deposits which are established by real estate companies and others to keep their properties in
service during the time they are showing potential buyers shall be $150.00 for each five units.
(3) The deposit may be refunded if the customer's account is determined to be current and in good standing
at the end of the initial 12 months of service. The account shall be considered in good standing if during the 12-
month period there were no disconnects, no non-sufficient funds (NSF) checks, no more than one late penalty,
and the account is current. The refund will be applied to the customer's account.
(4) A deposit payment is required to reactivate a discontinued service.
(Ordinance 10.18 adopted 11/2/87; Ordinance 840 adopted 11/6/89; Ordinance 903 adopted 9/26/90; Ordinance 1373 adopted
6/17/96; Ordinance 1771 adopted 9/5/00; Ordinance 1983, sec. 1, adopted 1/6/03; Ordinance 3223, sec. 1, adopted 7/6/10;
Ordinance 3297, sec. 1, adopted 7/5/11; Ordinance 3602, sec. 1, adopted 8/4/14)
Sec. 10-2. Sewer service fees.
The rates and charges for services of the sanitary sewer system of the city shall consist of a base rate for debt service and
system depreciation, and a user charge for system operation and maintenance.
A. Residential. Each residential user of the sewer system shall be charged a monthly rate for services from the
sanitary sewer system according to the following method of calculation:
(1) The winter months of November, December, January, February and March preceding the rate-setting
period shall be used as the basis for calculating a residential customer's monthly charge.
(2) The highest use month and the lowest use month of the five winter months shall be deleted from all
calculations. The three remaining months shall be averaged to determine a monthly volume for rate-setting
purposes.
(3) Adjustments to the calculated sewer rate can only occur in the event the user, consumer, and/or
subscriber shall apply for an adjustment for water usage due to a leak during the winter averaging months. The
burden of proof will be on the customer to establish that there is a leak and that it is not the result of his own
negligence or omission. An application for an adjustment can be made through the utility billing department. The
city will evaluate a current customer's account when a leak has been reported. The customer should produce a
receipt for repair parts as evidence that the high consumption actually resulted from a water leak that is now
repaired. The advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) consumption will be analyzed when considering the
amount of the adjustment for the rate-setting period. Evaluation of an adjustment to the sewer average rate must
be received annually by April 30.
(4) This calculated monthly volume shall apply for all 12 months of the rate-setting period.
(5) New residents shall be assigned the city-wide sewer average rate until the following rate-setting
calculation period. The method of calculation detailed in this section shall then be applied.
(6) Wastewater rate schedule adopted in the Master Fee Schedule.
(7) Industrial users who discharge wastes into said sewer system which are of greater strength than normal
domestic waste, shall be charged in addition to the business rate as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule, an
amount equivalent to the costs required to treat the additional strength to an acceptable level.
(8) Industrial users who discharge wastes into said sewer system shall pay the capital costs of the capacity of
those facilities required to transport and treat such wastes.
(Ordinance 623 adopted 11/16/87; Ordinance 1238 adopted 2/20/95; Ordinance 1531 adopted 11/17/97; Ordinance 1771
adopted 9/5/00; Ordinance 2010, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/03; Ordinance 3223, sec. 1, adopted 7/6/10; Ordinance 3602, sec. 1,
adopted 8/4/14; Ordinance 3754, sec. 1, adopted 8/15/16; Ordinance 3885, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/448
Sec. 10-3. Water and sewer service billing procedures.
A. General.
(1) Each residential, commercial, and industrial utility user shall be billed monthly for water, sewer, and other
services and charges as may be applicable. The city will mail or electronically deliver a statement to each user for
water, sewer, and solid waste services on the designated working day. Utility bills are due upon receipt. Utility bill shall
be paid not later than 20 calendar days following billing (the final due date). If not paid by the final due date, the user
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in paragraph B.(3) below. Billing statements are considered delivered when
mailed to the user's physical or email address as shown in the records of the city. If returned by the U.S. Postal
Service, the city shall mail the statement to any forwarding address available.
(2) The city shall charge a new customer a reasonable tapping fee for providing service from the city's systems to
the customer's property line. Placement and location of the tap lines shall be at the discretion of the city. The
customer, prior to the commencement of water service, shall pay the required tap fees and all other charges and
deposits required for connection of his property to the city's water and/or sewer system. For additional information on
water and sewer connections, refer to section 8-2, paragraph F of this Code.
(3) In order to obtain service, all users, consumers, and/or subscribers must complete an application for water,
sewer, and solid waste services, as may be applicable, and pay all fees, charges, and deposits in accordance with fee
schedules as set forth in this chapter.
(4) Dual or multiple connections (more than one user on a single meter) shall be prohibited except where a master
meter is permitted for a mobile home park or apartment complex.
(5) No free water or sewer service will be permitted. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from the
city water system without the written consent of the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to tamper with, or
interfere in any manner, with any water meters, service mains, or any other water department property. Refer to
section 10-4 of this Code for additional requirements for water and sewer services, as well as prohibitions and
penalties.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the flow of water in any water main or cause the flow of water
to cease or to cause the flow of water to diminish in pressure to any degree, without the written consent of the city.
(7) The waterworks system is operated on a fully metered basis. All services for water are metered. At its
discretion, the city shall install and provide water meters that can be electronically read. All water meters are read on
a monthly basis in a city wide metering cycle. The city reserves the right to implement cycle billing as may be deemed
necessary for all residential, commercial, and industrial consumers.
(8) Each residential, commercial, and industrial user of the sanitary sewer system is charged for sewer services
based on water consumption as set forth in this chapter.
B. Failure to pay, loss of service, penalties, reconnect fees, after hours service fees, and tampering fees.
(1) Payment is due no later than 20 days following the statement date, at which time the city reserves the right to
discontinue water service for failure to pay utility accounts in full. The finance department will review all delinquent
accounts and consider any extenuating circumstances resulting in nonpayment, upon notification by customer.
(2) Whenever the water service furnished by the city has been disconnected because of the failure to pay, a
reconnection charge, a utility deposit and all delinquent charges shall be paid to the city before service is restored.
(3) There will be a late charge equal to ten percent of the outstanding bill added to a customer's account for
payments not received by the close of business on the due date, which is no later than 20 days following the
statement date. Such late charge will not exceed $50.00 for any one statement. Late charges are applied to all
outstanding balances carried forward. If the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday as declared by the
city, bills are due by the close of business on the next regularly scheduled workday. Notices will be mailed to
customers who have not paid by the due date; the notice will include the date after which service will be terminated if
not paid, and no further notice will be given.
(4) There will be a disconnect service fee assessed on all accounts disconnected for non-payment as adopted in
the Master Fee Schedule. If accounts are reconnected after 4:00 p.m. on a weekday or during the weekend, the city
will charge the consumer's account the after hours service fee as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule.
(5) Tampering fees as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule will be assessed when a customer violates city policy
and tampers with the metered service. The amount charged will include the adopted fee plus any damage to city
property.
C. Returned check fees and charges.
(1) An attempted payment by a customer with a check which is dishonored by the bank on which it is drawn shall
constitute failure to pay. A returned check charge as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule will be assessed for each
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/448
returned check. Service may be disconnected due to nonpayment resulting from a dishonored check and reconnect
charges as applicable in accordance with subsection B.(4) above shall be applied.
(2) A consumer's service will only be reestablished or reconnected when all fees, charges, and original amount of
check have been paid in full by cash, money order, or cashier's check.
(3) The city will accept only cash, money order, or cashier's checks for consumer accounts that have a history of
returned checks and in order to restore service for disconnections for nonpayment.
D. Adjustments made for consumption and related charges.
(1) The finance department may allow reasonable adjustments for consumption and related charges for water and
sewer where deemed reasonable under the known facts in order to ensure fairness, equity, and reasonableness. The
city's finance department may make payment agreements with customers on payment of high water bills. If the
recommended adjustment or agreement is not acceptable to the consumer, he may appeal the decision to the city
manager, whose determination shall be final.
(2) In the event the current user, consumer, and/or subscriber shall apply for an adjustment for water usage due to
a leak, the burden of proof will be on the customer to establish that there is a leak and that it is not the result of his
own negligence or omission. An application for an adjustment can be made through utility billing department.
(3) The city will provide for a credit to be made to a current customer's account when a leak has been detected. In
order to receive this credit, the customer should produce a receipt for repair parts as evidence that the high
consumption actually resulted from a water leak that is now repaired. The advanced metering infrastructure (AMI)
consumption will be analyzed when considering the amount of the credit calculated.
(4) An adjustment for consumption will be based on the current active customers' AMI analysis. All leak
consumption will be charged the current NTMWD rate. The city's utility billing department will make the approved and
agreed upon adjustment on the affected consumer's account.
(5) In the event the current user, consumer, and/or subscriber shall apply for a tier adjustment for a swimming pool
repair and refill, the burden of proof will be on the customer to establish that a swimming pool repair occurred and that
it is not the result of his own negligence or omission. An application for a tier adjustment can be made through utility
billing department. Necessary application documentation should include a repair receipt from a licensed swimming
pool technician and the meter reading prior to refilling and meter reading at the completion of the refill. Pictures of the
face of the meter before and after the swimming pool refill will satisfy the odometer documentation. Only gallons
consumed for the pool refill will be billed at the lowest tier.
(6) The city is responsible for maintenance of water mains and meters. The customer is responsible for
maintenance of the water line located on his property. All leaks must be repaired by the responsible party immediately
to conserve water.
E. Meter testing, meter change out, and meter re-reads.
(1) Upon request of a customer the city will have the water meter tested for accuracy by a certified testing company.
If the meter is found to be under registering, the customer will reimburse the city an amount equal to the cost of the
meter testing to cover the testing expenses plus shipping and handling costs. If the meter is found to be over
registering, then the city will be responsible for payment of all costs associated with the meter test, will credit the
customer the percentage amount the test showed the meter was over registering for the preceding billing period, and
will install without charge a new meter for the customer. In this instance, there will be no reconnect charges.
(2) If a consumer questions the reading for water supplied and demands a review, the city will review the meter at
no cost. The city has standard operating procedures for automatic verifications that are controlled by parameters
entered into the city's electronic meter reading devices for high/low readings. Each customer is allowed two personnel
on-site meter reviews in a 12-month period at no charge. Additional requested reviews will be assessed a trip fee as
adopted in the master fee schedule.
F. Transfer services from residence to residence.
(1) Residential customers only shall be able to transfer services between residences without making application for
new service and paying a new deposit provided the existing account is current and in good standing. A transfer of
service request can be made by telephone, letter, or e-mail.
(2) The customer's new account will be charged a transfer fee as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule. A statement
of final services will be issued on the old account. The deposit on the old account will be transferred to the new
account.
G. Fire hydrant meter policies.
(1) Fire hydrant hook-ups may be authorized by the public works department for the purpose of initial hydromulching
installation, special irrigation, roadwork, or other finish out work being performed in the city. Customers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/448
wishing to apply for a fire hydrant meter must complete a written application with public works and pay all applicable
fees and deposits. Applicants must comply with all regulatory ordinances pertaining to conservation. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use water from any fire hydrant except as provided by this section.
(2) Applicants for fire hydrant meters must pay an initial deposit for service as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule.
An additional fee will be charged to set and/or connect the meter on location as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule.
The deposit is refundable upon return of the fire hydrant meter if all applicable fees and water charges have been paid
in full. The deposit may be applied to the final bill for cost of water used.
(3) The customer will be charged a monthly minimum use fee as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule, plus the cost
of water used. The fee will be assessed on the next business day after issuance of a permit and is not prorated for the
month.
(4) Water purchased from a fire hydrant shall be charged at the same rate as residential customers as referenced
in subsection 10-1 A. of this chapter.
(5) If the meter is returned in acceptable condition, upon inspection of the director of public works or his designee
within seven business days of disconnection, the deposit will be returned upon payment of metered bill. Repair of fire
hydrant meters and/or fire hydrants will be made by the city and the cost of repair deducted from the meter deposit. If
the meter is lost or stolen, the cost of a replacement meter will be assessed against the meter deposit. Any cost
overage will be charged to the metered bill in addition to the estimated consumption for the period of loss.
(6) The city will be responsible for obtaining readings for fire hydrant meters and billing the customer for water used
and related fees.
H. Letter of credit in lieu of utility deposits.
(1) Letters of credit reference from another city or utility, indicating a good payment history of an applicant for
service, may be allowed and accepted by the city in lieu of deposits for service.
(2) The city will accept letters of credit reference from a current utility where an applicant for water service has had
at least a 24-month service history with that current utility.
(3) Applicants for city water services that are 62 years of age or older shall be exempt from paying the required
utility deposit.
(4) The city will issue a form letter of payment record upon request of a customer for same purpose.
I. Online/telephone payments. The per transaction convenience fee for payments made through cityofsachse.com will be paid
by the customer.
(Ordinance 327 adopted 11/1/82; Ordinance 618 adopted 11/2/87; Ordinance 623 adopted 11/16/87; Ordinance 840 adopted
11/6/89; Ordinance 1019 adopted 3/2/92; Ordinance 1306 adopted 10/2/95; Ordinance 1306, sec. II, adopted 10/2/95; Ordinance
1950, sec. 1, adopted 7/15/02; Ordinance 3297, sec. 1, adopted 7/5/11; Ordinance 3602, sec. 1, adopted 8/4/14; Ordinance
3754, sec. 1, adopted 8/15/16; Ordinance 3885, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 10-4. Requirements for water and sewer service.
A. Owners of property to give notice of vacancy. Every owner of property to which water or sewerage service is furnished by
the water utilities department, or the designated agent or owner, shall give notice on the next business day when the property
becomes vacant or when vacant property becomes occupied.
B. Refusal of service for delinquency. Service shall not be furnished to any person who is delinquent in the payment of any bill
owed to the City of Sachse for water or sewerage service.
C. Unlawful use of water. No person shall:
(1) Prevent water from passing through a meter which is used by the water utilities department to supply water to a
customer;
(2) Prevent a meter used by the water utilities department from registering the quantity of water supplied to a
customer;
(3) Interfere with the proper and accurate registration upon a meter used by the water utilities department of the
amount of water supplied to a customer;
(4) Divert water, by the use of any device, from a pipe or pipes of the water utilities department; or
(5) Refuse to deliver any meter or other appliance of the water utilities department, in his possession, custody or
control, to the water utilities department upon request of the director.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/448
D. Use of water prohibited. Any person or entity which takes water in violation of this chapter, in addition to other penalties
prescribed by this Code, shall be liable for payment for the water taken computed in accordance with the terms and rates set
forth in this chapter.
E. New service not to be installed until application is made. Before any water service shall be installed to serve any premises
from the city water mains within or without the city, the owner and tenant or occupant of the premises shall make written
application for water service. No permit for any connection with the water mains or service lines of the waterworks system shall
be issued until such application is accepted by the waterworks department.
F. Control of meters and waterworks equipment generally. All meters, curb cocks, valves, fixtures, meter boxes and
appurtenances thereto, connected or used by the water utilities department system, including those furnished at the expense of
the customers or property owners shall remain under the direct control of the water utilities department. No person, unless
authorized by the water utilities department shall connect, disconnect, alter, move or tamper with any such equipment.
G. Using or furnishing water without permission. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from the system of the
waterworks department except under the terms and conditions specified in this chapter. All owners and occupants of property are
hereby prohibited from furnishing water to any person occupying other premises for any purpose whatsoever without the written
consent of the waterworks department.
H. Obstruction of access to system generally. No person shall place upon or about any fire hydrant, valve, manhole, curb cock,
meter or meter box, connected with any water pipe of the water utilities department, whether located on public or private
property, any object, debris or structure which will prevent free access to the same. Employees of the city shall have free and
unobstructed access at all times to meters and other property of the water utilities department wherever located. No person shall
deny any city employee access to any of said property, or create a hazardous condition in or around such property, or place an
animal at or near said property which will interfere with free access thereto. One notice of obstruction will be provided to the
service address free of charge. Water consumption will be estimated based on the customer's consumption history, if available. If
not available, the citywide average volume for the billing period will be the estimate. If access is still denied after 30 days, an
obstruction fee will be charged monthly until access is available. No person shall interfere with the performance of any lawful duty
of any city employee by obstructing said employee in the discharge of his duties, either physically or by gestures, threats or
otherwise.
I. Destroying or defacing equipment. Any person who unlawfully, willfully or maliciously injures, defaces or destroys any
reservoir, machinery, pipes, hydrants, meters, meter boxes, lids or other fixtures, properties or supplies belonging to the
waterworks department or who uses or takes from the waterworks department any water supplies or property except in
accordance with the rules and regulations, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
J. Connecting to or turning on water without permission; interference with system generally. Any person who shall tap or
connect with the waterworks of the city, or who shall turn on the water from such waterworks, without first having obtained a
permit to do so from the waterworks department, or who shall interfere with any water meter, service, main, standpipe or any
other waterworks property, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
K. Communicating electricity to pipes.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause or permit to be made any metallic connections either
directly or indirectly, with the water mains, laterals, supply or service pipes, of the waterworks department of the city or
any private pipes, mains or laterals which are connected to or with any such water mains, laterals, supply or service
pipes of the waterworks department of the city, whereby any electrical current shall be communicated to or transmitted
along or through such water mains, laterals, supply or service pipes of the waterworks department of the city.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate any current of electricity to, or transmit the same along or
through, or cause or permit any current of electricity to be communicated to or transmitted along or through any water
main, lateral, pipes or wires or any metal of any sort that is a conductor of electricity that shall hereafter be metallically
connected, bonded or joined to or with any water mains, laterals, supply or service pipes of the waterworks
department of the city in violation of this section.
L. Work to be done by plumbers; unauthorized changes or connections.
(1) It shall be unlawful for anyone other than a plumber, licensed or operating under the plumbing code of the city,
to make a direct connection of a service line onto the outlet side of the city water meter.
(2) Whenever such plumber shall use city water in testing pipes or repairing fixtures he shall, before leaving the
premises, turn the curb cock to the position he found it when he first opened the meter box, and it shall be the duty of
such plumber to notify the waterworks department immediately of every instance in which he finds or has reason to
believe that anyone has tampered with any meter box, meter or other waterworks equipment.
(3) In case any unauthorized connections are found to have been made, fixtures added and no permit taken for
same, water shall be disconnected from such premises until corrections have been made and all permit fees have
been paid.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any such plumber to leave any trench, ditch or excavation on any public right-of-way,
such as any sidewalk, street, alley, parkway or any other public way, left open for inspection, unless the same is
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/448
properly barricaded and lighted, and when the work has been inspected and approved by the city, such plumber shall
backfill and securely tamp any such trench, ditch or excavation so that the public right-of-way shall be safe for both
pedestrian and vehicular travel. Failure to comply with this provision shall render such plumber primarily liable for any
damage or injury to person or property resulting therefrom.
(5) Failure of any plumber who does work, whether under a permit or in violation of this Code without a permit, to
promptly pay all charges and permit fees when a bill is rendered therefore by the city water and sanitary sewer
department, shall authorize the city, acting by and through its superintendent of waterworks department, to withhold
any further permits pending payment of such charges and fees.
M. Exposing meters or fire hydrants to damage; moving meters or hydrants. It shall be unlawful to build driveways, etc., in
such manner as to expose any meter or fire hydrant to damage from traffic. Whenever the property owner requests the moving of
any meter or fire hydrant, such cost shall be at the expense of the property owner. In such case the property owner or contractor
shall make application to the waterworks department to have such structure moved. Upon approval by the waterworks
department, the property owner or contractor shall be furnished with an estimate of the cost of such moving. Upon deposit of
such estimated sum, by the property owner or contractor, the waterworks department shall proceed to make the desired change
in location of the structure.
N. Unlawful connection to service. It shall be unlawful to connect to any service until the meter has been installed or approval
has been secured from the waterworks department.
O. Penalty for violation. In addition to the penalty for the violation of this chapter, the failure and refusal of any person to
comply with any of the terms and provisions of this chapter shall authorize the city, acting by and through its superintendent of
the waterworks department, to disconnect the water and sanitary sewer service of such person and withhold such services until
such person complied with the foregoing terms and provisions. Since the city operates its water and sanitary sewer department
as a unit, the penalties provided for by this chapter as hereinabove stated shall apply to any violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this chapter whether they apply to water service or sanitary sewer service, or both.
P. Sale of water outside city limits prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who may be connected to the water system of the city to
permit any connections to the water system, regardless of where such connection is made, for the purpose of selling
or furnishing water to property located outside the corporate limits of the city.
(2) The city, acting by and through its water department, shall be authorized to disconnect the water service to the
premises of any person found violating any of the provisions of this subsection and to withhold such service until such
person complies with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(Ordinance 97 adopted 10/8/68; Ordinance 98 adopted 10/8/68; Ordinance 468 adopted 3/3/86; Ordinance 840 adopted 11/6/89;
Ordinance 3602, sec. 1, adopted 8/4/14)
Sec. 10-5. Discharge of swimming pool water.
A. New pools installed after the effective date of this section.
(1) In developments served by sanitary sewer, all in-ground and above ground pools shall be connected to and
discharge its contents, including backflush, into the sanitary sewer system.
(2) In developments not served by sanitary sewer, pools shall discharge its contents, including backflush, into the
owner's property, flood drainage ditches, or easements.
B. Existing pools installed before the effective date of this section.
(1) In ground pools installed between May 21, 1984 and the effective date of this section in developments served
by sanitary sewer shall be connected to and discharge its contents, including backflush into the sanitary sewer
system.
(2) Above ground pools installed before the effective date of this section in developments not served by sanitary
sewer shall discharge its contents, including back flush, onto the owners property, flood drainage ditches, or
easements.
C. Discharge on adjoining property prohibited. In no event may any discharge from in-ground or above ground pools be made
onto adjoining property without the consent of the adjoining property owner.
(Ordinance 1041 adopted 9/21/92)
Sec. 10-6. Regulating the discharge of industrial wastes into public sewers.
A. Definition of terms. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this section,
shall have the meanings herein after designated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/448
Act or “the Act”. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et
seq.
Approval authority. The words “approval authority” shall mean the authorized agent or representative of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA). The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) will be the authorized agent when
delegated such responsibility by the USEPA.
Authorized representative of the industrial user.
(a) If the industrial user is a corporation, “authorized representative” shall mean:
(1) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business
function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation;
(2) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million, if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
(b) If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general
partner or proprietor, respectively;
(c) If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the
government facility, or his or her designee;
(d) The individuals described in paragraphs (a) through (c) above may designate another authorized representative
if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the control authority.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration [milligrams per
liter (mg/l)].
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the U.S. EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of
industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
Chemical oxygen demand (COD). The measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity, expressed in milligrams per liter. It is
expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. It does not differentiate between stable
and unstable organic matter and thus may not correlate with BOD.
City. The word “city” shall be the City of Sachse together with all its governing and operating bodies.
Color. The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent
transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.
Composite sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals
based on an increment of either flow or time.
Control authority. The words “control authority” shall mean the director of public works, or other official designated by the city
manager of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Environmental protection agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of that agency.
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in
accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream
and without consideration of time.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of (non-domestic) pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source
regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
Industrial user or user. A source of non-domestic indirect discharge.
Industrial waste board. The words “industrial waste board” shall mean the persons appointed by the city council to review the
actions of the control authority at the request of a person whose industrial sewer connection permit has been denied or
suspended. The board shall consist of three members. One shall be the director of public works, one shall be a taxpaying
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/448
resident representative of a Sachse industry permitted under this article, and one shall be a disinterested taxpaying resident
citizen.
Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources:
(a) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; or
(b) Causes a violation of the City's NPDES permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act; or
(c) Restricts the flow in a public sewer.
Maximum allowable head works loading (MAHL). The amount of a pollutant (in pounds) in the influent (head works) of a
wastewater treatment plant above which inhibition, sludge contamination, or pass through will occur or which will be expected to
occur by the control authority.
New source.
(a) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of
the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
(1) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(2) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that
causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(3) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(b) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located is a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (a)(2) or
(3) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(c) Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(1) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program;
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
(2) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended
to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated
or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
Non-contact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a potential violation of any requirement of the city's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a potential violation).
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state or local governmental entities but does not include, unless otherwise specified, the city.
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance expressed as the reciprocal of the logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen
ion concentration.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/448
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, (including organic chemicals) industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater [i.e.,
pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor].
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the
concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user,
other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibitive discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in section 10-6 C.(A) of this chapter.
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A “treatment works” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is
owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the operation and
maintenance of the treatment works.
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (including, but not limited to household showers and dishwashing operations).
Sewer service charge. The words “sewer service charge” shall mean the charge made on all users of the public sewage system
whose wastes do not exceed in strength and concentration values established as representative of normal sewage.
Significant industrial user. Shall apply to:
(a) Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and
(b) Any other industrial user that:
(1) Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater;
(2) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or
(3) Is designated as significant by the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
Slug load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
section 10-6 C. of this article or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or
a non-customary batch discharge.
Standard industrial classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the “Standard Industrial Classification Manual” issued by
the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting there from, including snowmelt.
Surcharge. The word “surcharge” or “industrial waste surcharge” shall mean the charge in addition to the published water and
sewer rates. The basis for surcharges on industrial wastes is a capital and operating cost for suspended solids, BOD and
chlorine demand exceeding normal sewage.
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid,
and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
Toxic pollutant. One of 126 pollutants, or combination of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA
under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act.
Treatment plant effluent. Any discharge of pollutants from the POTW into waters of the state.
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial
waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/448
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the
plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings.
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
C Centigrade (as a measure of temperature)
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
F Fahrenheit (as a measure of temperature)
gpd Gallons per day
L Liter
MAHL Maximum allowable head works loading
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard industrial classifications
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.)
TSS Total suspended solids
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/448
USC United States Code
C. Prohibited discharge generally.
(A) Prohibited discharge standards. No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial
users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state
or local pretreatment standards or requirement. Furthermore, no industrial user may contribute the following
substances to the POTW:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in either the municipal wastewater collection system or
POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60
degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural
damage to the POTW or equipment, or endangering city personnel.
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow either in the conveyance
system or in the POTW resulting in interference.
(4) Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, for example),
released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or
which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals.
(5) Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65 degrees C), or which will inhibit
biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C).
(6) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause
interference or pass through.
(7) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity
that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(8) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the control authority and in
accordance with section 10-6 D.(E).
(9) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair.
(10) Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the POTW's
effluent.
(11) Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the control authority.
(12) Any sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
(13) Any wastewater containing pollutants deemed highly toxic by the control authority and discharged at a
flow volume capable of causing toxicity at the POTW.
(14) Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which cause excessive
foaming in the POTW.
(15) Any discharge of fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in excess of two hundred (200) mg/l
(1,668 pounds per million gallons) which causes sewer clogs, interference, pass through, or which exceeds the
grease handling capacity of the POTW.
(16) Any wastewater from an underground storage tank or tank hole containing gasoline, motor oils or
lubricating oils, unless specifically authorized by the control authority.
(17) Any pollutant in an amount which singly or in combination with discharges from other industrial users
creates an influent or sludge concentration at the POTW approaching, equal to or exceeding the MAHL for that
pollutant as established by the control authority except as specifically approved by the director of technical
services.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/448
Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's
pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.
(B) Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The national categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated by reference.
(C) Specific pollutant limitations.
(1) The following uniform concentration-based pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through,
sludge contamination, and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
following maximum allowable discharge limits:
Pollutant Maximum allowable
concentration
Sample type
Arsenic 1.00 mg/l Composite
Chromium 2.50 mg/l Composite
Copper 2.20 mg/l Composite
Mercury 0.10 mg/l Composite
Nickel 3.00 mg/l Composite
Zinc 3.00 mg/l Composite
(2) The following industrial contributory flow-based pollutant limits are established due to the pollutant's risk of
producing toxicity in the receiving streams. All industrial users shall be prohibited from discharging industrial
contributory flow-based pollutants at concentrations exceeding those normally found in domestic sewage, unless
specifically allowed by the control authority in the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit. The maximum
allowable concentration of industrial contributory flow-based pollutants shall be:
Pollutant Maximum allowable
concentration
Sample type
Cadmium 0.50 mg/l Composite
Cyanide 1.00 mg/l Grab
Lead 1.50 mg/l Composite
Silver 1.50 mg/l Composite
Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the POTW unless otherwise
specified by the control authority. All concentrations are for “total” substance unless indicated otherwise. At his
discretion, the control authority may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration -
based limitation above.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/448
(D) City's right of revision. The control authority reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives presented in section 10-6 of this article or the general and specific prohibitions in section
10-6 C.(A) of this article.
(E) Special agreement. The control authority reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial
users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement
waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request a net gross
adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. An industrial user may also request a
variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial
user proves that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA
when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance
must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions of 40 CFR 403.13.
(F) Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose
mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
D. Control of admissible wastes.
(A) Pretreatment facilities. Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions
set out in section 10-6 C.(A) above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, or the control authority, whichever
is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the control authority shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's sole expense. Detailed plans (sealed by a registered,
professional engineer) showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the control
authority for review, and shall be acceptable to the control authority before construction of the facility. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the control authority under the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Additional pretreatment measures.
(1) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the control authority, they are
necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and
capacity approved by the control authority and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, maintained in proper operating condition and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense. No in-line provisions for bypass of grease, oil or sand
interceptors shall be allowed.
(2) Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(3) At no time shall two readings on a combustible gas detection meter at the point of discharge into the
POTW, or at any point in the POTW, be more than ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
(C) Accidental discharge/slug control plans. The control authority may require any industrial user to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years the control authority shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an
accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification
must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in section 10-6 C.(A)
of this article.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include,
but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading
and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and equipment
for emergency response.
(D) Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to another person as a tenant under any
rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/448
(E) Hauled wastewater. The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as “industrial sewage” requires prior approval
and a wastewater discharge permit from the control authority. The control authority shall have authority to prohibit the
disposal of such wastes. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this article.
(F) Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper
with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in
violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in sections 10-6 J. and 10-6 K. below.
(G) Act of God defense.
a) Act of God defense. The Act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense [Texas Water Code
Section 7.251] in an action brought in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would
otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely
by an Act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit.
b) An industrial user who wishes to establish the Act of God affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through
relevant evidence that:
(1) An event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under
the ordinance, occurred, and the sole cause of the event was an Act of God, war, strike, riot or other
catastrophe; and
(2) The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and the city within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the event that would otherwise be in violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a
permit issued under the ordinance (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days):
a. A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the [event];
b. The time period of the event, including exact dates and times or, if still continuing, the
anticipated time the event is expected to continue; and
c. Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent of the event.
c) Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the Act of God
affirmative defense shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that
would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused
solely by an Act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe.
(H) Bypass. No industrial user shall intentionally divert waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's
treatment facility (bypass) unless all procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.17 are met.
E. Permit admission of industrial wastes.
(A) Wastewater survey. When requested by the control authority all industrial users must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey. The control authority is authorized
to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to
complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be
considered a violation of this article.
(B) Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the city's POTW without
first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the control authority. Any violation of the terms and conditions
of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 10-6 J. and 10-6 K. Obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
(2) The control authority may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
(C) Wastewater discharge permitting for existing connections. Any significant industrial user which discharges
industrial waste into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and which wishes to continue such discharges
in the future, shall, within 60 days after the effective date, apply to the control authority for a wastewater discharge
permit in accordance with section 10-6 E.(F) below, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue
after 90 days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by
the control authority.
(D) Wastewater discharge permitting. Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging
industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/448
of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin.
(E) Wastewater discharge permitting for extra-jurisdictional industrial users.
(1) Any existing significant industrial user located beyond city limits shall submit a wastewater discharge
permit application, in accordance with section 10-6 E.(F) below, within 30 days of the effective date of this
article. New significant industrial users located beyond city limits shall submit such applications to the control
authority 30 days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.
(2) Alternately, the control authority may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the
significant industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement (including permitting) of
pretreatment program requirements against the industrial user.
(F) Wastewater discharge permit application contents. In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit,
all industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall submit the information required by section
10-6 G.(A)(2) of this article. The control authority shall provide a form to be used as a permit application. In addition,
the following information shall be submitted:
(1) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials
and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the
POTW.
(2) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, hours of discharge and proposed or actual hours of
operation of the industrial user.
(3) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production.
(4) A map of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains.
(5) The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains,
and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge.
(6) Time and duration of all the discharges.
(7) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the control authority to evaluate the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(8) Plans and specifications sealed by a registered professional engineer detailing all pretreatment facilities
and processes including any grease, oil or sand interceptors and control manholes.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision.
(G) Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user
reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user.
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or
supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons
directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief,
true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(H) Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The control authority shall evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
user and may require additional information. Within 20 working days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, the control authority shall determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no
determination is made within this time period, the application shall be deemed denied. The control authority may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit based upon the provisions of this article, other applicable local law,
or applicable state or federal law. Any applicant denied a wastewater discharge permit may appeal the control
authority decision to the industrial waste board in accordance with section 10-6 F.(F).
F. Permit issuance process of industrial wastes.
(A) Wastewater discharge permit duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall generally be valid from the date of
issuance until the last day of September, of the fifth year after issuance (five-year permit period). A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than five years, at the discretion of the control authority. Each
wastewater discharge permit shall indicate the specific date upon which it will expire.
(B) Wastewater discharge permit contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the control authority to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/448
the water body receiving the POTW's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and
disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following conditions:
(a) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five
years.
(b) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable.
(c) Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal, state, and local law.
(d) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law.
(e) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may also contain, at the discretion of the control authority the following:
(a) Limits on the average and maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, or requirements for flow
regulation and equalization.
(b) Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average or maximum concentration, mass, or other
measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties.
(c) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of
appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants
into the POTW.
(d) Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges.
(e) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants
discharged to the POTW.
(f) The schedule of industrial user charges and fees for wastewater discharged to the POTW.
(g) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment.
(h) A statement that compliance with this wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of
responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal standards, including those which become effective
during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
(i) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to ensure compliance with this
article, and federal and state laws, rules, and regulations.
(C) Wastewater discharge permit modification. The control authority may modify the wastewater discharge permit
for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater
volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the
authorized discharge.
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, personnel, or the
receiving waters.
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application or in any required reporting.
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/448
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any
wastewater discharge permit condition.
(D) Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are non-transferable.
(E) Wastewater discharge permit suspension. Wastewater discharge permits may be suspended for the following
reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the control authority of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge.
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the control authority of changed condition pursuant to section 10-6 G.
(E).
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application.
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(6) Refusing to allow the control authority timely access to the facility premises and records.
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(8) Failure to remit fines or penalties after a final, non-appealable judgment has been rendered thereon.
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges (including industrial waste surcharge).
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application.
(12) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit
or this article.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse or cessation of operations. All wastewater discharge
permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. Permittees with suspended wastewater
permits shall admit no wastewater to the POTW.
(F) Industrial waste board appeal.
(1) Any applicant denied a permit under this article, or any permittee whose permit has been suspended, shall
have the right to a hearing before the industrial waste board.
(2) Requests for a hearing shall be made in writing and received by the control authority within ten days of the
action complained of. The control authority, within five days of receipt of the request, shall schedule a hearing
before the industrial waste board.
(3) The industrial waste board shall have the authority to review all pertinent files and information regarding
the applicant/permittee which are in the custody of the control authority. Additionally, the board shall have the
authority to accept written and verbal testimony from the control authority, applicant, and interested citizens.
(4) The board shall have the authority to assess whether the control authority acted properly within its power
under this article in its denial or suspension of permit. The majority vote of the board shall determine whether to
uphold or reject the control authority's action. Upholding the action of the control authority shall affirm the denial
or suspension. Rejection of the control authority's action shall, as the case may be, automatically reinstate a
suspended permit or shall cause the control authority to repeat the application process.
(5) The board shall have no authority to review or act on any action of the control authority other than permit
denials or permit suspensions.
(6) No person whose wastewater discharge permit has been denied or suspended shall discharge industrial
waste to the public sewer prior to final determination by the industrial waste board.
(G) Wastewater discharge permit re-issuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit re-issuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application in accordance with section 10-6
E.(F) a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
G. Reporting requirements.
(A) Baseline monitoring reports.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/448
(1) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph (2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2),
below. A new source shall also report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants
discharged.
(2) The industrial user shall submit the following information required by this section including:
(a) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and
owners.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control wastewater discharge permits held
by or for the facility.
(c) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard
industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description shall
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
(d) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in
gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(e) Measurement of pollutants.
(1) Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(2) Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and
mass, where required by the standard or by the control authority) of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average
concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 10-6 G.(J).
(3) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 10-6 G.(K).
(f) Certification. A statement reviewed and signed by the industrial user's authorized representative
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance and additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(g) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and
O&M shall be required. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
(h) All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 10-6 E.(G).
(B) Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by section
10-6 G.(A)(2)(g). The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and
final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and
conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed 30 days. The industrial user shall submit a
progress report to the control authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any
delay and, if appropriate the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no event
shall more than 30 days elapse between such progress reports to the control authority.
(C) Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in
section 10-6 G.(A)(2)(d)-(f). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in
accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports shall be signed and certified in
accordance with section 10-6 E.(G).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/448
(D) Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, on the dates and at a frequency
determined by the control authority but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance
reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with section 10-6 E.(G).
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(3) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement of this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in section 10-6 G.(J) and section 10-6
G.(K) of this article the results of such monitoring shall be included in the report.
(E) Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify the control authority of any planned
significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its
wastewater at least five working days before the change.
(1) The control authority may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed
necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under section 10-6 E.(F).
(2) The control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge
permit under section 10-6 F.
(3) No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the control authority
has responded to the industrial user's notice.
(4) For purposes of this requirement flow increases of 100 percent of the average daily or monthly flow (based
on the previous year averages) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be
deemed significant.
(F) Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problems
for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 10-6 C.(A) of this article), it
is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the control authority of the incident.
Notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
(2) Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the control authority,
submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of
any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other law.
(3) Failure to notify the control authority of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation
of this article.
(4) A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in sub-paragraph (1), above. Industrial
users shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
(G) Reports from non-significant industrial users. All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment
standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the control
authority as required by the control authority.
(H) Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a
violation, the industrial user shall notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control
authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
(I) Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/448
(1) Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA
regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part
261. Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial
user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12
months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification
under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications
of changed discharges shall be submitted under section 10-6 G.(E), above.
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1) of this section during a calendar month in
which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user shall notify the
POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of
the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program
in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
(5) Industrial users that are permitted by the control authority shall submit a copy of all manifests to the control
authority documenting offsite disposal of hazardous and non-hazardous waste.
(J) Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a
wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in
40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
(K) Sample collection.
(1) Except as indicated in subsection (2), below, the industrial user shall collect wastewater samples using
proportional composite collection techniques.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals
shall be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(L) Determination of noncompliance. The control authority may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance
with pretreatment standards.
(M) Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date post-marked. For reports which are
not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
(N) Record keeping. Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and
information required to be retained under this article. These records shall remain available for a period of at least
three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with
this article, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the control
authority.
H. Compliance monitoring.
(A) Inspection and sampling. The control authority shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this article, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the
industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall allow the control authority ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and
the performance of any additional duties.
(1) Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/448
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the control authority, state, and EPA will be
permitted to enter without substantial delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(2) The control authority, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and metering of the user's operations.
(3) The control authority may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected
and sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the control
authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the industrial user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing control authority personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall
be a violation of this article.
(B) Search warrants. If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part
thereof, and if the control authority has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the control authority designed to
verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then upon application the municipal court judge may issue a search and seizure
warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may
be searched and seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the control
authority in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. In the event of an emergency affecting public health
or safety, inspections may be made without the issuance of a warrant.
I. Confidential information. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge
permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from control authority inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes
or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by
the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, except as may be required by
the Texas Open Records Act, Art. 6252-17a, V.T.C.S., but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
J. Administrative enforcement remedies.
(A) Notification of violation. Whenever the control authority finds that any user has violated or is violating this article,
a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the control authority
may serve upon the user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of a notice of violation an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the control authority. Submission of the plan in no way relieves the
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall
limit the authority of the control authority to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(B) Show cause hearing. The control authority may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this
article, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
to appear before the control authority and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action,
the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing may be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) and shall be served at least five working days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action
may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other
action against the user.
(C) Emergency suspensions. The control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal
notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of any
person. The control authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to
respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the
event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the control authority may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/448
take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any person. The control authority shall
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the control
authority that the period of endangerment has passed.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall
submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the control authority, prior to the date of any show cause hearing under section
10-6 J.(B).
Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this
section.
(D) Permit suspension/termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions of section 10-6 F.(E) of this article, any
user that violates the following conditions of this section, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is
subject to permit suspension and discharge termination:
(1) Violation of any wastewater discharge permit condition or conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics
prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 10-6 C.(A) this article.
Such user shall be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under section 10-6 J.(B) of this article why the proposed action should not be taken.
(E) Supplemental enforcement action/water supply termination. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this article, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service to the
user may be terminated. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated
its ability to comply.
K. Judicial enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this section or who shall fail to comply with any
provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is shall be subject to a fine as provided for in
section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances, and each occurrence of the violation shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punished accordingly.
(2) This section applies only to offenses committed on or after its effective date, and any offense committed before
this section's effective date is governed by the law in existence at the time the offense was committed. The previous
regulations are continued in effect for this purpose as if this section were not in force. For the purpose of this section,
an offense is committed on or after the effective date of this section if any element of the offense occurred on or after
the effective date.
(3) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(4) The city shall be entitled to pursue other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of
statutes or other state ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
L. Review. The city council shall review this section at least once every five years.
(Ordinance 381 adopted 6/4/84; Ordinance 2212, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/06; Ordinance 3885, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 10-7. Water conservation plan.
The city council hereby approves and adopts the “2019 Model Water Conservation Plan for North Texas Municipal Water District
Member Cities and Customers” (the “plan”), attached hereto as addendum A*, as if recited verbatim herein. The city commits to
implement the requirements and procedures set forth in the adopted plan. (1988 Code; Ordinance 1765 adopted 7/17/00;
Ordinance 2239 adopted 9/18/06; Ordinance 3128, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/09; Ordinance 3920 adopted 5/6/19)
*Addendum A is hereby adopted by reference for the city and made part hereof for all purposes, the same as if fully copied herein.
Sec. 10-8. Testing of backflow prevention assemblies.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/448
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms
used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most recent edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control
published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California.
Backflow prevention assembly or assembly shall mean an assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage.
City or the city shall mean the City of Sachse through the city manager or any representative, inspector or employee designated
by the city manager.
Nonresidential use shall mean water used by any person other than a single-family or duplex residential customer of the water
supply.
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, association, corporation, firm, club, trustee, receiver, body politic and corporate,
and any other such entity.
Public water system or system shall mean any public or water system, which supplies water for public domestic use. The system
will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment use in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying
water for public consumption.
Tester shall mean a person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the city
and the TCEQ.
Water use survey shall mean a survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the local authority designed to identify any
possible sources of contamination to the potable water supply.
B. Testing of backflow prevention assemblies.
(1) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested or caused to be inspected and tested at the
expense of the property or building owner in each of the following circumstances:
(a) Immediately after installations;
(b) Whenever the assembly is moved;
(c) A minimum of once a year for nonresidential backflow prevention devices;
(d) Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to re-occupancy;
(e) Immediately after repairs.
(2) All assembly testing shall be performed by a state certified backflow prevention assembly tester, registered with
the city. All testing shall be in accordance with the standards contained in the 2003 International Plumbing Code, as
amended, that has been adopted by the City of Sachse.
(3) Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any
public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this section. Persons and occupants of
premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the city or its
representatives access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of, among others,
inspection, testing, records examination and/or to facilitate the performance of any of their duties. Where persons or
occupants of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with
their security guards so that upon presentation of identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(4) The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly, which may occur during testing, inspection
and/or examination.
(5) A water use survey may be conducted at any establishment located in the city which is served by a public water
supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination that the establishment falls under the provisions of
this section and requires a backflow prevention assembly, a notice to abate the condition or to install the proper
backflow prevention assembly shall be issued by the city.
(6) It is the responsibility of the person, who owns or controls property, to have all assemblies tested in accordance
with this section. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the city, in its sole discretion, regulatory
authority deems necessary.
(7) All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a form
that is supplied by the city.
(Ordinance 3241, sec. 1, adopted 9/20/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/448
Sec. 10-9. Municipal drainage utility system.
A. Creation and administration
(1) Municipal drainage utility system established. The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, Ch. 552, Subchapter
C, Texas Local Government Code, as amended (the “Act”), is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as
provided by the Act and by the city council; and the drainage of the city is hereby found to be a public utility within the
meaning of the Act.
(2) Definitions.
Except as otherwise defined below, the definitions in the Act shall apply.
“Benefitted property” shall mean an improved lot or tract within the city limits to which drainage service is made
available.
“Drainage system” shall mean the drainage infrastructure owned or controlled in the public right-of-way or public
easements by the city and dedicated to the service of benefitted property. Drainage infrastructure includes bridges,
catch basins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts, detention ponds, ditches, draws, flumes, pipes, pumps, sloughs,
treatment works, and appurtenances to those items, whether natural or artificial, or using force or gravity, that are
used to draw off surface water from land, carry the water away, collect, store, or treat the water, or divert the water
into natural or artificial watercourses.
(3) Drainage service provided. The city will provide stormwater drainage for all benefitted property within its
boundaries upon payment of the determined drainage charges, as defined in the Act, and excluding property exempt
under the Act and certain benefitted property exempted pursuant to this section, and that the fees, assessments, and
charges will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms. The drainage charges established
herein shall be for all non-exempt benefitted property as defined in the Act within the city drainage system.
(4) Billing for drainage service. The city is hereby authorized to bill the drainage charges incurred as a result of the
adoption of the Act and through the establishment of the municipal drainage utility system. The drainage charge shall
be separately identified from other public utility billings. Drainage charges may only be expended for the costs of
service as defined by the Act.
(5) Authority to levy drainage charges; findings. The city may levy a schedule of drainage charges upon satisfaction
of the procedural requirements provided in the Act and this chapter. Prior to the levy of any drainage charges, the city
council shall conduct a public hearing on the drainage charges pursuant to the Act. Prior to adoption of this section,
the city council found and determined:
(a) The city will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all benefitted property in the proposed area
which includes the entire city subject to the charges under the Act;
(b) The city will provide drainage for all benefitted property in the proposed service area on payment of the
drainage charges, except benefitted property exempt under the Act; and
(c) The city will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms.
(6) Exemptions authorized. The city is authorized to exempt certain property, entities or persons from all
ordinances, resolutions, and rules which the city may adopt from time to time in connection with the adoption of the
Act and the establishment of its municipal drainage utility system. Any exemptions to the drainage charges
established herein other than the exemptions required by the Act shall be set forth in the drainage charge schedule.
(7) Charges.
(a) The city council shall, following the adoption of this section, from time to time establish by ordinance a
drainage charge schedule for charges which shall be collected through the city's bill for public utilities pursuant
to the Act and other applicable law. There shall be a drainage charge on each monthly public utility statement for
the city drainage system as set forth in the drainage charge schedule. The city manager, or designee, is
authorized to collect such charges in a manner consistent with the City Charter, the Act and this section. The
drainage charges shall be a separate line item on the public utility statement, and shall be clearly identified as a
separate charge. Except, as otherwise provided herein, the billing, charges and collection procedures shall be
consistent with city collection procedures for water and sewer services provided by the city.
(b) The drainage charges established pursuant to this section will apply to the accounts maintained by the city
for public utility services.
(c) All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures relating to drainage charges established pursuant to
this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Act and other applicable law.
(d) A deposit for the drainage services as a precondition to accepting surface flow from benefitted property
into the city drainage utility system shall not be required. All benefitted property of the city will be provided with
drainage utility system service on timely payment of drainage charges established herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/448
(8) Appeals.
(a) Billing and payment disputes for administrative issues relating to the drainage charges shall be subject to
appeals procedures used by the city for other public utility billing disputes. A person or entity that owns or
occupies a benefitted property may appeal the drainage charges established herein pursuant to this procedure
set forth in this section.
(b) Appeals shall be directed to the city engineer for evaluation and determination. An appeal shall be in
writing and submitted to the city engineer within 30 days after the public utility billing statement containing the
matter to be disputed. During all periods of appeal the person or entity that owns or occupies the benefitted
property and/or the account holder shall be responsible for payment of the charges in full.
(c) The city engineer shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 days after receiving a timely
written notice of appeal from the person or entity that owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the
account holder. The city engineer shall deliver a copy of the appeal decision to the person or entity that owns or
occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder by U.S. mail to the address of the landowner/account
holder according to the most recent records in the possession of the city.
(d) Any person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder who
disagrees with the decision of the city engineer may appeal such decision to the city manager in writing within
ten days after receipt of the decision of the city engineer. The decision of the city manager shall render a written
decision within 30 days after receipt of a timely appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final.
(9) Penalties; enforcement. Failure to pay the drainage charges promptly when due shall subject such user to
discontinuance of any public utility services provided by the city, in accordance with the procedures adopted by the
city for discontinuance of any city public utility service including water and/or sewer service and other applicable laws.
(Ordinance 3817, sec. 1, adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 10-10. Municipal drainage utility system fee schedule.
A. Establishment. The municipal drainage utility system fee is adopted pursuant to section 10-9 and shall be collected through
the city's bill for public utilities pursuant to the Act, and other applicable law.
B. Impervious area; fee assessed.
(1) Drainage utility fees shall be charged based on a property's contribution to the public drainage utility system.
The contribution shall be based on the impervious area for the property.
(2) Each single-family residential user of the drainage utility system shall be charged a flat monthly rate based upon
one equivalent residential unit according to the rate schedule adopted in the Master Fee Schedule.
(3) Each non-single family residential user, business user, and industrial user of the drainage utility system shall be
charged a monthly rate based upon the equivalent residential unit for each 4,300 square feet of impervious area
according to the rate schedule adopted in the Master Fee Schedule.
C. Exemptions. The following property shall not be assessed a drainage utility fee:
(1) Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the
public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the city in which the property is located for maintenance;
(2) A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
city;
(3) Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately-owned drainage system;
(4) State property; and
(5) Public or private institutions of higher education property.
D. Fee credits.
(1) A property owner may petition the city to reduce the drainage utility fee for an individual property to account for
on-site stormwater management controls that reduce the property's impact to the drainage utility system.
(2) The petition shall be evaluated and the fee adjustment decision determined by the city engineer or the
engineer's designated representative. The evaluation and determination performed by the city engineer shall be
based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms in accordance with the Act and this section.
(Ordinance 3817, sec. 1, adopted 10/2/17)
Secs. 10-11–10-40. Reserved.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/448
ARTICLE II. INSTALLATION OF NETWORK NODES AND SUPPORT POLES
Sec. 10-41. Purpose and applicability.
The City of Sachse (“city”) recognizes that the State of Texas has delegated to the city the fiduciary duty, as a trustee, to manage
the public right-of-way for the health, safety, and welfare of the public to Texas municipalities.
Purpose: Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284 allows certain wireless network providers to install in the public rights-ofway
their wireless facilities, described and defined in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.002 as “micro
network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles.”
As expressly allowed by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.108, and pursuant to its police power authority
reserved in Section 284.301, the city enacts these design guidelines in order to meet its fiduciary duty to the citizens of the city,
and to give assistance and guidance to wireless telecommunications providers to assist such companies in the timely, efficient,
safe and aesthetically pleasing installation of technologically competitive equipment.
Applicability: This article is for siting and criteria for the installation wireless facilities, including micro network nodes, network
nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment being installed pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter
284.
This article shall apply to any sittings, installations, collocations in, on, over or under the public rights-of-way of network nodes,
node support poles, micro network nodes, distributed antenna systems, microwave communications or other wireless facilities,
by whatever nomenclature, whether they are installed pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, or installed
pursuant to an agreement as agreed to and consented to by the city in its discretion, or installed as may otherwise be allowed by
state law.
City rights-of-way management ordinance: A network provider shall comply with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance
except where in conflict with this article or Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Subchapter C.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-42. Definitions.
The definitions as used in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.002 shall be used in this article, unless
otherwise noted in this Section 10-42, below.
Abandon and its derivatives means the facilities installed in the right-of-way (including by way of example but not limited to:
poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof) that have been left
by provider in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 120 consecutive calendar days unless, after notice to
provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, is still
in active use.
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the
provision of wireless services.
Applicable codes means:
(1) Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code
organization; and
(2) Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter
284.
City means the City of Sachse, Texas or its lawful successor.
City manager means city manager or designee.
CHAPTER 284 means Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network
nodes in a public right–of-way on or adjacent to a pole.
Concealment or camouflage d means any wireless facility or pole that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged or
otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive as
allowed as a condition for city advance approval under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.105 in historic
or design districts. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole also includes any wireless facility or pole conforming to
the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is located and may include, but is not limited to hidden beneath a
façade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches.
Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances
or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event
attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/448
Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and
enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
Disaster emergency or disaster or emergency means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation
wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city is threatened, and includes, but is not limited to any declaration
of emergency by city, state, or federal governmental authorities.
Distributed antenna system or DAS shall be included as a type of “network node.”
Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to
the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. “Easement” shall include a private easement used for the
provision of utilities.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to
oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level.
Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway.
Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law.
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance.
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city.
Location means the city approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node.
Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.103 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas.
Mayor means the mayor for the city.
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12
inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the purpose of
recreational activity.
Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by Texas Utilities
Code Section 11.003, and located in a public right-of-way.
MUTCD means Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a
communications network. The term:
(1) Includes:
(a) Equipment associated with wireless communications;
(b) A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration; and
(c) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular
collocation.
(2) Does not include:
(a) An electric generator;
(b) A pole; or
(c) A macro tower.
Network provider means:
(1) A wireless service provider; or
(2) A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf
of a wireless service provider:
(a) Network nodes; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/448
(b) Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node.
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node.
Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from a
municipality before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the
municipality has police power authority.
Pole means a service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole.
Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their
successors and assigns.
Provider has the same meaning as “network provider.”
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or
utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include:
(1) A private easement; or
(2) The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.
Public right-of-way management ordinance means an ordinance that complies with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284,
Subchapter C.
Public right-of-way rate means an annual rental charge paid by a network provider to a municipality related to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of network nodes within a public right-of-way in the municipality.
Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and located in a
public right-of-way, including:
(1) A pole that supports traffic control functions;
(2) A structure for signage;
(3) A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
(4) A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes.
Small cell shall be included as a type of “network node.”
Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to
the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there
is no curb. A “street” is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may
include sidewalks and utility easements, a “street” does not. A “street” does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are
present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
SWPPP shall mean storm water pollution prevention plan.
TAS means Texas Accessibility Standards.
Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to
stop and to proceed.
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a
network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
Underground requirement area shall mean means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above
ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal
ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing
aboveground structures in a public right-of-way.
User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or
right-of-way, depending on the context.
Utility pole means a pole that provides:
(1) Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or
(2) Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Texas Utilities Code Chapter 284, Section 51.002.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/448
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public.
Wireless facilities mean “micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles” as defined in Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-43. Prohibited and preferred locations of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related
ground equipment.
A. Prohibited or restricted areas for certain wireless facilities, except with separate city agreement or subject to concealment
conditions.
(1) Municipal parks and residential areas. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section
284.104(a), a network provider may not install a node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's
discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent if the public right-of-way is in a municipal park or is adjacent to a
street or thoroughfare that is:
(a) Not more than 50 feet wide of paved street surface, being the area measured as the shortest distance
between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area measured as the shortest distance
between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb; and
(b) Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is
designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(2) In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.104(b), a network provider
installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of-way described above shall comply with private deed
restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities.
Each permit application shall disclose if it is within a municipal park and residential areas as described above.
(3) Historic landmarks. A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or node support pole
within 300 feet of a historic site or structure or historic landmark recognized by the city, state or federal government
(see, for example, and not limited to Texas Local Government Code Section 442.001(3), and 16 U.S.C. Section 470),
as of the date of the submission of the permit. It is recommended that each permit application disclose if it is with 300
feet of such a structure.
(4) Compliance with undergrounding requirements. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter
284, Section 284.107, a network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including
municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions,
that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use
approval.
(5) Areas may be designated from time to time by the city as underground requirement areas in accordance with
filed plats, and or conversions of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law.
(6) Each permit application shall disclose if it is within an area that has undergrounding requirements.
B. Least preferable locations.
(1) Residential areas and parks. A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node on an existing
pole in a public right-of-way without written consent from the city council if the public right-of-way is located in or
adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is adjacent to a municipal park or single-family residential lots or other
multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(2) In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.104(b) a network provider
installing a network node or a node support pole in a public right-of-way shall comply with private deed restrictions
and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities.
C. Most preferable locations.
(1) Industrial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district.
(2) Highway rights-of-way areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design
district.
(3) Retail and commercial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design
district.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/448
D. Exceptions. The city by its discretionary consent and agreement may grant exception to the above prohibited locations and
sizes, but only in a non-exclusive, and non-discriminatory manner, as allowed or required by Texas Local Government Code
Chapter 284, Sections 284.109 and 284.110.
E. Order of preference regarding network node attachment to existing facilities and new node support poles.
(1) Existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles. Micro network nodes shall only be lashed on
existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), with notice to
the pole owner as required by the Federal Pole Attachment Act, and not placed on utility poles, node support poles or
service poles.
(2) Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), shall be the preferred support facility for network nodes
and related ground equipment.
(3) Municipal service poles:
(a) Non-decorative street lights with a height of more than 20 feet.
(b) Traffic signal structures when such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the facility and will not
interfere with the safety of public and in accordance with an agreement as allowed by Texas Local Government
Code Chapter 284, Sections 285.056 and 284.101(a)(3), and (b).
(c) Street signage shall be a low priority use for attachment of a network node.
(d) Other municipal service pole use is discouraged.
(4) New node support poles shall be the least preferred type of allowed facility for attachment of network nodes.
(5) Ground equipment. Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-44. Guidelines on placement.
A. Generally. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.102, a network provider shall construct and
maintain network nodes and node support poles in a manner that does not:
(1) Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way;
(2) Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers;
(3) Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
(4) Violate or conflict with the municipality's publicly disclosed public right-of-way management ordinance or this
article; and
(5) Violate the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.)
B. General requirements and information.
(1) Size limits. Network providers shall provide detailed drawings, with calculations to show strict conformity to the
size limitations as set forth in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, in accordance with, but not limited to
Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.002, Size of a Micro Network Node, Texas Local
Government Code Section 284.003, Size of Network Nodes, and Texas Local Government Code Section 284.103,
Maximum Pole Height, with each application and with each request for a permit for each location.
(2) State and federal rights-of-way permit. If the project lies within a highway right-of-way, the applicant must
provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government.
(3) Confirmation of non-interference with city safety communication networks.
(a) The network provider needs to provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any
interference with city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other city safety communications
components in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.304.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the network provider to evaluate, prior to making application for permit, the
compatibility between the existing city infrastructure and provider's proposed network node. A network node
shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference. Network nodes shall not be allowed on city's
public safety radio infrastructure.
(4) Improperly located network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/448
(a) Improperly located network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall not
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way. If any network node facilities, node support poles or
ground equipment is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the city manager
and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise renders the right-of-way noncompliant
with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall promptly
remove the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment.
(b) Notice to remove unauthorized facilities and relocate and penalty: After 30 days' notice to remove of
network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment that is located in the incorrect permitted
location, if not relocated the network provider shall be subject to a penalty of $2,000.00 per day penalty until the
network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is relocated to the correct area within the
permitted location, regardless of whether or not the network provider's contractor, subcontractor, or vendor
installed the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment in strict conformity with the city
rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances concerning improperly located facilities
in the rights-of-way.
C. Underground requirement areas.
(1) In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.107, a network provider shall, in relation to
installation for which the city approved a permit application, comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding
requirements, including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public
or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining
zoning or land use approval.
(2) If a location is designated by the city to transits to be an underground requirement area, then a network
provider's permit for the location of the micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground
equipment at such location will be revoked 90 days after the designation, with removal of said the micro network
node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment at such location within 90 days of such
designation, or as otherwise reasonably allowed by the city for the transition of other overhead facilities.
D. Network node facilities placement.
(1) Right-of-way. Network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be placed, as
much as possible, within two feet of the outer edge of the right-of-way line to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or
hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way.
(2) Height above ground. Network node attachments to a pole shall be installed at least eight feet above the ground
in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.108, and if a network node attachment
is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be
installed no less than 16 feet above the ground.
(3) Protrusions. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.003(a)(1)(C), Section
284.003(a)(2)(C) and Section 284.003(a)(3)(B) no protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or
pole shall be more than two feet.
(4) Limit on number of network nodes per site. There shall be no more than one network node on any one pole.
E. New node support poles.
(1) New node support poles spacing. New node support poles shall be spaced apart from existing utility poles or
node support poles at the same as the spacing between utility poles in the immediate proximity, but no less than at a
minimum 300 feet from a utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road
ways and to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area.
(2) Height of node support poles or modified utility pole. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter
284, Section 284.103 a Node support pole or modified utility pole may not exceed the lesser of:
(a) Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the
same public right-of-way; or
(b) Fifty-five feet above ground level.
F. Ground equipment.
(1) Ground equipment near street corners and intersections. Ground equipment should be minimal and the least
intrusive. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.102(1), to minimize any obstruction,
impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way the maximum line of sight
required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and in order to maximize that line of sight at street
corners and intersections and to minimize hazards at those locations, ground equipment may not be installed within
250 feet of a street corner or a street intersection.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/448
(2) Ground equipment near municipal parks. For the safety of municipal park patrons, particularly small children,
and to allow full line of sights near municipal park property, the network provider shall not install ground equipment in
a right-of-way that is within a park or within 250 feet of the boundary line of a park, unless approved by the city
manager in writing.
(3) Minimize ground equipment density. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section
284.102(1) to enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the city's
designee may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs network node ground equipment
where existing ground equipment within 300 feet already occupies a footprint of 16 square feet or more.
G. Municipal service poles.
(1) In accordance with agreement. Installations on all service poles shall be in accordance with an agreement as
allowed by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Sections 285.056 and 284.101(a)(3), and (b).
(2) Required industry standard pole load analysis. Installations on all service poles shall have an industry standard
pole load analysis completed and submitted to the municipality with each permit application indicating that the service
pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load, in accordance with Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284.108.
(3) Height of attachments. All attachments on all service poles shall be at least eight feet above grade, in
accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Sections 285.108(a)(1), 285.108(a)(2) and if a network
node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the
attachment shall be installed no less than 16 feet above the ground.
(4) Installations on traffic signals. Installations on all traffic signal structures must not interfere with the integrity of
the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in accordance with an agreement as
allowed by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Sections 285.056, 284.101(a)(3), and 284.101(b). Installation
of network node facilities on any traffic signal structures shall:
(a) Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light electronics;
(b) Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal structure; and
(c) Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure; and
(5) Installations on street signage. Installations on all street signage structures must not interfere with the integrity
of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public. Installation of network node facilities on any
street signage structures that has electrics shall:
(a) Be encased in a separate conduit than any city signage electronics;
(b) Have a separate electric power connection than the signage structure; and
(c) Have a separate access point than the signage structure.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-45. General aesthetic requirements.
A. Concealment.
(1) Concealment of network nodes and node support poles shall be required by the city in design districts with
decorative poles and in historic districts pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.105.
(2) It is also the city's preference that all new node support poles be camouflaged, except those located in an area
zoned or predominantly industrial area. Companies shall submit their proposal for camouflage with the permit
application.
(3) The network node facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as reasonably possible in an equipment
box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be
sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent
possible in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances,
except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
(4) The network node facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet,
or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or
enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible, except
to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
B. New node support pole spacing. New node support poles shall be at a minimum 300 feet from a utility pole or another node
support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/448
the area.
C. Minimize ground equipment concentration. In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area, and in
accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.102(1) to enhance the safety requirements of line of
sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the city's designee may deny a request for a proposed location if the network
provider installs network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment within 300 feet already occupies a footprint of
25 square feet or more to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area.
D. Allowed colors. Colors in historic districts and design districts must be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way
management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code
Chapter 284. Colors in historic districts and design districts must be approved by the city manager from a palette of approved
colors. Unless otherwise provided, all colors shall be dark bronze or black, or as approved by the city manager shall match the
background of any structure the facilities are located upon and all efforts shall be made for the colors to be inconspicuous. Colors
in areas other than in historic districts and design districts shall conform to the same requirements above for historic districts or
design districts, or as approved by the city manager shall conform to colors of other installations of telecommunication providers
in the immediately adjacent areas.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-46. Electrical supply.
A. Network provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the micro network node,
network node facilities, node support poles and ground equipment. The city shall not be liable to the network provider for any
stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or
ground equipment, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public
utility serving the structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network provider of the structure, or for any other cause
beyond the control of the city.
B. Network provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way in accordance with Texas
Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.002(12)(B)(1).
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-47. Insurance, indemnity, bonding and security deposits.
A. Insurance, bonding and security deposits shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance,
and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
B. Indemnity shall be in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.302, as provided for in
Texas Local Government Code Chapter 283, Sections 283.057(a) and 283.057(b).
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-48. Requirements in regard to removal, replacement, maintenance and repair.
A. Removal or relocation by network provider.
(1) Removal and relocation by the network provider of its micro network node, network node facilities, node support
pole or related ground equipment at its own discretion, shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way
management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284.
(2) If the network provider removes or relocates a micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole or
related ground equipment at its own discretion, it shall notify the city manager in writing not less than ten business
days prior to removal or relocation. Network provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its
micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment prior to relocation or
removal.
(3) The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by network provider for micro network node, network
node facilities, node support poles or related ground equipment that have been removed.
B. Removal or relocation required for city project.
(1) Removal and relocation of network provider's micro network node, network node, node support pole or related
ground equipment, or portion thereof required for a city project shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-ofway
management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.107, except as provided in existing state and federal law.
(2) In accordance with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284, Section 284.107, except as provided in
existing state and federal law, a network provider shall relocate or adjust micro network node, network node, node
support pole and related ground equipment in a public right-of-way in a timely manner and without cost to the
municipality managing the public right-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/448
(3) Network provider understands and acknowledges that the city may require network provider to remove or
relocate its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or any portion
thereof from the right-of-way for city construction projects as allowed by state and feral law, including the commonlaw.
(4) Network provider shall, at the city manager's direction, remove or relocate the same at network provider's sole
cost and expense, except as otherwise provided in existing state and federal law, whenever the city manager
reasonably determines that the relocation or removal is needed for any of the following purposes: Required for the
construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any city
construction or maintenance project of a street or public rights-of-way to enhance the traveling public's use for travel
and transportation.
(5) If network provider fails to remove or relocate the micro network node, network node, node support pole or
related ground equipment, or portion thereof as requested by the city manager within 90 days of network provider's
receipt of the request, then the city shall be entitled to remove the micro network node, network node, node support
pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof at network provider's sole cost and expense, without further
notice to network provider.
(6) Network provider shall, within 30 days following issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its
reasonable expenses incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead and storage expenses) of the
micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof.
C. Removal required by city for safety and imminent danger reasons.
(1) Network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable
micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within the time frame and in the
manner required by the city manager if the city manager reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or
relocation of any part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment:
(a) Is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or city property;
(b) The micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion
thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property; or
(c) Network provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its
micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or use of any location
under applicable law in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other
applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
(2) If the city manager reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may
immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and
related ground equipment at the network provider's sole cost and expense in strict accordance with the city's rights-ofway
management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284.
(3) Network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable
micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within the time frame and in the
manner required by the city manager if the city manager reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or
relocation of any part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment:
(a) Is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or city property;
(b) The micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion
thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property; or
(c) Network provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its
micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or use of any location
under applicable law.
If the city manager reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may
immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and
related ground equipment at the network provider's sole cost and expense.
(4) The city manager shall provide 90 days written notice to the network provider before removing a micro network
node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment under this section, unless there is imminent
danger to the public health, safety, and welfare.
(5) Network provider shall reimburse city for the city's actual cost of removal of micro network node, network node,
node support pole and related ground equipment within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the city.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/448
Sec. 10-49. Installation and inspections.
A. Installation. Network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network node facilities,
node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner in strict accordance with the city's rightsof-
way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles
and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the
city manager, as such may be amended from time to time. Network provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control and
direction of the city manager. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification,
and/or replacement of the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall
be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city, applicable county, the state, and
the United States (“laws”).
B. Inspections. The city manager, or designee, may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node
support pole or related ground equipment located in the right-of-way shall be allowed in strict accordance with the city's rights-ofway
management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government
Code Chapter 284.
The city manager, or designee, may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or
related ground equipment located in the right-of-way as the city manager deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection
requires physical contact with the micro network node, network node, node support poles or related ground equipment, the city
manager shall provide written notice to the network provider within five business days of the planned inspection. Network
provider may have a representative present during such inspection.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-50. Requirements upon abandonment of obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole and
related ground equipment.
Abandoned or obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment shall be removed in
strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not
consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider shall remove micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment when such
facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice from the city. Unless the city sends notice that removal
must be completed immediately to ensure public health, safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within the earlier of
90 days of the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment being abandoned or within
90 days of receipt of written notice from the city. When network provider removes, or abandons permanent structures in the rightof-
way, the network provider shall notify the city manager and city manager in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall
file with the city manager and city manager the location and description of each micro network node, network node, node support
pole and related ground equipment removed or abandoned. The city manager may require the network provider to complete
additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of the right-of-way.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 10-51. General provisions.
A. As built maps and records. Network provider's as-built maps and records shall be in strict accordance with the city's rightsof-
way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider shall maintain accurate maps and other appropriate records of its network node facilities, node support poles
and related ground equipment as they are actually constructed in the rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of auto
CAD/GIS digital format. Network provider will provide additional maps to the city upon request.
B. Courtesy and proper performance. Courtesy and proper performance of network provider's personnel, and contractors shall
be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent
not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider shall make citizen satisfaction a priority in using the right-of-way. Network provider shall train its employees to
be customer service-oriented and to positively and politely interact with citizens when dealing with issues pertaining to its micro
network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment in the right-of-way. Network provider's employees
shall be clean, courteous, efficient, and neat in appearance and committed to offering the highest quality of interaction with the
public. If, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, network provider is not interacting in a positive and polite manner with
citizens, he or she shall request network provider to take all remedial steps to conform to these standards.
C. Drug policy. Drug policy of network provider's personnel, and contractors in the rights-of-way shall be in strict accordance
with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with
Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/448
It is the policy of the city to achieve a drug-free workforce and workplace. The manufacture, distribution, dispensation,
possession, sale, or use of illegal drugs or alcohol by network provider's employees, contractors, subcontractors, sub-network
provider's, or vendors while on city rights-of-way is prohibited.
D. Allocation of funds for removal and storage. The city has appropriated $0 to pay for the cost of any removal or storage of
micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as authorized under this article, and no
other funds are allocated.
E. Ownership. Ownership of network node and related equipment shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way
management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code
Chapter 284.
No part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment erected or placed on the rightof-
way by network provider will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a part of, the right-of-way. All portions
of the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment constructed, modified, erected, or
placed by network provider on the right-of-way will be and remain the property of network provider and may be removed by
network provider at any time, provided the network provider shall notify the city manager prior to any work in the right-of-way.
F. Tree maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and
other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider, its contractors, and agents shall obtain written permission from the city manager before trimming trees hanging
over its micro network node, network node, or node support pole, to prevent branches of such trees from contacting attached
micro network node, network node, or node support pole. When directed by the city manager, network provider shall trim under
the supervision and direction of the parks director. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from
network provider's actions under this section.
G. Signage. Signage shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable
ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the
cabinet of the network node facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four inches
by six inches, unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF ground notification signs) or the city manager.
Except as required by laws or by the utility pole owner, network provider shall not post any other signage or advertising on the
micro network node, network node, node support pole, service pole or utility pole.
H. Graffiti abatement. Graffiti abatement shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and
other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
As soon as practical, but not later than 14 calendar days from the date network provider receives notice thereof, network provider
shall remove all graffiti on any of its micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment
located in the right-of-way. The foregoing shall not relieve the network provider from complying with any city graffiti or visual
blight ordinance or regulation.
I. Restoration. Network provider shall restore and repair of the rights-of-way from any damage to the right-of-way, or any
facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from network provider's removal or relocation
activities (or any other of network provider's activities hereunder) in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management
ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, or any facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of
any third party resulting from network provider's removal or relocation activities (or any other of network provider's activities
hereunder) within ten calendar days following the date of such removal or relocation, at network provider's sole cost and
expense, including restoration of the right-of-way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately
before the date network provider was granted a permit for the applicable location or did the work at such location (even if network
provider did not first obtain a permit), including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city manager.
J. Network provider's responsibility. Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of network
provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-network
provider's and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole
and related ground equipment, as if such acts or omissions were network provider's acts or omissions in strict accordance with
the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Texas
Local Government Code Chapter 284.
Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of network provider's employees, temporary
employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-network provider's and subcontractors in
connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as
if such acts or omissions were network provider's acts or omissions.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/448
Sec. 10-52–10-59. Reserved.
Sec. 10-60. Design manual-Updates.
Placement or modification of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment shall comply
with the city's design manual at the time the permit for installation or modification is approved and as amended from time to time.
(Ordinance 3849, sec. 1, adopted 1/16/18)
CHAPTER 11
ZONING
Sec. 11-1. Zoning ordinance adopted.
The Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance No. 1255) adopted by the City Council of the City of Sachse on the 3rd day of April, 1995, as
subsequently amended, is included in this Code of Ordinances at the end of this chapter as Exhibit 1. Due to the nature of the
zoning ordinance and the technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted with
subsequent amendments inserted in their proper place. (Ordinance 1255 adopted 4/3/95)
Sec. 11-2. Zoning fees.
(1) Applications shall be accompanied by required fees as set forth in the City of Sachse Master Fee Schedule established by
resolution of the city council.
(2) Zoning application fees and charges shall be collected by the City of Sachse when a request for rezoning or variance is
tendered to the city, and each of the fees and charges shall be paid in advance, and no action of the city or any board or agency
shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid to the city. These fees shall be charged on all requests, regardless of the action
taken by the city and whether the request is approved or denied. The money collected shall defray the cost of administrative,
clerical, and inspection services necessary.
(Ordinance 398 adopted 8/27/84; Ordinance 2074, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3432, sec. 1, adopted 11/5/12)
Sec. 11-3. Planning and zoning commission.
A. Created.
(1) There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission of the city. Such commission shall consist of seven
members, and may include alternates. The commission members shall be qualified voters in the city.
(2) The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by a majority of the city council.
Members shall be appointed to staggered, overlapping two-year terms.
(3) Vacancies in the planning and zoning commission occurring other than through the expiration term of office shall
be filled by the majority vote of the entire city council. Such appointee shall serve for that portion of the unexpired term
remaining of the vacancy being filled.
(4) If any member of the planning and zoning commission is absent from three consecutive regular meetings, such
member may be removed by the City Council.
(5) The members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation.
(6) Four members of the planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum, and all members, including
the presiding chairman, shall have the right of one vote each, a quorum being present. All actions by the planning and
zoning commission shall be by a majority vote of those members present. The planning and zoning commission shall:
(a) Organize and select officers in June of each year, which shall include a chairman, vice-chairman and
secretary to serve for one-year terms;
(b) Adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its public hearings; and
(c) Keep accurate minutes of its meetings which shall be recorded with the city secretary, and such minutes
shall become a part of the permanent city records. Its meetings shall be open to the public at all times. The
commission shall meet at least once a month.
B. Duties and powers. The planning and zoning commission shall generally have the following duties and powers:
(1) To obtain information and make recommendations to the city council and to cooperate with all boards and other
agencies as to all facts bearing upon the needs of the city with regard to the development of boulevards, streets and
avenues and other public ways or places and city plans and subdivision development generally.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/448
(2) To formulate a plan to regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries, and the location of buildings
designed for specific uses, and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings. To effect such purposes, the
commission shall divide the city into zones of such number, shape and area as may seem best to carry out a definite
plan for the development of the city, and shall submit the same to the city council for approval or rejection. In
performing such duties, the commission shall function as provided under articles 1011a to 1011j, Revised Civil
Statutes.
(3) To recommend to the city council whether property should be acquired for boulevard purposes, and also
whether or not any change should be made in the width or length of any street or boulevard.
(4) To cooperate with and advise the city council with respect to any plan for the location or change of public
buildings, bridges, approaches or other structures erected by the city.
(5) To keep itself informed with reference to the progress of city planning in this and other counties, and to make
studies and recommendations for the improvement of the plan of the city with view to the present and future
movement of traffic and the convenience, health, recreation, safety, general welfare and needs of the city, based upon
the city plan. Such commission shall consider and report to the city council with reference to all facts bearing on the
designs and their relations to the city plan of all new public ways, lands, buildings, bridges, improvements of drainage,
extension or opening of streets and avenues.
(6) To pass upon whether or not plats of land and proposed plats of land within the city or coming under the city's
jurisdiction should be accepted, and to formulate and furnish to the city council regulations governing the platting of
additions which shall be for the guidance of the public in this regard.
(7) To act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to zoning, public improvements, civic
improvements, city planning, opening, widening and changing of streets, and such other matters relating to civic
improvements as such commission may deem beneficial and to the interest of the city.
C. Rules and regulations. The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted by the city for the making of applications for
zoning changes and for the handling of public hearings before the city planning and zoning commission and the city council:
(1) Applications for zoning changes must be made in writing and filed with the office of community development on
a form approved by the planning and zoning commission. The form to be used in making the application shall contain
such information as may be required by the planning and zoning commission.
(2) Written notice of the public hearing shall be sent to property owners as required by law prior to the hearing by
the planning and zoning commission. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to all owners of
property affected by the proposed change in the zoning by sending such notices to all persons owning property within
1,000 feet of the area of the proposed change of zoning. The notice shall be sent to persons whose names appear on
the current tax roll.
(3) The planning and zoning commission may investigate such application before or after public hearing so that the
members may be fully acquainted with the subject property and the surrounding area. At the hearing, proponents and
opponents shall be given full and adequate opportunity to present their respective views and the planning and zoning
commission will, from their personal inspection, and evidence presented, makes its recommendation to the city
council as to whether or not the zoning change or special use should be granted or denied, or any other disposition
which the planning and zoning commission may deem proper. It shall be the duty of the chairman of the planning and
zoning commission, or in his absence, the vice-chairman, assisted by the secretary and members of the planning and
zoning commission present at the hearing, to prepare a report in writing, which shall consist of a resume of the
evidence head by the planning and zoning commission and any facts which the planning and zoning commission may
have gained by personal inspection of the premises and surrounding area involved, and to which shall be attached
the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall then be filed with the city secretary for presentation
to the city council.
(4) When the planning and zoning commission has recommended that the application for a change of zoning be
denied, the community development office shall notify the applicant of the recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission and advise the applicant that if the applicant desires the matter to be presented to the city council for its
consideration, the applicant shall notify the community development office within 30 days of his desire that the case
be submitted to the city council for its consideration. In the event the applicant does not notify the office of community
development in writing of his desire that the case be submitted to the city council for its consideration, no further
action shall be taken. If such notice is given to the office of community development, the office of community
development shall schedule the case for a hearing before the city council. Prior to the hearing before the city council,
notice of such proposed hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city one time, at least 15 days prior
to date of the hearing, such notice to give the time and place of the hearing, a description of the property, information
as to the request made by the applicant and the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. Prior to the
hearings before the city council, the community development office shall deliver to the city council the report and
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission.
(5) At the time of the hearing before the city council, the applicant and opposition shall be give an opportunity to be
heard in connection with the proposed change of zoning. After both the applicant and the opposition have been heard,
the public hearing will be closed. After closing of the public hearing, the city council shall make a decision as to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/448
whether or not the proposed zoning change should be made as requested, or should be made in some modified form,
or whether it should be denied with or without prejudice. In the event the city council votes to grant a zoning change a
written ordinance shall be prepared for submission to the city council. No zoning change shall become effective until
after a written ordinance granting such change has been prepared and duly adopted by the city council, and the
caption of said ordinance published in the official newspaper, as the law in such cases provides.
(6) Any zoning matter acted upon by the planning and zoning commission will not again be considered for a period
of six months, except:
(a) At the request of, referral back or a denial without prejudice from the city council;
(b) On written request by the applicant, with pertinent facts which the planning and zoning commission deems
sufficient to warrant a new hearing. Such request shall not be set for public hearings unless approved by a
majority vote of the planning and zoning commission. If a rehearing is granted by the planning and zoning
commission then the procedure thereon shall be the same as that given an original application for zoning
change filed with the planning and zoning commission.
(7) Action by the planning and zoning commission shall be considered only as a recommendation that the proposed
zoning change be granted or denied. Any action or recommendation made by the planning and zoning commission
shall be governed by the provisions of article 1011a or 1011j of Vernon's Revised Civil Statutes and the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the city.
(8) In the event a protest against such proposed change has been filed with the city secretary, duly signed by the
owners of 20 percent or more either of the area included in the such proposed change or of the land within 1,000 feet
of such area, such amendment shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the governing body.
(9) In the event a request for zoning change to the planning and zoning commission is withdrawn following
placement on the agenda thereof, said request shall be deemed disapproved and shall be so stated in the minutes.
(10) In the event a recommendation for approval is forwarded to the city council by the planning and zoning
commission and said request is withdrawn after placement on the city council agenda, said request shall be deemed
disapproved and shall be so stated in the minutes.
(11) In the event any request for zoning change is denied by vote of the city council or is denied by virtue of the
provisions in subsections C(9) or C(10) of this section, said request shall not be resubmitted or considered by the
planning and zoning commission or the city council for a period of one year. Said period shall begin to run on the date
any such disapproval is entered in the minutes by the city secretary.
(D) Removal. Removal of members of the planning and zoning commission shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII, Section 8.01(2) of the City of Sachse's Home Rule Charter.
E. Joint public hearings with city council. In accordance with the provisions and authority of article 1011f, Revised Civil
Statutes of the State of Texas, the city council of the City of Sachse, Texas, may hold any public hearing, after published notice
as required by law, jointly with any public hearing which is required by law to be held by the planning and zoning commission.
Provided, however, that in such a case the city council shall not take action on any such matter before the joint hearing until it
has received the final report of the planning and zoning commission.
(Ordinance 182 adopted 2/26/74; Ordinance 210 adopted 12/22/75; Ordinance 296 adopted 9/14/81; Ordinance 395 adopted
9/17/84; Ordinance 1100 adopted 8/16/93; Ordinance 2032, secs. 1, 2, adopted 9/2/03; Ordinance 2188, sec. 1, adopted
12/19/05; Ordinance 2244, secs. 1, 2, adopted 10/2/06; Ordinance 3555, sec. 3, adopted 1/6/14)
Cross reference – See also City Charter, article IX.
Sec. 11-4. Board of adjustment.
A. Created.
(1) Under the authority of the Home rule Charter of the City of Sachse, Texas there is hereby created a board of
adjustment. This board shall consist of five members and may include four alternates, appointed by a majority of the
city council for a term of two years. Vacancies on the board shall be filled first by alternate members on the basis of
seniority. All other vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the original appointing authority of a suitable person to
serve out the unexpired term of any member whose place on the board has become vacant for any cause.
(2) If any member of the board of adjustment is absent from three consecutive regular meetings, such member may
be removed by the City Council.
B. Purpose, meetings, minutes. The board is hereby vested with power and authority, in appropriate cases and subject to
appropriate conditions, and safeguards to make such exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance of the City of Sachse in
harmony with its general purpose and intent and in accordance with general or special rules therein contained for the purpose of
rendering full justice and equity to the general public. The board may adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided, however,
that such rules are not inconsistent with this section. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman, who may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/448
administer oath and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the board and shall be a public record.
C. Appeals to board. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board of municipality affected by any decision of the administrative office. Such appeals shall be taken within 15 days time after
the decision has been rendered by the administrative office, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and the
board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. An action appealed from shall
stay all proceedings upon the action appealed, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to the board of
adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts, stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record or application on notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and due cause shown.
D. Powers.
(1) The board of adjustment shall have the following powers: to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of
the zoning ordinance. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance upon which the
board is required to pass under this section.
(2) To authorize upon appeal in special cases, such variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance as will not be
contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning
ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and to that the spirit of the zoning ordinance shall be observed and
substantial justice done.
(3) In exercising its powers the board may, in conformity with the provisions of articles 1011-a and including 1011-j
of the 1925 Civil Statutes of Texas, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision
or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer for whom the appeal is taken.
(4) To hold hearings and make determinations as to the proper amortization schedule to be fixed for nonconforming
uses which have failed to comply with the city Ordinances concerning zoning after said tract has been annexed and
brought into the City of Sachse, Texas. The board shall, in accordance with law, provide a compliance date for the
nonconforming use under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the use before the time that use became
nonconforming can be amortized within a definite period. In this connection, the factors to be considered by the board
of adjustment in making its determination will be:
(a) The amount of time required for the property owner to terminate the nonconforming use and to recover its
investment in the nonconforming structures.
(b) The actual dollars invested in the nonconforming structures, less the past depreciation taken by the owner,
which shall be the owner's investment in the structure in (a) above.
(c) The property owner's reasonable and necessary opportunity for recovery of its investment shall be
measured from the time the existing use becomes nonconforming, not be conditions upon the expiration of the
city's tolerance.
(d) The effects of the nonconforming use on adjoining properties and the surrounding area and the effect of
cessation.
(e) The suitability or lack thereof of the nonconforming use to the adjoining properties.
(f) The effects of the nonconforming use on new development in the city.
(g) The health, safety, and welfare of the community with regard to the nonconforming use.
E. Seventy-five percent vote required. Each case heard before the board must be heard by 75 percent of the board members.
The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the board is necessary to decide in favor of any applicant or action (i.e. 75
percent of five is four votes required for passage). In the event a member is not sitting due to a conflict of interest, three favorable
votes are required for passage (i.e. 75 percent of four is three).
F. Appeals of board decisions. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of
adjustment or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board and not thereafter.
(Ordinance 548 adopted 2/4/87; Ordinance 1101 adopted 8/16/93; Ordinance 1345 adopted 3/4/96; Ordinance 1365 adopted
5/20/96; Ordinance 1709 adopted 2/7/00; Ordinance 3555, sec. 4, adopted 1/6/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/448
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
(As amended through Ordinance No. 1624 adopted November 2, 1998)
ARTICLE 1. PREAMBLE
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Sachse, did on February 13, 1995, receive the final report of the city planning and
zoning commission recommending adoption of this zoning ordinance in its final form and recognizing the need of zoning
regulations to properly safeguard the general public welfare, health, peace and safety of the community, the city council
determined that this zoning ordinance should be adopted.
Sec. 1. Enacting clause.
1.1 That Ordinance No. 547 known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sachse, together with all amendments, is hereby
repealed, and that there be enacted in lieu thereof the following Comprehensive General Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sachse.
However, the zoning maps enacted pursuant to Ordinance [No.] 547, which delineate the boundaries of each use district, are not
repealed, but shall continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 2. Purpose.
2.1 It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of the city council in enacting this ordinance that the zoning regulations
and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure
safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district,
and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging
the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive plan.
Sec. 3. Zoning district map.
3.1 The boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon a zoning district map of the city adopted as part of
Ordinance No. 547. Such zoning district maps are continued herein.
3.2 One original of zoning district map shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. This copy shall be the official zoning
district map and shall bear the signature of the mayor and attestation of the city secretary. This copy shall not be changed in any
manner. In case of any question, this copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling.
3.3 An additional copy of the original zoning district map shall be placed in the office of community development. The copy
shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments.
(Ordinance 2015, sec. 1, adopted 5/5/03)
Sec. 4. Zoning district boundaries.
4.1 Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow
such centerlines.
4.2 Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
4.3 Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits.
4.4 Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the established, the boundary shall be interpreted
to be midway between the right-of-way lines.
Sec. 5. Compliance required.
5.1 All land, buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereof located within the city which are hereafter occupied, used, erected,
altered or converted shall be used, placed and erected in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning
district in which such land or building is located except as hereinafter provided. Land used in meeting the requirements of this
ordinance with respect to a particular use or building shall not be used to meet the requirements for any other use or building.
Sec. 6. Preserving rights and continuity in enforcement, pending litigation, and violations under ordinance and
amendments thereto.
6.1 By the passage of this ordinance no presently illegal use or building shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such
use falls within a use district where the actual use and standards under the terms of this ordinance would be conforming. Any use
which does not conform to provisions of this ordinance shall be a nonconforming use or structure if it legally existed as a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/448
conforming or nonconforming use or structure prior to adoption of this ordinance or an illegal use if it did not exist as a
conforming or nonconforming use or structure, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance
that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the previous
zoning ordinance was repealed and this ordinance adopted shall be discharged or affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and
suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded within all
respects as if such prior ordinance has not been repealed.
6.2 The prior elimination from zoning ordinance of the R-7.2 single-family dwelling district, the R-7.8 single-family dwelling
district, and the R-4 single-family dwelling district shall not make lawful buildings, structures or uses presently located in areas
presently so zoned as nonconforming. The zoning map of the City of Sachse shall continue to show such areas to be zoned R-
7.2 single-family dwelling district, R-7.8 single-family dwelling, and R-4 single-family dwelling district, as the case may be. Article
5, “Nonconforming Uses” of this article shall not apply to such areas. Development or redevelopment within such districts shall be
governed by the development standards and allowed uses in effect at the time of the elimination of such zoning categories, and
such provisions in the Zoning Ordinance shall be continued for that purpose.
Sec. 7. Newly annexed areas.
7.1 All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Sachse, Texas shall be temporarily classified agricultural. The city council, at
its own initiative, may establish permanent zoning as soon as practicable.
7.2 The procedure for establishing the permanent zoning on any annexed territory shall be the same as is provided by law for
the amendment of the zoning ordinance as outlined in article 12.
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
1.1 All words used in the present tense shall include the future; all words in the singular number include the plural number and
all words in the plural number include the singular number; the word “structure” includes the word “building,” and “dwelling”
includes “residence” and “place of habitation”; the word “person” includes “corporation,” “co-partnership,” “association,” and
“individual”, the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning assigned to
them in the building codes terms not defined herein or in the building code shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
Accessory building. A detached subordinate building containing more than 20 square feet of area and more than four feet in
height used for purposes customarily incidental to the residential occupancy of the main building and not involving the conduct of
a business or service not normally found in conjunction with the residential use. Accessory buildings shall not be utilized nor
rented as a dwelling unit.
Accessory use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use and located on the same lot
therewith.
Adjacent. Touching, adjoining, contiguous, or abutting.
Air conditioning service. A facility providing supplies, repair and installation of air conditioning and heating equipment.
Agriculture. Any activity related to the cultivation of the soil, the production of crops for human food, animal feed or planting seed
or for the production of fibers; floriculture, viticulture, horticulture; the raising or keeping of livestock; the planting of cover crops.
Airport/heliport. A facility for the landing, taking off, storage and servicing of fixed or rotary wing aircraft.
Alley. Any public right-of-way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property, and not intended for general
traffic circulation.
Alterations. Any change, addition, or modification in construction, any change in the structural members of a building, such as
walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as “altered” or
“reconstructed.”
Alternative financial services. A check cashing business, payday advance or loan business, money transfer business, or car title
loan business.
Ambulance service. A privately owned business which provides ambulance service to the public. Any site for such business may
contain facilities for the storage of ambulances, office space, and sleeping quarters for those employees who are on call.
Amenity center. A private recreation facility which may include swimming pools, meeting rooms, open space, or other amenities
maintained by a Homeowner's Association for - A facility for the landing, taking off, storage and servicing of fixed or rotary wing
aircraft.
Analytical laboratory. A facility for testing and analyzing scientific problems to include but not limited to soil testing, concrete
compression testing and similar uses.
Animal kennel or pound. A facility including outside runs for the short term boarding or keeping of animals permitted by the
Health Code to be kept within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/448
Antique shop. An establishment offering for sale objects d'art, furniture, glassware, china or similar furnishings, which have value
and significance as a result of age, design and sentiment.
Arcade. An establishment in which there is located four or more skill or pleasure machines that may be operated by giving or
paying any form of currency, credit or debit cards, or tokens for which a fee has been or will be paid.
Assisted living facility. An establishment that furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter, to four or more persons who
are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment and that provides personal care services as defined by Chapter 247 of the
Texas Administrative Code. Personal care services include assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other
personal needs or maintenance; the administration of medication; or the general supervision or oversight of a person's physical
and mental well-being.
Athletic club/instruction-Indoor. An area providing exercise or recreational facilities such as game courts, swimming pools or
exercise equipment and whose facilities are entirely contained indoors.
Athletic club/instruction-Outdoors. An area providing exercise or recreational facilities such as game courts, swimming pools,
exercise equipment or areas and playing fields, some of which may be located outdoors.
Automobile and motorcycle sales, leasing service and repair. A facility for the display, service and retail sale or rental of new or
used automobiles or motorcycles. Vehicles that require repair or which cannot be legally operated shall not be stored on-site for
longer than 14 days.
Automobile repair, major. Major repair, rebuilding, replacement or reconditioning of engines or transmissions for motor vehicles;
wrecker service with vehicle storage; collision services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing;
overall painting or paint shop; automotive glass and upholstery; those uses listed under “automobile repair, minor”; and other
similar uses. All repair work shall be performed inside a structure. Vehicles shall not be stored on site for longer than 60 days.
The modifications of automobiles, motorcycles, watercrafts. All terrain vehicles (ATV's) shall be considered a major automotive
use. The use shall include hot rod vehicles.
Automobile repair, minor. Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes, and batteries; diagnostic services; minor motor
services such as grease, oil, spark plug, and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency road service; replacement of starters,
alternators, hoses, brake parts, mufflers; automobile washing, steam cleaning, and polishing; performing state inspections and
making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; servicing of air-conditioning systems, and other similar minor services
for motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles, but not including any operation named under “automobile repair, major” or any
other similar use. All repair work must be performed inside a structure. Vehicles shall not be stored on site for longer than 14
days.
Automobile wrecking yard. A place used for the dismantling, disassembling, crushing or compacting of motor vehicles or trailers,
or the storage, sales or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
Bait sales, live. The storage and sale of bait such as minnows and worms.
Bakery, commercial. A manufacturing facility for the production and distribution of baked goods and confectioneries.
Batching plant. An asphalt or concrete batching plant which has fixed features with foundations for the plants, conveyor belts
(usually), office buildings of permanent nature, fixed storage, as well as other amenities; permanent plants generally sell the
products on contract or by the truck load.
Batching plant, temporary. A concrete or asphalt batching plant constructed for the purpose of providing concrete or asphalt for a
single construction project and intended to be removed following the completion of that project.
Battery repairing and rebuilding. A facility for the service, repair or rebuilding of batteries.
Bed and breakfast. An establishment that provides no more than ten bedrooms for guests, exclusive of the owner/operator's
sleeping quarters. Guests shall be permitted to stay for no more than 14 days. The facility may contain a kitchen and dining area.
No food shall be prepared within a bedroom, nor shall the facility contain a restaurant or banquet.
Bingo hall. A facility that is primarily used for commercial bingo operations as defined under Texas law. This does not include
facilities primarily used (50 percent or more) by nonprofit organizations for fund raising or other charitable purposes.
Birthing center. An establishment where a woman is scheduled to give birth following a normal, uncomplicated low-risk
pregnancy. The term does not include a hospital, ambulatory surgical center, a nursing home, or the residence of the woman
giving birth.
Board. The board of adjustment.
Boarding/rooming house. A residence structure other than a hotel where lodging and/or meals for four or more persons is
provided for compensation or other consideration.
Boarding school. An educational institution that has a curriculum for elementary or secondary education and that contains
facilities for lodging and meals for students.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/448
Boat and watercraft sales, leasing service and repair. A facility for the display, service and retail sale or rental of new or used
boats and/or watercrafts. Boats and watercrafts that require repair or which cannot be legally operated shall not be stored on-site
for longer than 14 days.
Bottling plant. A facility for the mixing, bottling, storing and distribution of soft drinks, mineral water or similar products.
Building. Any structure having a roof or other covering, and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal,
or property of any kind.
Building height. The vertical distance measured in feet from finished grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the
deck line for mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
Building line. The line parallel or approximately parallel to a lot line, marking the required minimum setback from a lot line at
which a building may be erected.
Building material sales. The indoor or outdoor storing and retailing or wholesaling of various types of building materials, such as
lumber, bricks, paint, roofing, electrical, plumbing, concrete, doors, windows, siding, and other such materials used in the building
construction industry.
Building permit application. An application submitted to community development for new construction and remodeling, including
any exterior remodeling which increases the exterior dimensions of any structure. The construction of masonry walls or fences
exceeding 30 inches in height measured at the natural grade, the enclosure of an existing canopy, carport, porte-cochere or the
construction of decking which exceeds 30 inches in height from the natural grade.
Building official. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance.
Bus terminal building. Any premises for the transient storage or parking of motor driven buses and the loading or unloading of
passengers.
Care of alcoholics, drug dependents, or psychiatric, patients: In-home. Permanent care and supervision of patients in a singlefamily
residential setting. Not more than six such patients shall reside on the premises at any one time. Facilities for a family
caring for the patients may be provided.
Care of alcoholics, drug dependents, or psychiatric, patients: Institutionalized. An institutionalized-type facility for the care of the
listed patients.
Care of alcoholics, drug dependents, or psychiatric, patients: Residential. A facility to provide residential lodging and food service
the listed types of patients while in transition from an institution to a normal life style or for those patients who need temporary
assistance.
Carpet or rug cleaning and repair. A facility for the commercial cleaning or repairing of household or commercial grade carpets or
rugs.
Carport. An unenclosed structure open on two or more sides for one or more vehicles.
Car title loan business. An establishment that makes small consumer loans that leverage the equity value of a car or other
vehicle as collateral, where the title to such vehicle is owned free and clear by the loan applicant and any existing liens on the car
or vehicle cancel the application. Such loans are often for 30-day terms and failure to repay the loan or make interest payments
to extend the loan allows the lender to take possession of the car or vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/448
Car wash, attended only. A structure used to wash motorcycles, automobile and other light load vehicles. The facility has to have
an attendant.
Catering. An establishment that serves and supplies food to be consumed off premises; a service providing meals and/or
refreshments for public or private entertainment for a fee; provides food and incidental service for a social affair or for a private
dwelling, but does not use commercial vehicles that are equipped in any manner for purposes of transporting food to be sold
directly from such vehicles.
Cemetery. Land used for the burial of human or animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Centerline, street or alley. A line midway between the bounding right-of-way lines of a street or alley.
Charitable boarding (temporary). Facilities for providing overnight sleeping accommodations and/or food facilities for poor and
indigent people such as provided by Salvation Army missions.
Charter school. A school operated under a charter by the Texas Education Board.
Check cashing business. An establishment that provides to the customer an amount of money that is equal to the face of the
check or the amount specified in the written authorization for an electronic transfer of money, less any fee charged for the
transaction, and where there is an agreement not to cash the check or execute an electronic transfer of money for a specified
period of time. This definition excludes a state or federally chartered bank, savings and loan association or credit union,
pawnshop or grocery store.
Child/children. A person or persons under the age of 21 and living with a parent or guardian.
City. The City of Sachse.
City manager. The chief executive officer and administrative head of the city government. The city manager may designate
persons who are under direction to act in his behalf as he deems appropriate.
Civic clubs/fraternal lodges. A regular meeting place accommodating ten or more members of a nonprofit membership
organization engaged in civic, social and fraternal activities.
College or university. An institution established for educational purposes offering courses for study beyond the secondary
education level, but excluding trade and commercial schools.
Commercial amusement, indoor. A facility that offers entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee and that is
wholly enclosed within a building.
Commercial amusement, outdoor. A facility offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee where any
portion of the activity takes place outside. This definition shall also include a skateboard ramp and related activities.
Commercial and industrial equipment. A facility for the repair and service of heavy equipment used in commercial or industrial
operations.
Commercial laundry/cleaners. A facility greater than 4,000 square feet (gross floor area) in area for laundering or dry cleaning
garments or similar items on a bulk basis and received from businesses or laundry and cleaners as well as individuals.
Commercial school. A private business offering, on a regular basis, instruction or training, in a trade, craft, skill, activity, and/or
profession, exclusive of other listed schools. Examples of commercial schools include: auto and truck repairing, welding, building
construction and repairing, truck driving, bartending, secretarial training, electronics assembling and repairing, computer
programming and maintenance, medical training, legal training, artistic and design training, personal grooming, modeling and
private schools specializing in such things as speech, hearing, sight or reading therapy; teaching or training of retarded,
handicapped or blind persons.
A commercial school shall be considered as a permitted use in any district in which that same trade, craft, skill,
activity, and/or profession is permitted as a business or other non-school use.
Contractor equipment and storage. A building, part of a building or land area for the storage of materials, tools, products and
vehicles used in the conduct of a construction business and plumbing, electrical, welding, etc.
Convention facility. A building or complex of buildings that house cultural, recreational, athletic, convention or entertainment
facilities owned and/or operated by a government agency.
Convent or monastery. The living quarters for a religious order or for the congregation of persons under religious vows.
Country club. Land area and buildings which may include a golf course, club house, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts
and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests.
Coverage. The percent of a lot or tract covered by the first floor or the largest floor of a building or structure whichever is larger,
including all covered porches, patios, garages, accessory buildings, etc. Unsupported roof overhangs and other allowed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/448
architectural projections shall be excluded from coverage computation.
Custodial quarters. Living quarters provided for the on-site dwelling of a security guard within a retail, commercial or industrial
facility. For residential uses, custodial quarters shall be considered as living or sleeping accommodations for the on-site dwelling
of a servant or employee.
Custom made furniture manufacturing. A facility for the manufacture or repair of furniture on a single item basis.
Day camp. A land area which may include buildings or outside areas for activities such as arts, crafts, games, exercise or sports.
Density. The ratio of the number of dwelling units per net acre of platted area being developed. Net acre shall be defined as the
acreage of a site less any existing or proposed rights-of-way, or flood plain that is not either reclaimed or substantially improved
as open space and incorporated into the project.
Detention center. Living facilities for juveniles being detained or held under governmental jurisdiction.
District. See “zoning district.”
Drive-in movie theater. An area containing a movie screen, concession stand and vehicle parking spaces for the purpose of
viewing motion pictures from parked vehicles.
Drive-through establishment. A business that allows the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale of food or
beverages, or the delivery of food or beverages to the occupants of the vehicle.
Driving range. A place or facility where golfers can practice their driving strokes, usually consisting of a row of tees fronting an
open area of ground. Putting areas shall also be permitted.
Drug store/pharmacy. A facility for the preparing, preserving, compounding and the retail sale of drugs, medicines and related
items.
Duplex. A structure containing two dwelling units.
Dwelling unit. A building, or a portion thereof, designed or used for occupancy by one family for residential purposes, but not
including hotels and motels, travel trailers, tents, and other such temporary residences.
Electric generating plant. A facility that generates electricity from mechanical power produced by gas, coal or steam.
Electric substation. A facility for transforming electricity for distribution to individual customers.
Electronic cigarette or e-cigarette. Any device that uses an atomizer or similar device that allows users to inhale nicotine vapor or
other vapor without the use of fire, smoke, or ash. The definition of e-cigarette shall include, but is not limited to, electronic cigars,
electronic cigarillos, or electronic pipe, and any cartridge or other component of the device or related product including any liquid
products that are manufactured for use with e-cigarettes.
Equipment leasing, outdoor. A facility for renting tools and equipment with no outside storage or display.
Equipment leasing, outdoor. A facility for renting tools and equipment with outside storage and display permitted.
Erected. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required
for construction.
Exterior corridor. A hallway or other pedestrian access way for a building, which is not fully enclosed and is open to the elements.
Family. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a group of not to exceed five persons not all related by
blood or marriage, occupying a single-family dwelling, boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use.
Farms, ranches, orchards. An area which is used for growing of farm products such as vegetables, fruits, trees and grain and for
the raising thereon of the farm animals such as horses, poultry, cattle and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for
raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to
swine or other animals.
Financial institution. An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit and/or
facilitating the transmission of funds.
Firearms sales and repair. An establishment that is primarily engaged in the sale and repair of firearms and accessories.
Firewood bulk sales, temporary. Any site which contains one cord or more of firewood which is offered for sale in any quantity on
a seasonal basis.
Flea market, indoor. A site where space inside a building is rented to vendors for the sale of merchandise such as new and used
household goods, personal effects, tools, art work and similar items in small quantities. Individual vendors shall not be required to
obtain a certificate of occupancy for the space they are renting.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/448
Flea market, outdoor. A site where space outside a building is rented to vendors for the sale of merchandise such as new and
used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work and similar items in small quantities.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floodway fringe. The area between the floodway and the boundary of the base or 100-year flood.
Floor area, gross. Total area of a structure measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended
for occupancy or storage. In computing floor area in residential districts, garages and carports shall be excluded.
Floor area, net. The gross floor area of a structure less stairs, washrooms, elevator shafts, and other common areas open to the
public or semi-public uses.
Floor area ratio. An indicated ratio between the number of square feet of total floor area of building(s) on a lot and the total
square footage of land in the lot.
Foster home. Temporary care of more than four children who are unrelated to the foster parent.
Frontage. All the property, measured along the property line abutting on one side of the street upon which such property is
addressed.
Furniture and appliance sales. Retail stores selling goods used for furnishing the home including, but not limited to furniture, floor
coverings and household electrical or gas appliances.
Furniture and upholstery cleaning or repair, reupholstering. An establishment with facilities for the commercial cleaning or repair
of furniture, including reupholstering, and including the storage of materials and supplies necessary for the conduct of said
business.
Garage, private. An accessory building or a portion of a main building for storage of motor vehicles or parking as may be required
in connection with the permitted use of the main building. For residential uses, a private garage shall be utilized for purposes
customarily incidental to the residential occupancy of the main building and not involving the conduct of a business or service not
normally found in conjunction with the residential use.
Garage sales. Occasional sales on residential premises.
Go cart track. A facility for the driving of motorized vehicles less than ten feet in length (except motorcycles), including closed
course, straightaway or acceleration runs.
Golf course. An area of twenty or more acres improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards and which may include a clubhouse
or pro shop.
Grade, average. A ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating height and number of stories, determined by
averaging ground elevations at corners, ends, or turning points of the structure in question.
A. Average grade for a building shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground at each corner of the
building.
B. Other average grade determinations shall be made by the building official.
Grain elevator. A facility for the temporary storage of large quantities of agricultural grain.
Greenhouse, residential. A structure for growing plant materials limited to a maximum of 400 square feet in area.
Greenhouse, commercial. A facility for the growing and distribution of plant materials.
Grocery/supermarket. An establishment for the display, preparation and retail sale of foods and associated items.
Growing of farm products (non-commercial). Definition to be added.
Guard and patrol service. Facilities for storing and maintaining equipment used by private security, guard, or patrol services
including motor vehicles and firearms as well as office and dispatching facilities for said service.
Guest house. A secondary structure on a lot which contains dwelling accommodations for the temporary occupancy by guests,
relatives, servants, or caretakers and is not for rent.
Halfway house. A residential facility providing shelter, supervision and residential rehabilitative services for persons who have
been inmates of any county, state or federal correctional institution and released and require a group setting to facilitate the
transition to a functional member of society.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/448
Heavy industrial uses. Heavy industrial manufacturing, processing, assembling, researching, and developing, packaging,
shipping, storing, servicing or other such activities which are not prohibited by law and do not meet standards set forth in the
definition of light industrial uses and high risk uses.
Height. See “Building Code.”
Helipad. A landing pad for the occasional and infrequent use by rotary wing aircraft.
High risk uses. Any use which is determined to be of special health or safety hazard due to excessive and/or toxic fumes, smoke,
gas, or dust; odors; noise; vibration; or danger from fire, explosion or radiation and involves materials meeting the “degree of
hazard-4” criteria of the International Fire Code in quantities deemed to be hazardous by the Director of Community
Development.
Home improvement center. The indoor retail sale and storage of building materials for home improvements, repairs, or
maintenance. Plants materials shall not be required to be indoors.
Home instruction. The teaching in the home of such activities as piano, voice, swimming, hobbies, and crafts and paintings when
such uses are secondary to the use of the structure. Such activities should not involve the use of equipment not normally found
in the home and shall not be advertised by a sign on the property. There shall not be more than four individuals receiving
instruction at one time.
Home occupation. An occupation customarily carried on in the home by a member of the occupant's family without the
employment of additional persons, without the use of a sign to advertise the occupation, without offering a commodity for sale on
the premises, without the use of materials and equipment not usually found in a home and does not create obnoxious conditions
to abutting or neighboring property such as noise, odor, increased traffic, light, or smoke.
Hookah/smoke lounge. A business establishment for which the configuration of the floor area is to facilitate on-site consumption
of tobacco, cigarette, and nicotine-enriched solutions. For clarification purpose, a hookah/smoke lounge and/or any other similar
uses shall be considered an individual business class separated from a retail tobacco store or a retail electroniccigarette/
vaporizer store.
Hospital. A building licensed by the state as a hospital that provides health services primarily on an in-patient basis.
Hotel/motel. A building occupied or used as a temporary abiding place of individuals or groups of individuals who are lodged with
or without meals for compensation.
Improved surface. A continuous parking surface such as concrete or other alternative materials that are shown to be impervious
yet as durable as concrete pavement to be approved by the city engineer.
Independent senior living facility. A facility containing dwelling units, accessory uses and support services specifically designed
for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older. Such facilities may include accommodations for persons who are fully
ambulatory or who require no medical or personal assistance or supervision, as well as accommodations for persons who require
only limited or intermittent medical or personal assistance.
Janitorial service. A facility providing the storage of equipment or supplies used for janitorial work and the administrative offices
for the offering of such services.
Junk. Manufactured goods that are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition; and all
other used products subject to being dismantled or recycled.
Kindergarten, pre-school, or child care center (private). A facility which provides care or training during the day for compensation
for five or more children.
Landscape nursery. An establishment for the growth, display and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees and other materials used in
indoor or outdoor planting.
Landscape nursery, wholesale. Land, buildings, structures or a combination thereof for the storage, cultivation, transplanting of
live trees, shrubs or plants offered on the premises and including products used for gardening or landscaping.
Laundromat. A facility for self-service laundering of garments, bundle service and similar items not on a bulk basis.
Laundry or cleaners, pick up/drop off only. A facility used for picking up or dropping off individual consumer's laundry not on a
bulk basis. Dry cleaning equipment shall not be located on the premises.
Laundry or cleaners, on-site processing. A facility for laundering or dry cleaning garments or similar items on a bulk basis and
received from businesses or laundry and cleaners as well as individuals, which operates in a maximum allowed area of 4,000
square feet.
Lawn equipment sales and repair. An establishment primarily engaged in the sale and repair of new and used merchandise,
including mowers, blowers, lawn tractors, edgers or other lawn equipment.
Library. An establishment for the loan or display of books, or objects of art.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/448
Light industrial uses. Manufacturing, processing, assembling, packaging, shipping, storing, servicing activities not elsewhere
listed for other than retail purposes which do not emit dust, odor, smoke, gas or fumes beyond the bounding property lines of the
tract upon which the use is located and which do not generate noise or vibration at the boundary of the property, which is
generally perceptible in frequency or pressure above the ambient level of noise or vibration in the adjacent areas, except as
provided by any noise ordinance.
Livestock auction. Barns, pens and sheds for the temporary holding and sale of livestock.
Loading space. An off-street space on the same lot or on a contiguous lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot. See “lot of record.”
Lot area. The net area of a lot exclusive of any portion of streets, alleys, or right-of-way.
Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
Lot coverage. The percent of a lot or tract covered by the largest floor of a building or structure, including all covered porches,
patios, garages, accessory buildings, etc. Unsupported roof overhangs and other allowed architectural projections shall be
excluded from coverage computation.
Lot depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, double frontage. A residential lot other than a corner lot abutting more than one street and having access to more than one
street.
Lot, interior. Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
A. Front lot line. That lot line adjacent to street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, only one lot line shall be
designated as the front lot line.
B. Rear lot line. That lot line opposite the front lot line of said lot not intersecting with the front lot line.
C. Side lot line. Any lot line, which intersects a front lot line of said lot.
Lot of record. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a recorded plat on file with the county clerk of the
encompassing county.
Lot width. The straight-line distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where the front building line intersects
the side lot lines.
Main building. A building or buildings in which the primary use of the lot upon which it is situated is conducted.
Marina. A facility for the docking, wet storage, refueling and servicing of boats and other uses as may be specified in the
ordinance granting the planned development under which a marina is permitted.
Massage therapy. An establishment which provides massage or other physical therapy by licensed physical therapists.
Meat and game processing. The skinning, preparation and packaging of livestock and game animals for non commercial use.
Medical and surgical appliances. The retail sales or leasing of medical related apparatus such as wheelchairs, beds, artificial
limbs and similar items.
Medical laboratory. A facility operated for the primary purpose of performing medical, dental or optical research, testing and
analytical work having a direct relationship to the provision of health services.
Medical office/clinic. Offices for examining, consulting, and limited treatment of people with physical or mental ailments, including
necessary accessory facilities, but excluding patient stays for a period in excess of 24 hours.
Microbrewery. An establishment where beer, ale, etc. is brewed and served.
Mining. The process by which metallic ores, coal, precious stones, salt or other minerals are extracted from the earth.
Mobile home. A structure designed or used for residential occupancy, built upon or having a frame or chassis to which wheels
may be attached for movement upon a highway.
Motorcycle sales, leasing and repair including personal watercraft. An establishment primarily engaged in the sale, repair and
service of new and used motorcycles, motorized bicycles, jet skis, or similar merchandise.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/448
Mortuary/funeral home. A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the
preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or
cremation.
Motor freight terminal. Any premises where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractor and trailer units, load and unload
cargo on a regular basis. This definition shall also include facilities for the temporary storage of loads and cargo prior to
shipment.
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle which is propelled by mechanical power such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, or buses designed
to carry one or more persons.
Motor vehicle race track. A facility for the racing of motorized vehicles of any size including close course, straightaway and
acceleration runs.
Movie theater/cinema/theater. A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures or for dramatic, musical
or live performance.
Multi-family. A structure containing three or more dwelling units which are not located on individually platted lots.
Museum or art gallery. An institution for the collection, display and distribution of objects or art or science whose facilities are
open to the general public.
Neighborhood assistance center. A group of offices designed to serve a neighborhood by offering facilities whereby residents
can obtain information relating to various social and civic organizations which may provide services to them. Such services could
include a referral service, transportation for the elderly, and coordination of other such services for low-income, handicapped, and
elderly families.
Noxious matter. Material(s) capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or capable of causing detrimental
effects upon the physical or economic well-being or comfort of humans.
Nursing home/convalescent center. A facility that provides lodging and skilled nursing care for the elderly, disabled, chronically ill
or convalescent patients.
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.
Office equipment sales, repair and maintenance. A facility for the sale, repair or maintenance of common office equipment such
as personal computers, typewriters, calculators, etc.
Office, general. A room or group of rooms used for the provision of professional, executive, management or administrative
services.
Office-showroom/warehouse. An establishment with a minimum of 75 percent of its total floor area devoted to storage and
warehousing but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales
offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas.
Optical dispensary. A facility for the production, display and sale of personal optical devices such as eyeglasses, contact lenses
and related items.
Orphanage. An institution for the lodging and boarding of orphans.
Outdoor produce market/farmers market. A business which sells fresh fruit, vegetables, small plants, flowers, and related
perishable products.
Outdoor display. The outdoor display of goods, materials and (or) equipment sold on premises during normal business hours of a
retail or wholesale business.
Outdoor storage. The storage of any equipment, machinery, commodities, raw, semi-finished materials, and building materials,
not accessory to a residential use, which is visible from any point on the building lot line when viewed from ground level.
Parking garage or lot, commercial. An area or structure designed specifically for the temporary storage or parking of motor
vehicles for a fee.
Parking space. An area of definite length and width as specified in the city's traffic management standards and engineering
paving specifications; said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully
accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.
Paved surface or pavement. Please see definition for improved surface.
Pawnshop. An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property and the sale of unclaimed items.
Payday advance/loan business. An establishment that makes small consumer loans, usually backed by a postdated check or
authorization to make an electronic debit against an existing financial account, where the check or debit is held for an agreed7/
15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/448
upon term, or until an applicant's next payday, and then cashed unless the customer repays the loan to reclaim such person's
check.
Pest control. A facility for the storage of equipment and supplies necessary for an exterminating service and including the
administrative offices for the operation of said business.
Pet sales and grooming. A retail establishment offering small animals for sale where all such creatures are housed within the
building, including the grooming of small animals and the sale of associated supplies.
Petroleum products, wholesale. An establishment for the wholesale distribution of petroleum products.
Plat. A plan illustrating a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts showing all dimensions and other information essential
to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of Sachse, which has been filed in the plat records of the encompassing
county and is therefore a plat of record.
Portable building sales or leasing. An establishment, which displays and sells or rents structures which can be carried or
transported to another location, not including mobile homes.
Premises. Land together with any buildings or structures occupying it.
Printer, large scale. An establishment which reproduces in printed form orders from a business, profession, service, industry or
government organization and containing more than 2,500 square feet.
Printer, small scale. An establishment which reproduces in printed form individual orders from a business, profession, service
industry or government organization and containing 2,500 square feet or less.
Private beverage club. An establishment providing alcoholic beverage service to an association of persons and falling within the
definition of that portion of the Alcoholic Beverage Code of the State of Texas as it pertains to the operation of private clubs.
Produce stand, outdoor/farmers market. An area designated for outdoor display and selling of agricultural products.
Property line. Same as “lot line.”
Public building. A building owned, operated or occupied by the City of Sachse, which may include but not limited to libraries, fire
stations, police buildings, public works facilities, city hall or museums.
Public park or playground. Definition to be added.
Public water reservoir or well. An area of impounded surface water or a facility for the drawing of subterranean water to the
surface.
Railroad freight terminal. An establishment or facility which is designed for the storage and handling of goods and cargo which
are transported by railroad. The outside storage of railroad cars, engines, or other railroad equipment shall be prohibited.
Railroad yard. Any place or premises for the loading and unloading materials on trains, including freight terminals, freight docks,
freight depots and railroad equipment storage yards.
Radio and T.V. recording studios. A facility for the production and transmission of commercial programming by radio or television
within the commercial band of the electromagnetic spectrum or containing the facilities and equipment necessary for the
production of records, audio tapes, video tapes or video cassette tapes.
Reception facility. An establishment that is open to the general public or made available for private use, primarily for the provision
of facilities for parties, dances, receptions banquets, or similar social events. This use does not include restaurants, hotels,
country clubs, theaters or commercial amusements that provide for such activities as a secondary use.
Recreational vehicle park. An area designed for the overnight or temporary parking of vehicular, portable structures built on a
chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. Overnight stay shall not exceed
14 days and the recreational vehicles shall be operational at all times and shall have current inspection decals.
Recycling center. A facility that is not a salvage yard and in which recoverable resources such as newspapers, glassware and
metal products are collected, stored, flattened, crushed or bundled.
Religious institution. An institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services.
Repair and service shop. An establishment, which provides the repair or service of household appliances or equipment.
Residential districts. Includes the following districts: R-39, R-15, R-12, R-10, R-E, and portions of any PD, which permits
residential occupancy.
Restaurant-General. An eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or self served and food is
consumed on the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/448
Restaurant with drive through. An eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or self served and food
is consumed on the premises. The facility contains a drive-through window.
Retail CBD and hemp based products. A business establishment for which more than 50 percent (50%) of sales are based on
the retail sale of products related to or derived from CBD oil (cannabidiol) or hemp. This includes, but is not limited to oils,
vitamins, supplements, food, personal care and garments.
Retail electronic-cigarette/vaporizer store. A business establishment for which more than 50 percent of the gross floor area is
dedicated to the storage, mixing, display and/or retail sale of electronic cigarette devices, nicotine-enriched solutions and/or liquid
products that are manufactured for use with e-cigarettes.
Retail sales with gas pumps. An establishment engaged in both the retail sales of convenience food items and the retail sales of
gasoline with either being the primary use of the property. No more than two diesel pumps shall be permitted.
Retail sales and personal service. An establishment engaged in the selling of merchandise to the general public for personal or
household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods or these businesses which provide services
customized for individuals such as a tailor, barber or beauty shop or photographic studio.
Retail tobacco store. A business establishment for which more than 50 percent of the gross floor area is dedicated to the display
and retail sale of tobacco products such a cigars, pipe tobacco and cigarettes. This business may also sell tobacco accessories
such as lighters, matches, cigarette holders and devices used to preserve tobacco, cigars or cigarettes, which are merely
incidental to the sale of tobacco products.
Riding academy or stables, commercial. A facility for horses, which are let, hired, used or boarded on a commercial basis and for
compensation.
Rodeo. A facility for public performances of rodeo events including but not limited to bronco riding, calf roping, steer wrestling,
and bull riding.
Salvage yard. A yard or building where automobiles or parts of automobiles or machinery are stored, dismantled or offered for
sale in the open as whole units, as salvaged parts or as processed metal.
Sanitary landfill. A facility for the collection, handling, storage and disposal of solid waste in accordance with Texas Department
of Health regulations.
Schools, public and private. A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction, including
kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools and high schools.
Secondary use. A use subordinate to the main use on a lot, but not necessarily incidental or related to the main use.
Self-storage units. An enclosed structure divided into individual or spaces intended for storage of goods, products or equipment.
Custodial quarters are permitted as a secondary use within a self-storage unit development.
Septic tank service. A facility for the storage of equipment and supplies necessary for a business providing for repair and
cleaning of private septic tanks or portable facilities and the administrative offices for said business.
Servant quarter(s). Quarters used by bona fide farm workers, or other accessory buildings such as barns, sheds and other
structures necessary for farming operations may be permitted, provided, however, that no such accessory building or quarters to
be used by servants or farm workers shall be occupied as a place of abode or dwelling by anyone other than a bona fide servant
or farm worker and actually and regularly employed by the land owner or occupant of the main building.
Setback. The required minimum distance between any structure and any property line of the lot on which it is located. Setbacks
shall be measured perpendicular to lot lines. The terms “setback” and “required yard” shall mean the same and can be
interchanged.
Sewage treatment plant. A facility for receiving and treating sewage from the public sanitary sewer system.
Shooting range, indoor. A building housing facilities for practicing the discharge of firearms.
Shooting range, outdoor. A facility for practicing the discharge of firearms including outdoor facilities.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult movie theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or other commercial enterprise that the primary business of which is
the offering of a service or selling, renting or exhibiting of devices of other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to the customer.
Single-family, attached. A dwelling that is part of a structure containing three or more dwellings, each designed and constructed
for occupancy by one family, with each dwelling attached by a common wall in which each dwelling is located on a separate
platted lot.
Single-family, detached. A structure containing one dwelling unit to be occupied by not more than one family.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/448
Site. That area of land, upon which a structure is placed, utilized in meeting requirements of this ordinance. No portion of land,
when once used as a site area for a structure, may be used as a site for another structure.
Slaughterhouse/feed yard. A facility for the storage and butchering of animals or poultry.
Smoking paraphernalia establishment. A retail store where more than 15 percent of the gross square footage of the
establishment is dedicated to the sale, distribution, delivery, furnishing of smoking paraphernalia, from one person to another.
Smoking paraphernalia shall mean paraphernalia, devices, or instruments that are designed or manufactured for the smoking,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the body of tobacco, products prepared from tobacco, or controlled substances
as defined in the Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 481. Smoking paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, pipes, bongs,
and hookahs. Smoking paraphernalia does not include lighters, matches, cigarette holders and device used to store or preserve
tobacco, tobacco cigarettes, cigarette papers or cigars. For purposes of this definition, smoking paraphernalia establishments
may also be referred to as head shops.
Stadium, arena, athletic field-public. An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the general public.
Storage, indoor. Storage of items, which are completely enclosed in a building.
Storage, outdoor. Storage of items, which are not completely enclosed in a building and not moved indoors on a daily basis.
Story. See City of Sachse current Building Code.
Street. A public or private thoroughfare right-of-way, which affords the principle means of access to abutting property. The term
“street” shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, boulevard, highway, or any other similar term.
Street, private. A street, which has no publicly, dedicated right-of-way.
Structure. See “Building Code.”
Taxidermist. A facility for preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of animals, birds and fish.
Telecommunications. The transmission of audio and/or visual information.
A. Alternative mounting structure. Water tower, man-made tree, clock tower, church steeple, bell tower, utility pole,
flagpole, or similar structure, designed to support and camouflage or conceal the presence of telecommunication
antennas.
B. Antenna, type 1. An antenna and associated mast or tower or a facility for transmission or reception of voice or
data by radio or television of local business communications within a business.
C. Antenna, type 2. An antenna and associated mast or tower or a facility for transmission or reception of voice or
data by radio or television for all communications other than those defined under antenna, type 1, or antenna, private.
D. Antenna, private. An antenna or facility for transmission or reception of voice or data of (a) noncommercial
communications by radio or television within the noncommercial band of the electromagnetic spectrum or (b) private
reception of commercial broadcasting.
E. Antenna tower/antenna support structure. A structure, other than an antenna mast placed, erected or
constructed to support one antenna mast and/or one or more antennas for the purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.
F. Co-location. A single telecommunications tower and/or site used by more than one telecommunications service
provider.
G. Stealth. A telecommunications antenna that is effectively camouflaged or concealed from view.
H. Antenna height. The distance measured from grade to the highest point of any and all components of the
structure, including antennas, hazard lighting, and other appurtenances.
I. Monopole. A self-supporting telecommunications tower, which consists of a single vertical pole, fixed into the
ground and/or attached to a foundation.
Tattooing/Body Piercing. An establishment that offers either tattooing or body piercing. Tattooing is the marking or coloring of skin
with dyes or inks. Tattooing for medical purposes, plastic surgery or reconstructive surgery and for cosmetic purposes such as
permanent and eye and lip make-up that are accessory to other uses are not included in this definition. All tattoo studios shall be
licensed by the Texas Department of Health.
Tire dealer, no outside storage. A facility for the display and sale of automobile or truck tires including facilities for the mounting,
balancing and repair of tires but with no outdoor storage of parts, equipment or inventory.
Tire dealer, outside storage. A facility for the display and sale of automobile or truck tires including facilities for the mounting,
balancing and repair of tires and including outdoor storage.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/448
Toxic and noxious matter. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous material which is capable of endangering the health, safety, comfort, or
economic well-being of persons in the vicinity or which may cause injury or damage to property as defined by the Uniform Fire
Code and/or the Environmental Protection Agency.
Transit station. Passenger terminal or loading facilities for a privately or publicly owned transit system.
Truck or bus storage, commercial. An area for the temporary parking of vehicles having a manufacturer's recommended gross
vehicle weight of greater than 11,000 pounds.
Truck or bus washing. A facility for the washing of vehicles having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight of
greater than 11,000 pounds.
Truck terminal. An establishment designed equipped, intended, adapted or primarily for the parking, storage, fueling or repair of
other than passenger motor vehicles. The use may include the retail sale of convenience food items, a fast food/take-out
restaurant, truck weighing scales, truck washes, showers, laundry facilities and personal services such as barber shops.
Two-family. A structure containing two dwelling units.
Uniform supply service. An establishment which provides for the pick-up, delivery, sale or leasing of uniforms to individuals or
businesses.
Use. The purpose for which land or a building is or may be occupied.
Used goods or products collection point (temporary). Temporary storage of used goods or products such as aluminum cans,
newspapers, or a Goodwill or Salvation Army type collection box.
Variance. A modification of the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance granted by the board of adjustment when strict
enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on
which the variance is granted.
Vehicle pound. An area for the temporary storage and parking of wrecked or impounded vehicles.
Vehicle sales, leasing and repair. A facility for the display, service and retail sale or rental of new or used vehicles other than
automobiles or motorcycles.
Veterinary clinic. A facility operated by a veterinarian for the purpose of examining and treating household pets permitted by the
Health Code to be kept within the city. The keeping of animals overnight is permitted when kept inside the clinic building.
Veterinary hospital. Facilities operated by a veterinarian for examining and treating animals permitted by the Health Code to be
kept within the city including outdoor facilities for caring for the animals while being treated.
Warehousing, general. The storage in an enclosed building of materials and goods including all office, distribution and sales
space. This definition does not include motor freight terminals or railroad freight terminals.
Water reservoir or well. A natural or artificial system, device or facility used for storing water for human consumption or
agricultural uses.
Water treatment plant. A facility for storing, purifying, supplying and distributing city water, which may include a system of
reservoirs, channels, mains, and purifying equipment.
Wholesaling, general. The sale of commodities for the purpose of resale, as to retailers rather than directly to consumers.
Wind energy system. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use and consisting
of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, that has a rated capacity of not more than 20 kw for
residential systems and not more than 100 kw for commercial systems and is intended for on-site production and consumption of
electricity to serve the needs of the consumer.
Wrecker service (one). Operating one wrecker designed to transport automobiles and other vehicles only when said operation is
secondary to main use of motor vehicle service, repair and/or sales.
Wrecker service. A primary use operating a wrecker or wreckers designed to transport all types of vehicles.
Yard, required. See “setback.”
Yard, required front. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance
between the front lot line and the front building line.
Yard, required rear. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and the rear building.
Yard, required side. An open space extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, the width of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and the side building line.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/448
Zoning district. A classification applied to any certain land area within the city stipulating the limitations and requirements of land
usage and development.
Zoning map. The Official Zoning Map of the City of Sachse together with all amendments thereto.
Zoo. A facility consisting of a zoological garden or a collection of animals for display to the public.
(Ordinance 1624 adopted 11/2/98; Ordinance 1725 adopted 4/3/00; Ordinance 1778 adopted 10/2/00; Ordinance 2015, secs. 3–
5, adopted 5/5/03; Ordinance 2074, sec. 2, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 2089, sec. 2, adopted 8/16/04; Ordinance 2247, sec. 1,
adopted 10/16/06; Ordinance 3126, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/09; Ordinance 3147, sec. 1, adopted 7/6/09; Ordinance 3206, sec. 1,
adopted 4/19/10; Ordinance 3209, sec. 1, adopted 5/3/10; Ordinance 3375, sec. 1, adopted 3/19/12; Ordinance 3560, sec. 1,
adopted 1/20/14; Ordinance 3573, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/14; Ordinance 3622, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/14; Ordinance 3887, sec. 1,
adopted 9/17/18; Ordinance 3906 adopted 1/22/19; Ordinance 3919 adopted 5/6/19)
ARTICLE 3. DISTRICTS
Sec. 1. Number of districts.
1.1 For the purpose of this ordinance the following districts are hereby established for the city:
Residential districts.
R-39 single-family dwelling district.
R-15 single-family dwelling district.
R-12 single-family dwelling district.
R-10 single-family dwelling district.
R-E single-family estate dwelling district.
Commercial districts.
C-1 neighborhood shopping district.
C-2 general commercial district.
Industrial districts.
I-1 restricted manufacturing and warehousing district.
I-2 general industrial district.
Special districts.
AG agricultural.
OP office park district.
MX mixed-use district.
PD planned development district.
(Ordinance 1624 adopted 11/2/98; Ordinance 2074, sec. 3, adopted 4/19/04)
Sec. 2. R single-family dwelling districts.
2.1 General description. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and
educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area. These residential areas are intended
to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment. Internal
stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and
related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses. The R, single-family dwelling
districts are further categorized in this section.
2.2 Uses permitted. Property and buildings in R, single-family dwelling district, shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) Detached one-family dwelling.
(b) Churches, but not including missions tents or revival tents.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/448
(c) Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as ordinarily given in public schools and
having no rooms regularly used for housing and sleeping.
(d) Public park and playground.
(e) Library.
(f) Growing of farm products.
(g) Municipal use.
(h) Telephone exchanges.
(i) Home occupation.
(j) Transportation and utility easements, alleys and rights-of-way.
(k) Accessory buildings which are not a part of a main building, including one private garage, or accessory buildings
which are a part of a main building, including one private garage.
(l) A temporary bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of
a single building or premises, which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premise is leased, hired or sold.
(m) A temporary bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 50 square feet in appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of
multiple buildings or premises.
(n) A church bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 50 square feet in area, located on the same lot with the church
building.
(o) Temporary construction facilities incidental to the development of property as permitted in this district and which
shall be removed when construction work is completed.
(p) Parking lot required to serve the uses permitted in this district. All single-family dwelling districts shall have
concrete surface pavement required for all applications.
(q) Servant's quarters and quarters used by bona fide farm workers, or other accessory buildings such as barns,
sheds and other structures necessary for farming operations may be permitted, provided, however, that no such
accessory building or quarters to be used by servants or farm workers shall be occupied as a place of abode or
dwelling by anyone other than a bona fide servant or farm worker and actually and regularly employed by the land
owner or occupant of the main building.
(r) Accessory uses, which shall include the following, when the primary use is residential:
(1) Home occupations which are secondary to the primary residential use and which involve the manufacture,
assembly, sale or service of goods, or which involve the providing of a service, subject to the following
conditions:
a. The home occupation is conducted entirely within a dwelling unit which is the bona fide residence of
the practitioner(s) or entirely within only one accessory building (not to include a driveway, yard or outside
area).
b. No person, not a family member who resides in the dwelling unit, may participate in the home
occupation on the premises.
c. The lot and the dwelling maintain their residential character. Neither the interior nor the exterior of the
dwelling shall be structurally altered so as to require compliance with nonresidential construction codes to
accommodate the home occupation No additional buildings shall be added on the property to
accommodate the home occupation.
d. The home occupation does not generate customer related vehicular traffic in excess of two vehicles at
any one time and a total of five vehicles per 24-hour date in the residential neighborhood.
e. No direct selling of merchandise occurs on the premises.
f. No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation are displayed or stored where visible
from anywhere off the premises.
g. The occupation produces no external noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes,
electrical interference or waste runoff outside the dwelling unit or on the property surrounding the dwelling
unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/448
h. No vehicle used in connection with the home occupation which exceeds one ton capacity is parked on
the premises or on any street adjacent to the residentially zoned property.
i. The home occupation does not advertise by any signs on the premises, nor shall the street address of
the home occupation be advertised through signs, billboards, television, radio, newspapers or telephone
directories.
Provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to allow the following businesses or occupations in
residential neighborhoods as home occupations: animal hospitals, animal breeding, clinics, hospitals,
contractor's yards, dancing schools, junkyards, restaurants, rental outlets, vehicle repair shops or massage
parlors.
(2) A detached private garage or an attached private garage, in a compartment as a part of the main building.
(3) A fence, hedge or enclosure wall in accordance with article 4, section 2.
(4) A semi-public parking area.
2.3 Building regulations.
(a) Minimum size. The minimum area of the main building shall be as specified in Table 2.1 for each district,
exclusive of garages, breezeways and servant quarters.
(b) Height regulations. No building shall exceed the height specifications in Table 2.1 for each district, except as
provided in article 4, section 3. Height regulations for unattached accessory buildings shall be in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this Ordinance.
(c) Exterior fire-resistant construction. The exterior walls of all main buildings and garages shall be masonry, in
accordance with the building code of the City of Sachse.
(d) Garage requirements.
(1) The entrances to all attached or detached garages shall not face any street, except for the entrances to
attached or detached garages located on property platted after June 20, 2011.
(2) Front entry garage doors, where permitted, shall be even with, or recessed behind the front face of the
primary structure.
(3) Enclosing a garage for the purpose of creating additional living space shall be permitted for single-family
residences provided the following conditions are satisfied:
a. The property owner obtains the necessary building permit(s); and
b. Provided the property owner is enclosing a one-car garage, only one off-street parking space with a
minimum width of nine feet and minimum depth of eighteen feet shall be provided. In cases, where a
garage larger than a one-car garage is being enclosed, a maximum of two off-street parking spaces with a
minimum width of nine feet and minimum depth of eighteen feet for each space shall be provided. Such
space(s) shall be located on the property and on a paved or improved surface as required by the Code of
Ordinances.
TABLE 2.1
Building Size Lot Size
District Minimum Floor
Area 
Stories
Maximum Height
Minimum
Lot Area
Width at
Building
Line
Width at
Street Row

R-39 2,000 2 30 39,000 130 100
R-15 2,000 2 30 15,000 100 50
R-12 2,000 2 30 12,000 80 50
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/448
R-10 2,000 2 30 10,000 70 40
2.4 Area regulations.
(a) Front yard.
(1) The depth of the front yard shall be as specified in Table 2.2 for each district.
(2) If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved
with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than that specified in Table 2.2 and
no building varies more than six feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to
the street line than the setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a
front yard of greater depth than the front yard setback limit specified in Table 2.2.
(3) When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be complied with on both streets.
(b) Side yard.
(1) There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten percent of the width of
the lot at the building line, except as hereinafter provided in article 4, section 2.
(2) For unattached buildings of accessory use, the regulations in Article 4, Section 12 of the Zoning Ordinance
shall apply.
(3) For dwellings located on corner lots there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not
less than 15 feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and shall conform to front yard
requirements in every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and
accessory buildings on an interior lot.
(4) Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings,
shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
(1) There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 25 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached accessory buildings may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
(d) Lot width. For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width as specified in Table 2.1 for each district at the front
building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than that specified in Table 2.1 for each
district.
(e) Intensity of use.
(1) For each dwelling and building accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than that specified in
Table 2.1 for each district.
(2) For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwelling,
the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas
required in article 4, section 5; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall not be less than that
specified in Table 2.1 for each district, nor less than 21,000 square feet, whichever is greater.
(f) Coverage of lot. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover a greater percentage of the lot area than that
specified in Table 2.2 for each district.
TABLE 2.2
District Coverage Total Front Minimum Setback Maximum
R-39 35% 90' none
R-15 35% 40' 50'
R-12 35% 30' 40'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/448
R-10 35% 25' 40'
(Ordinance 1624 adopted 11/2/98)
(g) Provisions for undersized lots.
(1) The provisions for this paragraph permit undersized lots within a subdivision as follows. It is the intent of
this paragraph that the requirements of the applicable zoning district be met, yet permitting some deviation to
accommodate reasonable platting of the subdivision.
(2) The provisions of this paragraph shall apply to each phase of a subdivision individually, and collectively,
and the specific lot numbers of each undersized lot shall be noted on the final plat of each phase of a
subdivision.
(3) The average size of all lots within each phase of a subdivision shall be equal to or greater than the
requirement of the applicable zoning district.
(4) The number of undersized lots within a phase of a subdivision shall be less than ten percent maximum of
the total number of residential lots contained within the phase.
(5) Such undersized lots shall contain at least the following minimum percentage of the land area required by
the applicable zoning district:
R-39, R-15, R-12, R-10: 90%
R-8.4: 95%
(6) The lot width at front building line and at the front street line of any undersized lot shall be at least 90
percent of the requirement of the applicable zoning district.
(7) Any lot which is undersized in any dimension shall be counted as an undersized lot even if it meets all
other dimensional and area requirements.
(h) Provisions for irregularly shaped lots.
(1) In any residential zoning district, the front building line and the street frontage requirements may be amended as
follows.
(2) The provisions of this paragraph shall apply only to lots of irregular shape such as cul-de-sac lots or corner lots
on irregular subdivision boundaries. It shall not be applied in general platting of subdivisions.
(3) Except for front building line and street line, all other provisions of building construction and rear yards shall be
as required in the applicable zoning district, based on the full width requirement of the applicable zoning district.
(4) The width of the lot at the street right-of-way shall be 35 feet minimum.
(5) The width of the lot at the front building line shall be at least 75 percent of the width required in the applicable
zoning district.
(6) An irregularly shaped lot must have the full area requirement of the applicable zoning district.
(7) If the width of the lot at the front building line is less than the width required in the applicable zoning district, it
will count as an undersized lot as specified in (g) above.
2.5 Park dedication required. See chapter 8, section 8-19 of the Code of Ordinances.
2.6 Outside storage.
(a) Prohibition. A person commits an offense if he or she keeps, maintains or stores, outside of a building, in an R
single-family dwelling district, any personal property which is visible from a public street or alley, or is visible from
private property which is under separate ownership, including but not limited to household items, building materials,
automotive parts, equipment, etc., without proper screening and located in allowed outside storage areas only. It shall
not be a defense to prosecution that such items were covered with a tarp or similar covering.
(b) Exceptions. It is not an offense to keep, store or maintain personal property customarily found outside of a
building on property zoned for single-family use such as lawn furniture, dog houses, landscape containers, etc.
(c) Parties responsible. The owner (or owners) and persons in control of such residentially zoned property are
responsible for violations of this subsection.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/448
(Ordinance 1856, sec. 1, adopted 5/21/01; Ordinance 3169, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; Ordinance 3296, sec. 1, adopted 6/20/11;
Ordinance 3463, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/13; Ordinance 3552, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/13; Ordinance 3573, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/14;
Ordinance 3622, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/14)
Sec. 3. R-E single-family dwelling district.
3.1 General description. R-E is a special residential zoning district in which remote lots may be served by private drives owned
either individually or cooperatively. In all other respects, requirements of zoning district R-39 shall be required except the
minimum main building size shall be 1,500 square feet. Furthermore, an R-E zoning district shall require approval of a site plan
by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. The site plan shall specifically detail the number, size and shape of
the lots; the location of the nearest public street(s) and the access of each lot to the street(s); and full-service city water including
fire hydrants per City Code.
3.2 Area regulations. Each lot of an R-E zoning district shall contain five acres minimum including easements.
3.3 Accessibility requirements.
(a) An easement to the city shall be granted as required for developer/owner installation and city service of utility
lines and fire hydrants.
(b) Driveway and parking facilities shall be provided according to the following requirements:
(1) Concrete entry apron is required with a turning radius to extend a minimum of 20 feet from the street.
(2) All parking aprons shall be concrete.
(3) Driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet in width with sealed surface pavement, asphalt type or two-inch
minimum gravel, with four-inch minimum white rock base. This type surface is permitted only if driveway length,
exclusive of entry apron or parking apron at the residence, exceeds 150 feet in length. White rock only entry or
parking surfaces are prohibited.
(c) Designation as an R-E zoning district shall imply granting of permission for the city to use private drives for
access of fire, police or other city services. On the other hand, the city shall not incur liability for failure to service
individual lots, if in the judgment of the responsible city official, the private drive is impassable.
Sec. 4. C-1 neighborhood shopping district.
4.1 General description. This commercial district is for the conduct of retail trade and personal service enterprises to meet the
regular needs and for the convenience of the people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may be an
integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with residential, religious, recreational and educational uses, more restrictive
requirements for light, air, open space and off-street parking are made than are provided in the C-2 commercial district.
4.2 Uses permitted.
(a) Property and buildings in C-1 neighborhood shopping districts shall be used for retail stores and shops which do
not exceed 14,000 square feet of gross floor area each and which supply the regular and customary needs of the
residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily for their convenience. See chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3,
section 13;
(b) Name plates and signs relating only to the use of the establishment and premises or to products sold on the
premises;
(c) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to allowed uses;
(d) A building used for any of the uses listed in this 4.2 may not have more than 40 percent of its floor area devoted
to purposes incidental to the primary use. No materials or goods offered for sale in connection with the allowed uses
shall be displayed or stored outside of a building. Service machines such as those for ice, soft drinks and newspapers
may be permanently displayed behind the front building line;
(e) Sleeping facilities for caretakers and night watchmen employed on the premises are permitted. No other
residential use is permitted; and
(f) Temporary construction facilities incidental to the development of property as permitted in this district are allowed
for so long as construction work is in progress.
4.3 Area regulations. The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:
(a) Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard having not less
than 25 feet in depth.
(b) Side yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 15 feet.
There shall be a side yard setback from intersection street of not less than 25 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/448
(c) Rear yard. There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof, of not less than ten
feet with not less than 25 feet adjoining a dwelling district.
4.4 Building regulations.
(a) Height regulations. No building shall exceed three and one-half stories, or 40 feet in height, except as
hereinafter provided in article 4, section 3.
(b) Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be of masonry construction, and must meet the required construction
standards for this zoning district. The regulation contained in the preceding sentence does not apply to glass, doors,
or window walls.
(c) Accessory buildings. The color of accessory buildings shall be the same as the main building.
(Ordinance 2074, sec. 4, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3169, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; Ordinance 3552, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/13;
Ordinance 3573, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/14; Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 5. C-2 general commercial district.
5.1 General description. This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business services and the general
retail business of the community. Persons living in the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct and
frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and commercial
vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail goods.
5.2 Uses permitted.
(a) Property and buildings in C-2 general commercial districts shall be used for those uses provided for in chapter
11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 13;
(b) Buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to allowed uses, provided that there shall be no
manufacture, processing or compounding of products other than such as are customarily incidental and essential to
retail establishments;
(c) Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal, professional or business service which does
not produce more noise, odor, dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated in chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3,
section 13. Except for open display permitted in chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 13 and under subsection 5.3 of
this section 5, no article or material stored or offered for sale in connection with permitted uses shall be stored or
displayed outside of a building unless it is so screened by permanent ornamental walls, fences or planting (in
accordance with article 4, section 2) that it cannot be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person
standing at ground level; provided, however that no screening in excess of eight feet is required;
(d) Temporary construction facilities incidental to the development of property as permitted in this district are
allowed for so long as construction work is in progress;
(e) Refuse storage screening: Materials and trash receptacles stored outside shall be screened from public view by
a combination wood and masonry fence not to exceed eight feet in height.
5.3 Open display uses permitted. The uses indicated accordingly in chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 13, and reasonably
similar uses are permitted open display in the C-2 general commercial district. Service machines, such as those for ice, soft
drinks and newspapers may be permanently displayed behind the front building line.
5.4 Area regulations. The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:
(a) Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard having not less
than 25 feet in depth.
(b) Side yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 15 feet.
There shall be a side yard setback from intersecting street of not less than 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be provided a private alley, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof, of not less
than ten feet with not less than 25 feet adjoining a dwelling district.
(d) Area for off-street parking. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking
requirements set forth in article 4, section 5.
5.5 Building regulations.
(a) Height regulations. No building shall exceed 90 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in article 4, section
3.
(b) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All exterior walls of buildings shall be masonry in accordance with the
Building Code of the City of Sachse.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/448
(c) Electrical equipment. Building and pad mounted electrical equipment shall be screened by fencing of wood and
masonry or landscaped with shrubs and trees. All screening shall be approved on the site plan.
(d) Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be directed toward the property where located, and in a downward
direction. Lenses shall be of the nonglare type. Light poles for parking lots shall include a decorative fixture and pole
according to the city building standard guide.
(e) Accessory buildings. The color of accessory buildings shall be the same as the main building.
(f) Overhead doors. No overhead doors shall face the front of the property.
(Ordinance 1435 adopted 1/20/97; Ordinance 2074, secs. 5–7, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3169, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09;
Ordinance 3552, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/13; Ordinance 3573, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/14; Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 6. I-1 restricted manufacturing and warehousing district.
6.1 General description. This industrial district is intended primarily for manufacturing and assembly plants and warehousing
that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust and glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building. These
industries may require direct access to rail, air or street transportation facilities; however, the size and volume of the raw
materials and finished products involved should not produce the volume of freight generated by the uses of I-2 industrial district.
Buildings in this district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped yards.
6.2 Uses permitted.
(a) Any use permitted by chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 13. No dwelling uses, except sleeping facilities for
caretakers and night watchmen employed on the premises, is permitted.
(b) Reserved.
(c) Any of the uses permitted under this section shall have their primary operations conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings, and shall not emit any dust or smoke, or noxious odor or fumes outside of the building operation,
or produce a noise level at the property line that is greater than the average noise level occurring on the adjacent
street. These requirements do not waive or modification (modify) the requirements contained in the Sachse City Code
concerning environmental emissions. Any article or material stored temporarily outside of an enclosed building as an
incidental part of the primary operation shall be so screened by ornamental walls and fences or evergreen planting
that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing at ground level.
(d) Temporary construction facilities incidental to the development of property as permitted in this district and which
shall be removed when construction work is completed.
6.3 Area regulations. All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines and lot lines to comply with the following
yard requirements:
(a) Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard having not less
than 25 feet in depth.
(b) Side yard. A side yard of 25 feet shall be provided on one side of a lot and no side yard is required on the
opposite side of the lot. There shall be a side yard setback from intersecting street of not less than 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard. No rear yards are required except 25 feet adjoining a dwelling district.
6.5 [6.4] Building regulations.
(a) Height regulations. No building or structure shall exceed 90 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in
article 4, section 3 of this Ordinance.
(b) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All main buildings shall be masonry or pre-engineered metal building
systems in accordance with the Building Code of the City of Sachse.
(Ordinance 2074, sec. 8, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3169, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; Ordinance 3552, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/13;
Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 7. I-2 general industrial district.
7.1 General description.
(a) This industrial district is intended primarily for the conduct of manufacturing, assembling and fabrication. These
uses do not depend primarily on frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but usually require good accessibility
to major rail, air or street transportation facilities.
(b) No I-2 zoning district may be established adjacent to a single family dwelling district.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/448
7.2 Uses permitted. Property and buildings in an I-2 general industrial district shall be used for the following or reasonably
similar purposes:
(a) Any use permitted by chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 13. No residential dwelling use, except sleeping
facilities for caretakers and night watchmen employed on the premises, is permitted.
(b) Reserved.
(c) The following uses, when conducted within a completely enclosed building: the manufacturing, compounding,
processing, packaging or treatment of products.
(d) Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses.
(e) Temporary construction facilities incidental to the development of property as permitted in this district and which
shall be removed when construction work is completed.
(f) The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor, fumes or dust
will be emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. These requirements do not waive or
modify the requirements set out in the Sachse City Code concerning environmental emissions or discharge of
industrial waste into public sewers.
7.3 Area regulations.
(a) Front yard and side yard. There shall be a side yard setback from intersecting streets of not less than 25 feet.
Other than the requirement contained in the preceding sentence, there are no specific front or side yard requirements
for uses in this district.
(b) Rear yard. Where a building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alley, service court, rear
yard or combination thereof of not less than 30 feet in width or of adequate area and width to provide for maneuver of
service vehicles, whichever is greater. In all other cases no rear yard is required, provided however, that a building
shall setback a distance of not less than 25 feet that adjoins a dwelling district.
(c) Yard area. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set
forth in article 4, section 5.
7.4 Building regulations.
(a) Height regulations. No building shall exceed 90 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in article 4, section
3.
(b) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All main buildings shall be masonry construction or pre-engineered metal
building systems in accordance with the Building Code of the City of Sachse.
(Ordinance 2074, sec. 9, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3169, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; Ordinance 3552, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/13;
Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 8. AG-agricultural district.
8.1 General description. The AG-agricultural district is intended to be used primarily in areas where agricultural uses of at least
five acres should be retained, where scattered nonfarm growth should be prevented, and as a temporary classification for newly
annexed lands.
8.2 Principal permitted uses. No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered
or enlarged which is arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the following uses:
(a) Agriculture. Any customary agricultural use, building or structure, including nurseries, greenhouses, orchards,
truck farms and animal farms.
(b) Residential. Single-family detached dwellings of a minimum size of 2,000 square feet.
(c) Other uses as shown in chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 13.
(d) Accessory uses. Buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any listed permitted use, including but
not limited to the following:
i. Temporary (in season) fruit and vegetable stands;
ii. Accessory buildings such as barns, sheds and other structures necessary for farm operations;
iii. Servant's quarters and quarters used by bona fide farm workers, provided that no such accessory building
or quarters may be occupied as a dwelling by anyone other than a bona fide servant or farm worker who is
actually and regularly employed by the land owner or occupant of the main building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/448
(None of these enumerated herein shall be construed to authorize the creation or maintenance of a nuisance in
fact.)
8.3 Building regulations.
(a) Height regulations. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as provided in article 4, section 3.
(b) Lot area. Width and yard requirements: The following minimum requirements shall apply:
Use Area Width Front Side yard Rear
Single-family
dwellings
5 acres 150 ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. 50 ft.
(c) The exterior materials of single family homes shall be governed by the architectural design standards (chapter
11, exhibit 1, article 4, section 7), and agriculture related structures and accessory structures shall abide by the
accessory structure standards (chapter 11, exhibit 1, section 12.1).
8.4 Accessibility requirements.
(a) An easement to the city shall be granted as required for developer/owner installation and city service of utility
lines and fire hydrants.
(d)[b] Driveway and parking facilities shall be provided according to the following requirements:
(1) Concrete entry apron is required with a turning radius to extend a minimum of 20 feet from the street.
(2) All parking aprons shall be concrete.
(3) Driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet in width with sealed surface pavement, asphalt type or two inch
minimum gravel, with four-inch minimum white rock base. This type surface is permitted only if the driveway
length, exclusive of entry apron or parking apron at the residence, exceeds 150 feet in length. White rock only
entry or parking surfaces are prohibited.
(Ordinance 2074, sec. 10, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3876, sec. 1, adopted 7/16/18; Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 9. Reserved.
Editor's note – Ordinance No. 2074, sec. 11, adopted April 19, 2004, repealed section 9 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to Ffloodplain
district.
Sec. 10. Planned development district.
10.1 General description. The planned development district is a district which accommodates planned associations of uses
developed as integral land use units such as industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers and
single/multifamily developments or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated as
integral land use units either by single owner or a combination of owners.
A planned development district shall be comprised of one or more of the zoning districts in each planned development ordinance.
The ordinance creating the planned development district shall provide the standards of development for such planned
development district, which shall be comprised of the development standards applicable to one or more zoning districts already
in the zoning ordinance.
10.2 Creation. The city council, after public hearing and proper notice to all affected property owners and after
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the creation of a planned development district on sites
of five acres or more to accommodate various types of development and conditions of development for any use or combination of
uses permitted by this ordinance. The uses to be permitted in any specific planned development district shall be enumerated in
the ordinance establishing such district and shown on the approved plan for development which becomes part of said ordinance.
The city council may amend the minimum acreage requirement through the planned development district ordinance, or an
associated development agreement, or in advancement of a comprehensive plan initiative.
10.3 Design standards. In approving the development plan and the ordinance establishing the planned development district,
the city council shall, after recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, specify such maximum height, floor-area
ratio, park dedication required, density and minimum off-street parking and loading standards within the limits of those specified
in the districts listed for the specific uses involved as is appropriate for the development. The city council shall, after receiving the
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, establish the standards for yards, signs, building spacing, site
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/448
coverage, access, screening or landscaping, building area, open space, pedestrian ways, public or private streets and alleys to
be observed in a planned development district and such standards shall be specified in the ordinance establishing the district.
10.4 Development schedule. An application for a planned development district shall, if the applicant desires, or the planning
and zoning commission or city council requires, be accompanied by a development schedule indicating the appropriate date on
which construction is expected to begin and the rate of anticipated development to completion. The development schedule, if
adopted and approved by the city council, shall become part of the development plan and shall be adhered to by the owner,
developer and his successors in interest.
10.5 Annual development report. Annually, where a development schedule has been required, the building inspector shall
report to the planning and zoning commission the actual development accomplished in the various planned development districts
as compared with the development schedule.
10.6 Failure to meet development schedule. The planning and zoning commission may, if in its opinion the owner or owners of
property are failing or have failed to meet the approved schedule, initiate proceedings to amend the zoning district map or the
planned development district by removing all or part of the planned development district from the zoning district map and placing
the area involved in another appropriate zoning district. Upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission and
for good cause shown by the owner and developer, the city council may also extend the development schedule or adopt such
new development schedule as may be indicated by the facts and conditions of the case.
10.7 Development plan required. An application for a planned development district shall include and be accompanied by a
development plan which shall become a part of the amendatory ordinance and shall be referenced on the zoning district map.
Changed in the development plan shall b[be] considered the same as changed in the zoning district map and shall be processed
as required, except that changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent
property and which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, floor-area ratio, height or coverage of the site, or
which do not decrease the off-street parking ration, or reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site as indicated on the
approved development plan may be authorized by the planning and zoning commission. Any applicant may appeal the decision
of the planning and zoning commission to the city council for review and decision as to whether an amendment to the planned
development district ordinance shall be required. All uses shown on the development plan shall be mutually exclusive.
10.8 The development plan shall include:
(a) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or building lots; any
areas proposed for dedication of parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility and garbage easements, school sites, street
widening, street changes; the points of ingress and egress from existing public streets on an accurate survey of the
boundary of tract and topography with a contour interval of not less than five feet, or spot grades where the relief is
limited; and site landscaping required for commercial uses.
(b) Where multiple types of land uses are proposed, a land use plan delineating the specific areas to be devoted to
various uses shall be required.
(c) Where building complexes are proposed, a site plan showing the location of each building and the minimum
distance between buildings, and between buildings and the property line, street line and/or alley line shall be
submitted. For buildings more than one story in height, except single-family, elevations and/or perspective drawings
may be required in order that the relationship of the buildings to adjacent property, open spaces and to other features
of the development plan may be determined. Such drawings need only indicate the height, number of floors and
exposures for access, light and air.
(d) A plan indicating the arrangement and provision for off-street parking and off-street loading where required.
Such a plan may be presented as ration of off-street parking and off-street loading area to building area when
accompanied by a typical example indicating the feasibility of the arrangement proposed and when the areas where
the example would be applied are dimensioned on the drawing of the entire site. Any special traffic regulation facilities
proposed or required to assume the safe function of the circulation plan shall also be shown.
(e) A designation of the maximum building coverage of the site shall be indicated upon the site plan.
(f) Screening and landscaping plan shall be required where such treatment is essential to the proper arrangement
of the development in relation to the adjacent property. Such plan shall, when required, include screening walls,
ornamental planting, playgrounds, wooded areas to be retained, lawns and gardens if such are determined to be
necessary by the city council.
10.9 Development conditions. Every planned development district approved under the provisions of this ordinance shall be
considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to the property involved. In carrying out the development of
a planned development district, the development conditions and the development schedule, if required, shall be complied with
and such conditions as are specified for the development of a planned development district shall not be construed as conditions
precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy and compliance as required in this ordinance.
(Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 11. SP-special use permits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/448
11.1 General description. The city council may authorize the location of a special use permit after public hearings and proper
notice to all parties affected, and after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission as outlined in article 12,
section 3.1.
The planning and zoning commission in considering and determining its recommendations to the city council on any request for a
special use permit may required from the applicant plans, information, operating data, and expert evaluation concerning the
location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed.
The city council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the ordinance, establish conditions of
operation, location, duration, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized. Said conditions shall be
complied with by the grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed
as special use permits, the city council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and locations
indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor,
glare, explosion, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions.
Every special use permit granted under the provisions of this article shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning
ordinance as applicable to such property.
11.2 Use regulations. Any use which is not contrary to city, county, state or federal laws which is not listed as an allowed use in
the zoning ordinance is a special use permit use in any district and subject to the provisions of this article. The following uses are
hereby authorized in the specified districts upon compliance with all of the requirements herein:
(a) Any public building to be erected by the city, county, state or federal government in any district;
(b) Other uses as shown in chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 13;
(c) Check cashing business, payday advance/loan business and car title loan business.
(1) Location. No check cashing business, payday advance/loan business or car title loan business may be
located within 1,000 feet of another check cashing business, payday advance/loan business or car title loan
business, within 500 feet of the right-of-way of President George Bush Tollway/State Highway 190 or within 500
feet of the Sachse city limit line.
(2) Measurement. For purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects.
(i) From the nearest portion of the property line of the premises where the existing business is located to
the nearest portion of the property line of the premises where the new business is proposed, if confirming
separation between businesses;
(ii) From the nearest portion of the right-of-way line of President George Bush Tollway/State Highway
190 to the property line of the premises where the new business is proposed if confirming buffering from
these roadways; or
(iii) From the nearest portion of the city limit line to the property line of the premises where the new
business is proposed if confirming buffering from the city limit.
11.3 Uses in I-2 only. A special use permit may be granted for the following uses in the I-2 General Industrial District only:
(a) Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture;
(b) Natural gas production and distribution;
(c) Petroleum production and refining;
(d) Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane or butane, or other petroleum products;
(e) Disposal plants of all types including trash and garbage, sewage treatment including lagoons and compost
plants and recycling centers.
11.4 Temporary special use permits. A temporary special use permit may be granted by the city manager or designated
representative for uses below or for a reasonably similar use. Hearings and approval by the planning and zoning commission is
not required.
(a) Use regulations. Persons intended to operate a temporary use are required to apply for a temporary use permit.
Temporary uses include, but are not limited to:
(1) Produce stands.
(2) Christmas tree lots.
(3) Asphalt batching plant.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/448
(4) Cement batching plant.
(5) Construction office.
(6) Real estate office.
(7) Portable buildings. A maximum of four portable buildings may be temporarily installed, up to a maximum of
five years, on sites owned and used by public schools and assembly uses, per the following conditions:
a. The portable building shall obtain a building permit, complete all necessary inspections, and abide by
all applicable codes and regulations.
b. A primary structure with a current certificate of occupancy and no code violations must be in existence
prior to applying for a portable building permit.
c. The location of the portable building shall be selected to minimize visibility from the public right-of-way
and be generally situated in the rear or least conspicuous location on the subject property that is practical.
d. Skirting for the building is required.
e. All associated service and utility lines shall be buried.
f. Concrete pedestrian access shall be provided, in addition to any required ramps.
g. A stabilizing foundation in compliance with the building code must be provided.
h. All portable buildings shall be perpetually maintained and repaired in a safe, reasonably good, and
attractive manner by the property owner in a manner that protects against the elements, is structurally
safe, and corrects any visual ills or other problems.
(b) Definitions-Temporary uses.
(1) Produce stands, temporary. An open or covered areas used for sale of fruits, vegetables and/or dairy
products for a specified period of time in a designated area.
(2) Christmas tree lot. An open or covered area used for the sale of Christmas trees for a specific period of
time in a designated area.
(3) Asphalt batching, temporary. A designated area, allowable after application, for the temporary
manufacturing of asphalt for installation within subdivisions in the city.
(4) Cement batching, temporary. A designated area, allowable after application, for the temporary
manufacturing of cement for the installation within subdivisions in the city.
(5) Construction office. The use of a portable trailer for supervision of a construction site allowable for a
specific period of time in a designated area.
(6) Real estate sales office. The use of a portable or permanent building or structure for the sale of real estate
within a new subdivision allowable for a specific time.
(c) Application information required. Each application for a temporary special use permit shall be submitted to the
City of Sachse building inspector on forms furnished by the building inspector and shall set out the following:
(1) Name of the applicant;
(2) Applicant's permanent address;
(3) Name and address of the firm applicant represents;
(4) Narrative statement of specific temporary special use permit applied for;
(5) Specific site plan drawn to scale showing the specific dimensions and arrangement of proposed temporary
special use;
(6) Specific time period for which applicant is requesting temporary special use.
(d) Fees required. The fees for administering temporary uses within the City of Sachse shall be established in
section 11-2, zoning fees.
(e) General requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/448
(1) If temporary power is required, it must be supplied overhead or underground directly to the specific special
use. No open wiring laying directly on the ground will be allowed.
(2) All building or structure setbacks shall conform to the current zoning district for principal uses on the land
in which the temporary special use is occurring.
(3) The maximum time period for a temporary-use permit for real estate sales office and construction office is
12 months. The time period for all other temporary requirements will be determined by the city manager.
(4) A new permit is required for each new location, whether or not the temporary use is located on the same
property or on a new site.
(5) A minimum of four parking spaces shall be designated on the general site plan for construction offices and
real estate sales offices.
(6) The building inspector may revoke a temporary special use permit for noncompliance with the above
requirements.
(f) City manager review.
(1) The city manager, or his designated representative, shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all
temporary use requests presented, except as approved by the building inspector regarding construction offices
and real estate offices.
(2) The city manager shall designate a specific time limit on all temporary uses approved.
(3) No appeal on the same request shall be filed within a period of one year from the date of denial.
11.5 Conformance regulations. Unless the city council specifies otherwise, all special permit uses shall comply with the
building, area and height regulations of the zoning district for which the use is approved. All special permit uses shall also be
required to conform to:
(a) The land subdivision ordinance and regulations.
(b) Site plan approval by the planning and zoning commission as follows:
(1) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, there shall be submitted to the planning and zoning
commission for its approval a site plan drawn to an acceptable scale and with copies. The scale and number of
copies shall be that deemed necessary by the city secretary or other designated city official.
(2) The site plan shall show but not be limited to, the arrangement of the proposed improvements in detail,
together with the essential requirements, such as parking facilities, location of buildings and other structures,
means of ingress and egress, areas to be landscaped, together with any other requirements provided by the
comprehensive zoning ordinance, or other valid ordinance of the City of Sachse.
(3) A landscape plan must be submitted as part of the required site plan and approved by the building
inspector before a building permit shall be issued. The plan must be totally implemented, inspected and
approved before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued, the landscape plan will be reviewed by the planning
and zoning commission for recommendation to and approval by the city council as part of the required site plan.
(4) The planning and zoning commission consideration shall include: paving and layout of streets, alleys and
sidewalks; means of ingress and egress, and provisions for drainage; parking space, protective screening and
open spaces; areas designated for landscaping; internal and perimeter lighting which shall be designated so
a[as] to reflect light away from surrounding areas and any other aspect deemed by the planning and zoning
commission necessary to consider in the interest of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare.
(5) In the approval or disapproval of the site plan, the planning and zoning commission shall not be authorized
to waive or vary conditions and requirements contained in the zoning ordinance, or amendments thereto, or
other valid ordinances of the City of Sachse.
(6) It shall be unlawful to issue a building permit prior to the approval of the site plan by the planning and
zoning commission. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the approved site plan,
including all conditions of approval applied by the planning and zoning commission.
(7) For the purpose of assisting in-process planning, a preliminary site plan may be submitted for planning
and zoning commission consideration. Such preliminary site plan may contain any or all of the site plan
requirements and must be drawn to scale, submitted in adequate quantity and titled “preliminary site plan.” The
approval of a preliminary site plan will not imply approval of all elements of site plan. It shall be unlawful to issue
a building permit on a “preliminary site plan”.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/448
(c) Special requirements as may be required by the city council, as well as any special requirements in the zoning
district for which the use is approved, including but not limited to:
(1) The outside storage and display of goods, wares and merchandise is prohibited, except as may be
specifically authorized by the city council or by the zoning district for which the special use permit is granted.
(2) Refuse and waste storage areas shall conform to standards as may be required by the city.
(3) Security bond.
(d) Site landscaping.
(1) Landscaped area is defined as the improving of land and placing thereon live flowers, shrubs, trees or
grasses, decorative fixtures such as fountains, water treatments, sculptures, retaining walls, berms, fences and
specially treated walkways. These features shall be treated as and go toward the calculation of total landscaped
area. Required sidewalks and access sidewalks may not be included in the calculated landscaped area.
(2) All required landscaped open space shall be provided with adequate and inconspicuous irrigation systems
and shall be properly maintained.
(3) Five percent of the lot area shall be maintained in landscaped open area in front of the building line. Also,
if the parking and maneuvering space exceeds 20,000 square feet, at least five percent of such space shall be
maintained as landscaped area, in addition to the five percent of the lot area requirement specified in the
preceding sentence. It is the intent of this paragraph to require design and construction of parking areas in a
manner to insure areas unusable for parking or maneuvering space be landscaped.
(4) If all of the city right-of-way is landscaped and maintained, such landscaped portion will reduce the amount
of required landscaped area of the lot by that amount (square foot for square foot).
(5) The City of Sachse shall have the power to plant, preserve, spray, trim or remove any tree, shrub or plant
on any parkway, alley or public ground belonging to the city.
11.6 Amendment to the zoning ordinance. Every special use permit granted under the provisions of this article shall be
considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to such property. In granting such permit the city council may
impose conditions which shall be complied with by the grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building
inspector for the use of the building on such property pursuant to said special use permit; and such conditions shall not be
construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy.
11.7 Restrictions and conditions for private clubs.
(a) Private clubs operation as a secondary use. A private club may operate only as a secondary use pursuant to a
special use permit only in a:
(1) General restaurant;
(2) Restaurant in an office or retail complex;
(3) Hotel or motel; or
(4) Country club.
Furthermore, private clubs shall be limited to property in a C-2 zoning district which is located adjacent to Highway
78 and is not further than 1,500 feet from the right-of-way of Highway 78. This provisions [provision] does not apply to
country clubs.
(b) Regulations applicable to establishment and operation of registered private clubs. The operation of registered
private clubs, holding state permits under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, shall be subject to compliance with the
terms and conditions set forth hereinbelow, to wit:
(1) A site plan of any proposed establishment shall be submitted and approved by the city council prior to the
issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
(2) Reserved.
(3) No registered private club shall be established or permitted to operate within 200 feet of any residential
dwelling unit including single family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings.
Said distances shall be determined by measurement to be made in a straight line from the nearest point of
the structure of the premises to be permitted to the nearest boundary line of the closest residential dwelling unit.
(4) A private club shall be prohibited within 1,000 feet to the property line of any church, public or parochial
school, hospital, day care or child care facility, or city park.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/448
Said distances shall be determined by measurement to be made in a straight line from the nearest point of
the structure of the premises to be permitted to the nearest boundary line of said church, public or parochial
school, hospital, day care of child care facility, or city park.
(5) Paved parking must be provided on the premises with a ratio of one parking space for every three seats
under the maximum seating arrangement (per fire and building code) with a minimum of 33 automobile parking
spaces.
(6) No private registered club shall be permitted in drive-in, fast food or take-out restaurants, snack shops or
confectionery shops.
(7) Screening in conformance with city zoning ordinance shall be constructed and maintained for the entire
distance between the site of a registered private club and abutting residential property or residential zoning
district.
(8) The registered private club shall contain a minimum seating capacity of 100 persons.
(9) Reserved.
(10) Reserved.
(11) Reserved.
(12) Reserved.
(13) Reserved.
(14) Reserved.
(15) The applicant shall comply with the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code and receive private club
permit from the State of Texas within six months from the date of issuance of the special use permit by the city
council, each such limitation in time being subject to review and possible extension by the city council.
(c) Reserved.
(d) Cancellation. The city council may revoke a special use permit granted hereunder if it finds that any of the
conditions imposed at the time of granting the permit are not met, or thereafter cease to exist. The city council may
deny a special use permit for the operation of a private club if it should affirmatively determine that issuance of the
same would be contrary to the health, safety and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
(e) Cessation. All special use permits approved in accordance with the provisions of this section shall only be
issued to the applicant whose name appears on the application and shall be valid only as long as said applicant owns
the private club. Upon notification that an existing private club has ceased or will cease operations, a public hearing
may be initiated by the city council to consider rescinding the special use permit which had been approved for that
private club. Any cessation of the use granted by the special use permit for a period longer than 180 days shall
require the owner to reapply for said permit.
(Ordinance 2031, sec. 1, adopted 9/2/03; Ordinance 2074, secs. 12, 13, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3147, sec. 1, adopted
7/6/09; Ordinance 3876, sec. 1, adopted 7/16/18; Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 12. Reserved.
Editor's note – Ordinance 3841, sec. 1, adopted Dec. 4, 2017, repealed sec. 12, which pertained to MX-mixed use regulations and derived
from Ordinance 2074, sec. 14, adopted 4/19/04; Ordinance 3074, sec. 1, 8-18-08.
Sec. 13. Use designations.
13.1 Land uses. The use of land and/or buildings shall be in accordance with those listed in the following use charts. No land
or building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or converted other than for those uses specified in zoning district in
which it is located. The legend for interpreting the permitted uses in the use charts is as follows:
[P] Designates use is permitted in the district indicated.
[ ] Designates use is prohibited in district indicated.
[S] Designates use is permitted in the district indicated upon approval by special use permit (SUP).
[C] Designates use is permitted in the district indicated upon compliance with conditions outlined in this chapter.
13.2 Use chart organization.
(a) Primary residential uses (table 13.2.1);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/448
(b) Accessory and incidental uses (table 13.2.2);
(c) Institutional and special uses (table 13.2.3);
(d) Commercial uses (table 13.2.4.);
(e) Transportation uses (table 13.2.5); and
(f) Industrial and utility uses (table 13.2.6).
Use Chart 13.2.1 Primary Residential Uses
SF-RE SF-39 SF-15 SF-12 SF-10 Section AG C1 C2 I-1 I-2
Single
Family
Estate
Single
Family 39
Single
Family
15
Single
Family
12
Single
Family
10
Primary
Residential
Uses
Agricultural Commercial
One
Commercial
Two
Industrial
One
Industrial
Two
Assisted living
facility/nursing
home
S S
Boarding
house/rooming
house
Duplex
S S S S S Group home S S S S S
Hotel, motel
S S
HUD code
manufactured
home
Independent
senior living
S S S S
P P P P P Model home
Multi-family
P P P P P Single family
residence
(detached)
P
Townhouse
Use Chart 13.2.2 Accessory and Incidental Uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/448
SF-RE SF-39 SF-15 SF-12 SF-10 Section AG C1 C2 I-1 I-2
Single
Family
Estate
Single
Family 39
Single
Family
15
Single
Family
12
Single
Family
10
Accessory and
Incidental Uses
Agricultural Commercial
One
Commercial
Two
Industrial
One
Industrial
Two
C C C C C Accessory
structure
C C C C C
P P P P P Amenity center
C C C C C Antennas C C C C C
S S S S S Communication
tower
S S S S S
C C C C C Construction
office
C C C C C
Contractor's yard
P P
Farms, ranches,
orchards
P
C C C C C Home
occupation
C
C C C C C Incidental and
secondary uses
C C C C C
Open storage C C C C C
C C C C C Portable
buildings
C C C C C
Private club
S
Seasonal sales C C C C C
C C C C C Temporary batch
plant
C C C C C
Use Chart 13.2.3 Institutional and Special Uses
SF-RE SF-39 SF-15 SF-12 SF-10 Section AG C1 C2 I-1 I-2
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/448
Single
Family
Estate
Single
Family 39
Single
Family
15
Single
Family
12
Single
Family
10
Institutional and
Special Uses
Agricultural Commercial
One
Commercial
Two
Industrial
One
Industrial Two
Alternative
financial
services
S S
Arcade or bingo
hall
S S S S
S S S S S Child care
center (day
care)
S S S S S
Commercial
amusement
S S P P
Hospital
S P P
Library or
museum
P P P P
Lodge or club
(social or civic)
P P P P
Mausoleum or
cemetery
S
S
Mortuary,
funeral home
S S S S
P P P P P Municipal
facilities and
uses
P P P P P
Pawn shop
S S
P P P P P Religious
institutions
P P P P P
Schools,
private
S S S S
P P P P P Schools, public
(all facilities)
P P P P P
Use Chart 13.2.4 Commercial Uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/448
SF-RE SF-39 SF-15 SF-12 SF-10 Section AG C1 C2 I-1 I-2
Single
Family
Estate
Single
Family 39
Single
Family 15
Single
Family 12
Single
Family
10
Commercial
Uses
Agricultural Commercial
One
Commercial
Two
Industrial
One
Industrial Two
Body art
studio (tattoo,
piercing, etc.)
S S
Indoor display
(showroom,
nursery)
P P P P
Kennel (indoor
and
conditioned)
S S S S S
Medical
building, clinic
or lab
P P P P
Microbrewery
P P P P
Office, medial
or professional
P P P P
Outdoor
display (sales)
S S
Personal or
professional
services
P P P P
Restaurant
P P P P
Retail CBD oil
or hemp
based
products
P P
Retail sales,
general stores
P P P P
Sexually
oriented
business
S
Smoking
(tobacco, Ecig,
vape, etc.)
S S
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/448
Studio
(gymnastics,
martial arts,
etc.)
P P P P
Theater or
cinema
S S
Vet or pet
store (indoor)
P P P P
Use Chart 13.2.5 Transportation Uses
SF-RE SF-39 SF-15 SF-12 SF-10 Section AG C1 C2 I-1 I-2
Single
Family
Estate
Single
Family 39
Single
Family 15
Single
Family 12
Single
Family
10
Transportation
Uses
Agricultural Commercial
One
Commercial
Two
Industrial
One
Industrial Two
Auto
(motorized)
sales or storage
S S
Auto
(motorized)
leasing
S S S S
Auto repair,
major
S S P P
Auto repair,
minor
P P P P
Car wash
S S S S
Gas pumps, fuel
sales
S S S S
Helipad S
S S
Drive-through
establishment
S S P P
Transit station,
terminal
S S
Wrecking,
salvage yard
S
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/448
Use Chart 13.2.6 Industrial and Utility Uses
SF-RE SF-39 SF-15 SF-12 SF-10 Section AG C1 C2 I-1 I-2
Single
Family
Estate
Single
Family 39
Single
Family 15
Single
Family 12
Single
Family
10
Industrial and
Utility Uses
Agricultural Commercial
One
Commercial
Two
Industrial
One
Industrial Two
Agricultural
(commercial
uses or
facilities)
S P
Agricultural
(private, family)
P
Distribution
center, general
warehousing
P P
Equipment
storage, leasing
S P
Heavy industrial,
plant operations
S
High risk
S
Laboratory, light
manufacturing,
distillery
S S P P
Mining S
S
Landfill S
S
Research and
development,
data center
S S P P
Storage facility-
Conditioned
space
S S S S
Storage facility-
Mini
warehousing
S S
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/448
S S S S S Substation,
generating plant
S S S S S
C C C C C Wind energy
system
C C C C C
13.3 Classification of new/unlisted uses. It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not
presently anticipated may seek to locate in the city. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to
the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made by the zoning administrator, who shall make
an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed. The zoning administrator shall consider the
nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and
determine the zoning district within which use should be permitted. Appeals can be made to the planning and zoning
commission. The commission shall approve the zoning administrator's recommendation or may make its own determination
concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings or shall request an initiation of a
zoning text amendment pursuant to procedures set forth in this ordinance.
13.4 Special zoning districts. It is recognized that allowed uses may be governed by special zoning districts, approved special
use permits or planned development districts. Old town and PGBT are classified as special zoning districts.
(Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18; Ordinance 3906 adopted 1/22/19; Ordinance 3919 adopted 5/6/19)
Editor's note – Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted September 17, 2018, repealed the former sec. 13, and enacted a new sec. 13 as set out
herein. The former sec. 13 pertained to the OP office park district and derived from Ordinance 1862, adopted July 2, 2001; and Ordinance
3552, adopted December 2, 2013
Sec. 14. PGBT zoning district.
14.1 Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of the PGBT area zoning district, hereafter known as the PGBT district, is to facilitate the
development of the PGBT area into a walkable, mixed-use environment with shopping, employment, housing and
regional retail services. Development within this district shall implement the vision adopted in the comprehensive plan,
adopted March 2017. The prescribed character areas within the district facilitate a variety of development types to
meet the preferences of the market and to be responsive to development innovations. The purpose of the district is to
advance development; promote sustainable land use patterns; protect Sachse's long-range tax base; encourage
pedestrian activity; and support an attractive community.
B. Establish specific development standards. The PGBT district regulating plan (Appendix 1), hereafter known as
the regulating plan, establishes the character areas. The respective character areas determine which specific
development standards apply. Creation of different character areas within the PGBT area enables specific site and
locational standards to be applied. Graphic standards are provided for location, height and building elements.
14.2 Components of the Code.
A. Applicability of other city ordinances. This section governs the PGBT area zoning district except where others
are referenced or where other ordinances of the Code apply and are not in conflict with the PGBT district.
B. PGBT area regulating plan. The PGBT district regulating plan identifies applicable character areas within the
PGBT area including:
1. Character areas. The PGBT area is divided into three character areas. A character area creates a distinct
urban form, which is different from urban forms in other character areas. Each character area establishes use
and development standards including height, bulk, building and parking location, and functional design. The
regulating plan classifies all lots within the PGBT area into one of the character areas.
2. Street designations by street type. The street designations illustrate the design, configurations and
development context for streets within the PGBT area. The street designation addresses vehicular lane widths,
number of lanes, pedestrian accommodation, street tree requirements, on-street parking, and parkway and
median standards (streetscape standards). In addition, streets are distinguished by the appropriate development
context by denoting them on the regulating plan as type A or type B streets.
3. Street network. The street network consistent of mandatory streets and local streets for the future streets
needed to implement the regulating plan. The mandatory and illustrative streets shall generally meet the
locational and connectivity goals of the PGBT district. Street design shall be guided by the street type
specifications.
C. Development standards. The Code (the text portion of this Code) enumerates the development standards with
text and graphics for character areas, building form, civic open space, landscape, building design, signage, lighting
and all related standards for streets, public and private development.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/448
14.3 Administration. This section sets forth the provisions for reviewing and approving development applications within the
PGBT area. The intent is to ensure that all development is consistent with the provisions of this Code. All sections of this Code
shall be applied during the review process.
A. Using this Code. The following steps should be followed to determine the uses and the development standards
applicable on the property within the PGBT area:
1. Locate the subject property on the PGBT area regulating plan.
2. Identify (1) the character area in which the property is located; (2) the network of mandatory and local
streets; and (3) the street type designations for those streets along all the property's street frontages.
3. Review the schedule of uses by character area as listed in Table 14.5.1.
4. Examine the corresponding zone standards in the development standards in section 14.6 to determine
applicable development standards.
5. Refer to section 14.7 for architectural standards and design guidelines.
6. Refer to section 14.8 for streetscape and street design standards.
B. Development process. Development within the PGBT area that complies with the provisions of this Code shall
follow the city's development process as outlined in the Code and shall be approved by the city manager or designee.
In addition to complying with applicable city regulations that are not in conflict with this Code, the applicant shall
provide the information required to adequately show compliance with this Code.
C. Development plan approval standards. If a development plan conforms to the standards set forth in this Code,
regulating plan and other applicable city regulations not in conflict with this Code, the development plan shall be
approved. Upon request by the applicant, the authority charged with approving the development plan shall certify the
reason(s) for an action taken.
D. City manager or designee. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the following:
1. Reviewing development plan applications for compliance and giving approval for applications within the
PGBT area.
2. Making determinations on the applications and interpretations of standards in this Code.
3. Approving revisions to previously approved development plans that comply with this Code and all
applicable city ordinances.
4. Reconciling any potential ambiguities or conflicts between other city codes and this Code.
5. Approving any minor modifications to the approved regulating plan per section 14.3(E).
6. Recommendations on special development plan (SDP) applications to planning commission and city
council.
7. Determining if a proposed use is within the intent of permitted uses in the Code so that it may also be
deemed permitted.
E. Minor modifications. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve a request for minor
modifications to the Code that:
1. Does not materially change the circulation on the site;
2. Does not materially change the walkable relationship between the buildings and the street;
3. Does not allow a use otherwise authorized in this Code, unless substantially similar to a use already
permitted; or
4. Does not allow greater height of any building except for non-habitable architectural features.
The city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve minor modifications per Table 14.3.1. Any
appeals to the decisions of the city manager on minor modifications shall follow the process below:
a. Initiation of an appeal. The applicant may appeal a decision of the city manager or designee. The written
request to appeal shall be submitted to the city manager or designee within 14 calendar days following the
denial decision.
b. Appeal to planning and zoning commission. The commission shall consider the appeal at an open meeting
no later than 30 calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the director of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/448
development services. At this meeting, new information may be presented and considered, if available, that
might alter the previous decision to deny the minor modification. The commission may affirm, modify or reverse
the previous decision by simple majority vote.
c. Appeal to city council. The applicant or the city manager may appeal the commission's decision by
submitting a written notice of appeal to the city manager or designee within 14 calendar days following the
commission's decision. The city council shall consider the appeal at an open meeting no later than 30 calendar
days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the director of development services. The city
council may affirm, modify or reverse the commission's decision by simple majority vote. The decision of the city
council is final.
Any city council denials of minor modifications or any changes beyond those that meet the criteria in this section
and the thresholds established in Table 14.3.1, shall be processed as an amendment to this Code.
TABLE 14.3.1 MINOR MODIFICATIONS ALLOWED
Standard Minor Modification Allowed Comments
Area/Boundary of
Character Area
No more than a 15% change
(increase or decrease) in any
character area (aggregate or per
block)
• Shall not eliminate any character
area.
• 15% measurement shall be based
on the total area of that character
area within the entire PGBT area.
• The turnpike transition area shall
remain contiguous along Hudson and
Merritt Road as depicted in the
originally adopted regulating plan.
Setback Range No more than 30% change in the
maximum or minimum setback
• Changes to the street setback lines
may only be due to any changes to
the street cross-sections or change in
the width of the sidewalk.
• In no case shall a sidewalk be less
than six feet in length.
Building Frontage No more than a 30% reduction in
the required building frontage along
each block of a type A street
• Any reduction in the required
building frontage shall be to
accommodate porte-cocheres for
drop-off and pick-up.
• Should also allow for conditions
such as utility easements; large,
existing trees; or other physical/
topographical constraints.
Street Screen Waiver of street screen requirement
along a type B street
• Requirement for a street screen
may only be waived along a type B
street along the frontage of any
interim surface parking lot (off-street)
that is intended to be filled with a
parking structure or future building.
• In no case shall any portion of the
surface parking have frontage along
a type A street without a required
street screen.
Street Location and
Cross Sections
Street location within the connected
network and implementing cross
sections of new streets may be
• Any changes to the street locations
within the network and implementing
street cross section design shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/448
adjusted with respect to number of
lanes, lane widths, on-street parking
configuration, pedestrian
accommodation and street tree
planting
based on specific development
context such as opportunities to
increase connectivity within the
multimodal network, advance
complete street functionality,
preserve natural features, advance
low impact drainage to improve fire
access, and to advance similar
outcomes.
• Can amend right-of-way (ROW)
width and/or components up to 15%.
Landscaping Alternative landscaping in terms of
quantity, species type, and/or
location may be submitted for
consideration by the city manager or
designee
• A detailed landscape concept plan
shall be submitted for review in order
to be accepted as an alternative.
Street Type
Classification
A type B street may be designated
as a type A street with review and
approval of design details by the city
manager or designee
• Detailed plan and cross section
required for approval of street type
change.
Architecture Alternative architectural concepts
that meet the spirit and intent of the
Code may be considered by the city
manager or designee
• A detailed architectural plan and/or
elevations shall be submitted for
review in order to be accepted as an
alternative.
F. Major modifications. A request for a modification of any of the standards of this Code other than minor
modifications permitted under section 14.3(E), such as a change in use or major spatial modification, shall be
reviewed and processed as a major modification.
1. Major modifications are intended to allow applicants development flexibility to address specific market
opportunities. An application for a major modification shall be in the same manner as a minor modification and
shall be considered by the city council after the planning commission has made a recommendation. The city
manager or designee reviews, makes recommendations on any major modifications and shall forward all
applications to the planning commission for recommendations to city council. In evaluating a major modification,
city council shall consider the extent to which the application meets any of the following:
a. Provides an alternative master plan approach by consolidating multiple properties to create a
predictable, market responsive development for the area;
b. Fits the adjoining context by providing appropriate transitions; or
c. Maintains the overall intent of the comprehensive plan and the PGBT zoning district.
G. Parking. All off-street parking requirements may be modified through alternative parking plans, shared parking
agreements or other similar mechanisms to advance the goals of walkability and connectivity if approved by the city
manager or his or her designee. Parking lot locations and site design standards can be modified to facilitate creative
site plans and mixed-use contexts by the approval of the city manager or designee, as long as they encourage
walkability and are consistent with the overall intent of the respective character area.
H. Non-conforming uses and buildings. Regardless of transfer of ownership, non-conforming buildings that are
utilized for single family residential or houses of worship may continue in that use in perpetuity if utilized solely for that
purpose even if destroyed by act of God and reconstructed. All other non-conforming uses and buildings shall be
governed by the Code and applicable state law.
14.4 The regulating plan.
A. The regulating plan is hereby adopted as the official zoning map for the PGBT zoning district.
B. Character areas established. The following character areas are established. The boundaries of specific
character areas shall be established in the regulating plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/448
1. Turnpike commercial (TC). Turnpike commercial creates an area where uses contribute to a concentration
of regionally-scaled, commercial that provide employment opportunities in a more dense, walkable and urban
context.
2. Turnpike mixed-use (TMU). Turnpike mixed-use creates an area that transitions the activity of the
commercial and residential mixed-use to the neighborhoods in a walkable, urban fabric.
3. Turnpike transition (TT). Turnpike transition creates an area that transitions development to the adjacent
residential context in a walkable, neighborhood fabric.
C. Street designations by street type established. The regulating plan shall establish the following street
designations.
1. Type A streets established. Type A streets are intended to be the primary pedestrian streets and provide
walkable relationships to the buildings and public spaces along type A streets with a pedestrian-oriented design.
Figure 1: Type A Street Examples
2. Type B streets established. Type B streets are intended to balance pedestrian orientation with automobile
orientation. Buildings along type B streets may be permitted to accommodate service and auto-related functions.
Figure 2: Type B Street Example
14.5 Schedule of uses.
A. Due to the emphasis on urban form over land uses, general use categories have been identified by character
area. Uses not listed on the following schedule, but are substantially similar, may be permitted upon approval by the
city manager or designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/448
TABLE 14.5.1 SCHEDULE OF USES
Turnpike
Commercial
(TC)
Turnpike Mixed-
Use (TMU)
Turnpike
Transition (TT)
Land Use
Commercial Uses (Office, Retail, Sales and Service Uses)
Retail sales or service P P NP
Professional office P P NP
Light industrial, including manufacturing,
data centers, research laboratory
headquarters, laboratories and
associated facilities
P P NP
Heavy industrial NP NP NP
Food service uses (full-service
restaurants, cafeterias, bakeries, snack
bars, QSRs, cafe seating within a public
or private sidewalk area with no
obstruction of the pedestrian realm)
P P NP
Brewery P P NP
Any use with a drive through P/C P/C NP
Auto-related uses P/C P/C NP
Storage facilities P/C P/C NP
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation Uses
Art galleries, antique, furniture or
electronics studio (retail, repair or
fabrication; excludes auto electronics
sales or service)
P P NP
Theater, cinema, dance, music or other
entertainment establishment
P P NP
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/448
Museums and other special purpose
recreational institutions
P P NP
Fitness, recreational sports, gym or
athletic club
P P NP
Outdoor entertainment venue P P NP
Parks, greens, plazas, squares and
playgrounds
P P P
Educational, Public Administration, Health Care and Other Institutional Uses
Child daycare and preschools P P NP
Schools, libraries, and community halls P P NP
Universities and colleges P/C P/C NP
Hospital/medical office buildings P P NP
Civil uses P P NP
Residential Uses
Single family detached-low density NP NP NP
Single family detached-medium density NP P/C P
Garden style multifamily residential NP NP NP
Urban living residential P/C P/C NP
Single family residential attached
dwelling unit (townhome)
NP P/C P/C
Live/work unit P P P
Multi-unit (up to 12 units per structure) NP P NP
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/448
Assisted living facilities NP NP NP
Other Uses
Municipal facilities P P P
Hotels P P NP
Parking, surface (primary use of
property)
P/C P/C NP
Parking, surface (accessory use of
property)
P P NP
Parking, structured P P NP
Private attached garage NP P P
Private detached garage NP NP P
Sales from kiosks P P NP
Veterinary clinic P P NP
P = Permitted by right
NP = Not permitted
P/C = Permitted with design criteria per Table 14.5.1(B)
B. Use criteria. All uses listed as P/C in Table 14.5.1 shall also meet the following standards.
Use Zone Location and Design Criteria
Any Permitted Use with a
Drive Through Facility
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
• All drive through access (driveways) shall be from type B streets
unless screened from any type A street.
• Drive through lanes and/or canopies shall not have frontage along
or be located along any type A streets.
• Alcohol sales expressly excluded.
• Drive through areas shall be screened by a four foot high street
screen.
Storage Facilities Turnpike
Commercial
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
• Storage uses shall be a minimum of three stories. Shall be 100%
indoor access and climate controlled.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/448
Auto-Related Uses Turnpike
Commercial
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
• Gas pumps and canopies shall not be located at the corners of the
facility's lot.
• Car lots are not permitted.
• Any buildings associated with the use shall also have a pedestrian
entrance at a type A street.
• Must be setback at least 50 feet with a landscape buffer.
• Auto sales, repairs and storage uses shall be fully contained inside
of a building.
Universities and Colleges Turnpike
Commercial
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
Shall be required to provide structured parking as part of the build-out
for the university/college campus.
Urban Living Residential
(Upper and Lower Floors)
Turnpike
Commercial
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
• Urban living residential shall be either 100% studio/convertible, one
and two bedroom units, residential lofts or flats, or condos.
• Two bedroom units shall have similar sized bedrooms, bathrooms
and closets.
• Site development permits for the urban living residential shall be
preceded by or issued at the same time as the issuance of a site
development permit for at least the following:
• 1 to 300 Units = 15,000 SF commercial
• 301 to 600 Units = 15,000 SF additional commercial
• No more than 600 units allowed per urban living residential project.
• Any unit not fronting a street shall be accessed from a climatecontrolled
hallway.
• Any shared wall, floor or ceiling shall be insulated.
• Ground floor units may be retail.
• Surface parking shall be designed to facilitate a pedestrian-oriented
site.
• Urban living residential and the required commercial component
shall have one type A street component with both urban living
residential and commercial uses constructed as horizontal or vertical
mixed-use with pedestrian public spaces totaling at least one-half
acre. For horizontal mixed-use, the public spaces shall connect the
two uses in a pedestrian-oriented, walkable context.
• Urban living residential shall be at least four stories.
Turnpike
Commercial
Each urban living residential project shall be 70% structured parking.
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
Interior surface parking allowed with substantially four story products
or higher. Otherwise structured is required.
Single Family Detached-
Medium Density
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
• More than 10 and up to 100 contiguous units shall not be built
without the initiation of construction of a commercial component of at
least 2,500 square feet, or alternatively at least three pocket parks,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/448
greens and/or plazas designed and dispersed within the residential
neighborhood totaling no less than one acre. If the pocket space
requirement is utilized, the five percent civic/open space requirement
in section 14.10 shall apply. Every additional 100 units of
development shall have an additional 2,500 square feet of retail or
integrated public green or open space.
• Lots shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide and alley-loaded if 50 feet
wide or less.
Single Family Residential
Attached Dwelling Unit
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
Turnpike
Transition
• More than 10 and up to 100 contiguous units shall not be built
without the initiation of construction of a commercial component of at
least 2,500 square feet, or alternatively at least three pocket parks,
greens and/or plazas designed and dispersed within the residential
neighborhood totaling no less than 1.5 acres. If the pocket space
requirement is utilized, the five percent civic/open space requirement
in section 14.10 shall apply. Every additional 100 units of
development shall have an additional 2,500 square feet of retail or
integrated public green or open space.
• Units shall be at least 12 units an acre.
• Lots shall be a minimum of 22 feet wide and alley-loaded.
Parking, Surface (Primary
Use of Property)
Turnpike
Commercial
Turnpike
Mixed-Use
• Required to be temporary use of property as part of a phasing
strategy or appropriately screened and landscaped by incorporating
one tree per every 12 spaces planted within parking islands.
• To be reviewed by city manager or designee.
14.6 Development standards. The following section establishes the development standards for all character areas within the
PGBT zoning district. Diagrams and reference letters are used for illustrative purposes only. Reference letters may not be in
continuous sequence.
A. Turnpike connection (TC).
1. Building orientation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/448
Setback range.
Front (type A street and civic space) 5-20 feet
Front (type B street) 20-250 feet
Side (from property line) 0 feet
Rear (from property line) 5 feet
Building frontage.
Building frontage required along:
Type A street (civic space) 70% (minimum)
Type B street 0% (minimum)
2. Block standards.
Block face dimensions 400 feet maximum
Block perimeter 1,600 feet maximum
3. Building height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/448
Principal building standards.
First floor-to-floor height 12 feet (minimum)
Ground floor finish level 1 2 inches maximum above sidewalk
Upper floor(s) height (floor to ceiling) 10 feet minimum
Height No maximum; stepback required
after five stories; maximum five
stories within 100 feet of another
character area or the perimeter of
the district
Stepback distance 10 feet minimum
4. Commercial frontage requirements.
Ground floors of all buildings fronting type A streets shall be built to retail-ready standards, including first
floor-to-floor height, ingress and egress, handicap access, and first floor elevation flush with the sidewalk.
5. Parking and service access.
Parking location.
Surface/at grade parking. Shall be located behind principal
building; or on the side if no more
than one double-loaded bay and
screened at the street with masonry
or fence no taller than four feet
Type A street and civic setback
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/448
Type B setback N/A
Side setback (distance from property
line)
0 feet minimum
Above grade parking. 0 feet minimum
Type A street, type B street and civic
space setback
Side and rear setbacks (distance from
the property line)
0 feet minimum
Upper floors May be built up to the building line
Required off-street parking
spaces.
1 space/300 square feet (gross)
Non-residential
Residential 1.5 spaces/unit
Driveways and service access. 20 feet maximum (except when
drives need to be wider to address
service access or fire lane
standards)
Parking driveway width
Driveways and off-street loading/unloading shall not be located on type A streets. Port-cocheres may be
permitted on type A streets to provide drop-off and valet service. Shared driveways and cross-access
easements are encouraged between lots to minimize curb cuts. If driveway and/or off-street service
loading/unloading access is provided from a type A street, access shall be temporary and cross-access along
the rear of the property shall be required when adjoining properties are undeveloped.
6. Encroachments. Canopies, signs, awnings and balconies may encroach over the sidewalk as long as the
vertical clearance is a minimum of eight feet. In no case shall an encroachment be located over an on-street
parking or travel lane.
7. Development standards in this section shall apply to all development within the character area.
8. Notes.
a. On type A streets, the area between the building and the edge of the street at the public sidewalk
shall be paved flush with the sidewalk unless a contained private forecourt.
b. Side and rear setbacks shall be based on minimum fire separation required between buildings, if
applicable.
c. Corner building street façades shall be built to the setback for a minimum of 15 feet from the corner
along both streets or the width of the corner lot, whichever is less. Recessed entrances are permitted as
long as the upper floors meet the setback range standards.
d. Blocks exceeding the minimum block face and perimeter dimensions may be permitted as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/448
* Combined blocks shall be adjacent to one another based on the regulating plan and provide
pedestrian paseos.
* An increase in block dimension shall not eliminate or significantly move a required street or required
civic/open space. Required streets and required civic/open spaces may move a minimum of 100 feet
to accommodate a larger block.
* The block shall maintain a continuous type A street frontage with adjoining blocks.
Ground floor internal pedestrian connectivity shall be provided through the block. Connectivity may be
provided inside the building, through a parking garage, or outside by way of pedestrian passage.
e. First floor heights shall not apply to parking structures.
f. All buildings in the turnpike commercial area shall meet the architectural and design standards in
section 14.7.
g. Any frontage along all streets (except alleys) not defined by a building within the setback range shall
be defined by a four foot high street screen, furthermore service areas shall be defined by a street screen
that is at least as high as the equipment being screened. The street screen shall be of either the same
building material as the principal structure on the lot or masonry, or a living screen composed of shrubs
planted to be opaque at maturity. The required street screen shall be located within the setback range
along the corresponding frontage.
h. Corner buildings may exceed the maximum height by 25 percent for 20 percent of the building's
frontage along each corresponding street façade.
i. Ground and roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from direct ground level view from
adjoining public right-of-way. In addition to a parapet wall no lower than three feet, the perimeter of any
visible roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be circumscribed by a wall or permanent screen that is at
least as tall as the equipment itself.
j. Setback ranges on recessed entries and arcade buildings shall be measured from the building façade
line.
k. Required parking may be provided anywhere within the PGBT area.
B. Turnpike mixed-use (TMU).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/448
1. Building orientation.
Setback range.
Front (type A street and civic space) 5-15 feet
Front (type B street) 0-75 feet
Side (from property line) 0 feet
Rear (from property line) 5 feet
Building frontage.
Building frontage required along:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/448
Type A street/civic space 50% (minimum)
Type B street 0% (minimum)
2. Block standards.
Block face dimensions 400 feet (maximum)
Block perimeter 1,200 feet (maximum)
3. Building height.
Principal building standards.
First floor-to-floor height 12 feet (minimum)
Ground floor finish level 1 2 inches maximum above sidewalk
Upper floor(s) height (floor to ceiling) 10 feet (minimum)
Height Maximum five stories; maximum
three stories within 50 feet of the
turnpike transition area or district
perimeter or in area identified as
turnpike mixed-use transition on the
regulating plan and shall be
screened from adjacent single family
residential
4. Commercial frontage requirements. Ground floors of all buildings fronting type A streets shall be built to
retail ready standards, including first floor-to-floor height, ingress/egress, handicap access, and first floor
elevation flush with the sidewalk.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/448
5. Parking and service access.
Parking location.
Surface/at grade
parking.
Type A street and
civic space
setback
Shall be located
behind the
principal building;
or on the side if
no more than one
double-loaded
bay and screened
at the street with
masonry or fence
no taller than four
feet
Type B setback N/A
Side setback
(from property
line)
0 feet (minimum)
Rear setback
(from property
line)
0 feet (minimum)
Above and below
grade parking.
Setback along
type A street, type
B
0 feet (minimum) Side and rear
setbacks
0 feet (minimum)
Upper floors May be built up to
the building line
Driveways and
service access.
24 feet maximum
(except when
drives need to be
wider to address
service access or
fire lane
standards)
Parking driveway
width
Driveways and off-street loading/unloading shall not be located on type A streets. Port-cocheres may be
permitted on type A streets to provide drop-off and valet service. Shared driveways and cross-access
easements are encouraged between lots to minimize curb cuts. If driveway and/or off-street service
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/448
loading/unloading access is provided from a type A street, access shall be deemed temporary and cross-access
along the rear of the property shall be required when adjoining properties are undeveloped.
6. Encroachments. Canopies, signs, awnings, and balconies may encroach over the sidewalk as long as the
vertical clearance is a minimum of eight feet. In no case shall an encroachment be located over an on-street
parking or travel lane.
7. Applicability. Development standards in this section shall apply to all development standards in this
character area.
8. Notes.
a. On type A streets, the area between the building and the edge of the property line at the public
sidewalk shall be paved flush with the sidewalk unless it contains a private forecourt.
b. Side and rear setbacks shall be based on the minimum fire separation required between buildings, if
applicable.
c. On type A streets, corner building street façades shall be built to the setback range for a minimum of
15 feet from the corner along both streets or the width of the corner lot, whichever is less. Recessed
entrances are permitted as long as the upper floors meet the development standards.
d. Blocks exceeding the maximum block face and perimeter dimensions may be permitted as follows:
* Combined blocks shall be adjacent to one another based on the regulating plan.
* An increase in block dimensions shall not eliminate or significantly move a required street or
required civic/open space. Required streets and required civic/open spaces may move a maximum of
100 feet.
* The block shall maintain a continuous type A street frontage with adjoining blocks.
Ground floor internal pedestrian connectivity shall be provided through the block. Connectivity may be
provided inside the building, through a parking garage, or outside by way of pedestrian passage.
e. First floor heights shall not apply to parking structures.
f. All buildings in the turnpike mixed-use area shall meet the architectural and design standards in
section 14.7.
g. Any frontage along all streets (except alleys) not defined by a building shall be defined by a four foot
high street screen, furthermore, service areas shall be defined by a street screen that is at least as high as
the service equipment being screened. The street screen shall be of either the same building material as
the principal structure on the lot or masonry or a living screen composed of shrubs to be opaque at
maturity. The required street screen shall be located within the setback range along the corresponding
frontage.
h. Corner buildings may exceed the maximum building height by 25 percent for 20 percent of the
building's frontage along each corresponding street façade.
i. Ground and roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from direct ground level view from
adjoining public rights-of-way. In addition to a parapet wall no lower than three feet, the perimeter of any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/448
visible roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be circumscribed by a wall or permanent screen that is at
least as tall as the equipment itself.
j. Setback ranges on recessed entries and arcade buildings shall be measured from the building façade
line.
k. Required parking may be provided anywhere within the PGBT area or through shared parking
agreements.
C. Turnpike transition (TT).
c
1. Applicability.
Setback range.
Front (type A street and civic space) 5-15 feet
Front (type B street) 0-50 feet
Side (from property line) 5 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/448
Rear (from property line) 0 feet
Building frontage.
Building frontage required along:
Type A street/civic space 50% (minimum)
Type B street 0% (minimum)
2. Block standards.
Block face dimensions 400 feet
Block perimeter 1,200 feet
3. Building height.
Principal standards.
Building maximum 40 feet except non-habitable
architectural features
First floor-to-floor height 12 feet (minimum)
Ground floor finish level 12 inches above the sidewalk
Upper floor(s) height wall-to-ceiling 10 feet (minimum)
4. Parking and service access.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/448
Parking location.
Surface/at grade parking.
Type A street and civic space setback Shall be located behind the principal
building; or on the side if no more
than one double-loaded bay and
screened at the street with masonry
or fence no taller than four feet.
Type B setback Minimum of 3 feet behind the
setback
Side setback (from property line) 0 feet (minimum)
Rear setback (from property line) 0 feet (minimum)
Above and below grade parking.
Setback along type A street, type B
street and civic space 0 feet (minimum)
Side and rear setbacks 0 feet (minimum)
Upper floors May be built up to the building line
Required off-street parking space. 1 space/300 SF (gross)
Non-residential uses
Residential uses 1.5 space/unit
Driveways and service access. 24 feet maximum (except when
drives need to be wider to address
service access or fire lane
standards)
Parking driveway width
Driveways and off-street loading/unloading shall not be located on type A streets. Port-cocheres may be
permitted on type A streets to provide drop-off and valet service. Shared driveways and cross-access
easements are encouraged between lots to minimize curb cuts. If driveway and/or off-street service
loading/unloading access is provided from a type A street, access shall be deemed temporary and cross-access
along the rear of the property shall be required when adjoining properties are undeveloped.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/448
5. Encroachments. Canopies, signs, awnings, and balconies may encroach over the sidewalk as long as the
vertical clearance is a minimum of eight feet. In no case shall an encroachment be located over an on-street
parking or travel lane.
6. Applicability. Development standards in this section shall apply to all development standards in this
character area.
7. Notes.
a. On type A streets, the area between the building and the edge of the property line at the public
sidewalk shall be paved flush with the sidewalk unless it contains a private forecourt.
b. Side and rear setbacks shall be based on the minimum fire separation required between buildings, if
applicable.
c. On type A streets, corner building street façades shall be built to the setback range for a minimum of
15 feet from the corner along both streets or the width of the corner lot, whichever is less. Recessed
entrances are permitted as long as the upper floors meet the development standards.
d. Blocks exceeding the maximum block face and perimeter dimensions may be permitted as follows:
* Combined blocks shall be adjacent to one another based on the regulating plan.
* An increase in block dimensions shall not eliminate or significantly move a required street or
required civic/open space. Required streets and required civic/open spaces may move a maximum of
100 feet.
* The block shall maintain a continuous type A street frontage with adjoining blocks.
Ground floor internal pedestrian connectivity shall be provided through the block. Connectivity may be
provided inside the building, through a parking garage, or outside by way of pedestrian passage.
e. First floor heights shall not apply to parking structures.
f. All buildings in the turnpike transition area shall meet the architectural and design standards in section
14.7.
g. Any frontage along all streets (except alleys) not defined by a building shall be defined by a four foot
high street screen, furthermore service areas shall be defined by a street screen that is at least as high as
the service equipment being screened. The street screen shall be of either the same building material as
the principal structure on the lot or masonry or a living screen composed of shrubs to be opaque at
maturity. The required street screen shall be located within the setback range along the corresponding
frontage.
h. Corner buildings may exceed the maximum building height by 25 percent for 20 percent of the
building's frontage along each corresponding street façade.
i. Ground and roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from direct ground level view from
adjoining public rights-of-way. In addition to a parapet wall no lower than three feet, the perimeter of any
visible roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be circumscribed by a wall or permanent screen that is at
least as tall as the equipment itself.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/448
j. Setback ranges on recessed entries and arcade buildings shall be measured from the building façade
line.
k. Required parking may be provided anywhere within the PGBT area or through shared parking
agreements.
l. Minimum floor-to-ceiling height (to the first obstruction at the ceiling level) for upper floors shall apply
only to a majority of upper floors (over 50 percent).
14.7 Architectural standards and design guidelines.
A. The architectural standards and design guidelines for the PGBT area shall establish a coherent urban character
and encourage enduring, attractive and sustainable development. Development plans shall be reviewed by the city
manager or designee for compliance with the standards below.
B. The key design principles establish essential goals for development in the PGBT area to ensure the
preservation, sustainability and visual quality of this unique environment. Buildings shall be located and designed so
that they provide visual interest and create enjoyable, human-scaled spaces. The key design principles are:
1. New buildings shall utilize building elements and details to achieve a pedestrian-oriented public realm with
transitions into human-scale private places, with connectivity to adjacent neighborhoods;
2. Compatibility is not meant to be achieved through uniformity, but through the use of variations in building
elements to achieve individual building identity;
3. Building façades shall include appropriate architectural details and ornament to create variety and interest;
and
4. Open space(s) shall be incorporated to provide public areas integral to the urban environment.
C. General to all character areas.
1. Building orientation.
a. Buildings shall be oriented towards type A streets where the lot has frontage along type A streets.
When no other type A street frontage is available, all other buildings shall be oriented towards type B
streets or civic/open spaces.
b. The primary entrance to buildings shall be located on the street along which the building is oriented.
At intersections, corner buildings may have their primary entrances oriented at an angle to the intersection.
c. All primary entrances shall be oriented to the public sidewalk or within a forecourt adjacent to a public
sidewalk for ease of pedestrian access. Secondary and service entrances may be located from internal
parking areas or alleys.
Figure 14.7.1: Building Orientation and Primary Entrance Example
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/448
D. Design of parking structures.
1. All frontages of parking structures located on type A streets shall not have parking uses on the ground floor
to a minimum depth of 30 feet along the type A street unless screened with a similar architectural façade that
matches the primary façade design and materials of the building.
2. The amount of type A street frontage devoted to a parking structure shall be minimized by placing the
shortest dimension(s) along the type A street edge(s) if feasible.
3. Parking structure façades on all type A streets shall be designed with both vertical and horizontal
articulation.
4. Where above ground structured parking is located at the perimeter of a building with frontage along a type
A street, it shall be screened in such a way that cars on all parking levels are screened from view of the type A
streets. Architectural screens shall be used to articulate the façade, hide vehicles and shield lighting.
5. Parking structures and adjacent sidewalks shall be designed so pedestrians are clearly visible to entering
and exiting automobiles.
Figure 14.7.2 Parking Garage Design Examples
E. Driveways, alleys and service access.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/448
1. Unless otherwise specified in the character area standards, driveways and off-street loading and unloading
may be located with access along type A streets only if the property has no access to either an alley, type B
street or joint use easement to an adjoining property with direct driveway access to any other street; except
porte-cocheres entrances shall be allowed for hospitality and entertainment uses with design along the frontage
to ensure pedestrian safety and walkability.
2. Along type A streets, driveway spacing shall be limited to two driveways per each block face or per 200 feet
of block face for blocks greater than 400 feet in length, unless approved by the city manager or his or her
designee when pedestrian design is used to mitigate the additional driveway crossings.
3. Shared driveways, joint use easements or joint access easements shall be required for adjoining properties
when driveway and service access is off a type A street.
4. Service and loading/unloading areas shall be screened per standards in section 14.7(H).
5. Unless required to meet minimum fire access or service access standards all commercial and mixed-use
driveways/alleys shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. Service driveways/alleys shall be a maximum of 32 feet
in width garage to garage. Driveways wider than 24 feet in width shall only be located off type B streets.
Driveways/alleys along TxDOT roadways shall meet state standards or the city's adopted ordinances.
F. Design of automobile related building site elements.
1. Drive-through lanes for commercial uses shall not be located on any type A street. Drive-through lanes
shall be hidden behind a street screen along any type B street frontage.
2. All off-street loading, unloading and trash pick-up areas shall be located along alleys or type B streets only
unless permitted in the specific building form and development standards in section 14.6. Any off-street loading,
unloading or trash pick-up areas shall be screened using a street screen that is at least as tall as the trash
containers and/or service equipment it is screening. The street screen shall be made up of (i) the same material
as the principal building or (ii) a living screen or (iii) a combination of the two.
G. Mechanical and service screening.
1. All buildings shall be designed such that no mechanical equipment (HVAC, etc.) except vents or stacks is
visible from the public right-of-way or open space, whether the equipment is located on the ground, exterior
walls or roof.
2. The screening material used shall be the same as the primary exterior building material used and raised at
least one foot above the top of the mechanical equipment per city standards.
Figure 14.7.3: Mechanical Equipment Screening
H. Façade composition.
1. Buildings shall maintain a façade rhythm of 20 feet to 30 feet along all type A streets.
2. This rhythm may be expressed by changing materials, or color, or by using design elements such as
fenestration, columns and pilasters, integrated colors, or by varying the setback of portions of the façade.
3. Storefronts on façades that span multiple tenants shall use architecturally compatible materials, colors,
details, awnings, signage and lighting fixtures.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/448
4. Building entrances may be defined and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels, pediments,
pilasters, columns, porticos, overhangs, railings, balustrades and others, as appropriate. All building elements
shall be compatible with the architectural style, materials, colors and details of the building as a whole.
Entrances to upper level uses may be defined and integrated into the design.
5. Corner emphasizing architectural features, pigmented gabled parapets, cornices, awnings, blade signs,
arcades, colonnades and balconies may be used along commercial storefronts to add pedestrian interest.
I. Windows and doors.
1. Windows and doors on street (except alleys) fronting façades shall be designed to be proportional and
appropriate to the specific architectural style of the building. First floor windows shall not be opaque, tinted or
mirrored glass.
Figure 14.7.4: Storefront Window Transparency
2. All ground floor front façades along type A streets or civic/open spaces shall have transparent storefront
windows covering no less than 50 percent of the façade area on the first two floors. Each upper floor above the
second floor of the same building façades facing a type A street or civic/open space shall contain windows
covering at least 25 percent of the façade area. All other street facing façades (except alleys) shall have
windows covering at least 15 percent of the façade area for all floors.
J. Commercial and mixed used building materials.
1. At least 80 percent of each building's façade (excluding doors and windows) along all type A streets shall
be finished in one of the following materials:
* Masonry (brick, stone, stucco utilizing a three-step process, cast stone, rock, marble, granite, or
curtain glass).
2. No more than 20 percent of each façade along all type A streets shall use accent materials such as wood,
architect metal panel, split-face concrete block tile or pre-cast concrete panels.
3. A minimum of 80 percent of all other building façades with the exception of type A street façades shall use
accent materials such as wood, architect metal panel, split face concrete block, tile or pre-cast concrete panels.
K. Building orientation. Buildings located along Merritt Road and Hudson Road must face the street edge; a
transition between the residential in the southeast quadrant and the uses in the turnpike commercial and turnpike
mixed-use.
14.8 Street and streetscape design standards.
A. Generally. Streets in the PGBT area shall support the overall goal of a mixed-use, compact, pedestrian-oriented
district. Streets should balance all forms of mobility while maximizing convenience for residents and visitors.
The regulating plan designates mandatory streets and the street network to be made up of additional local streets
to be proposed by the applicant(s) within the PGBT area. This section specifies the typical configuration of streets.
The specifications address vehicular lane width, ROW widths, number of travel lanes, on-street parking and
pedestrian accommodation. The character of streets within the PGBT area will vary based on the location.
B. New streets. New streets shall be based on the type A or type B street type designation on the regulating plan.
Development plans shall propose a complete street network to achieve connectivity as envisioned in the
comprehensive plan.
1. New streets must terminate at other streets or pedestrian-ways/trails; and connectivity of type A streets
shall extend for at least two blocks down a street or turning a corner.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/448
2. Each phase of development of at least 20 acres or more shall have at least two blocks of type A frontage.
Type A frontages shall be connected to other type A frontages where feasible.
3. Cul-de-sacs shall be utilized only for unique environmental conditions.
4. The street network shall complement the trail network and vice versa.
5. Street types shall be utilized to create a hierarchy of multimodal travel patterns within the PGBT area.
C. Street classification established. Table 14.8.1 and associated cross sections shall establish the cross sections
for each street type. The cross sections may be adjusted to fit existing contexts with the approval of the city manager
or designee. In addition, the proposed cross sections may be adjusted to meet the needs of the uniform fire code as
adopted by the city.
D. Street cross sections.
TABLE 14.8.1 STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
Street
Type
ROW (Recommended
Min.)
Number
of Lanes
Number
of Bike
Lanes
Vehicle
Lane
Widths
Bike
Lane
Width
On-Street
Parking
Parkway/Tree
Well
Paved
Area
Ped.
Realm
A 72 FT
(Angled or
Parallel)
12 FT 4 2 11 FT 5 FT Yes 5 x 5 FT
(Min.)
B 42 FT 12 FT 2 N/A 12 FT N/A Yes,
Parallel
5 x 5 FT
(Min.)
General 40 FT 12 FT 2 N/A 11 FT N/A Yes,
Parallel
5 x 5 FT
(Min.)
Alley 32 FT
(Garage to
Garage)
None N/A None N/A N/A None None
TYPE A STREET - PARALLEL PARKING
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/448
TYPE A STREET - ANGLED PARKING
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/448
TYPE B STREET
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/448
GENERAL STREET
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/448
COMMERCIAL ALLEY
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/448
RESIDENTIAL ALLEY
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/448
E. Streetscape and landscape standards. Streetscape standards shall apply to all streets within the PGBT area.
Streetscape standards shall address all elements between the building face and the edge of the curb. Typical
streetscape elements addressed are street trees, lighting, street furniture and pedestrian amenities and materials. All
dedicated public ROW and landscaping within the ROW shall be maintained by the city.
1. All streetscape elements and site amenities, such as bike racks, trash receptacles, lamp posts, benches,
bollards, patio furniture, and tree grates, shall be decorative metal, rust and flake/chip resistant, and generally
be black (“storm cloud”) in color. Bollards can be concrete or cast metal and shall be decorative design with no
bold colors or sleeves.
F. Street trees and landscaping (within the pedestrian easement).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/448
1. Street trees shall be required on all PGBT area streets (except on alleys and the PGBT access/ frontage
road).
2. Street trees shall be planted per best practices and based on urban tree species (see Table 14.8.2), and
consistent with a pedestrian zone along the street.
3. Spacing shall be an average of 30 feet on center (measured per block face) along all streets except alleys.
4. The minimum caliper size for each tree shall be three inches and shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height at
planting. Each tree shall be planted in a planting area no less than 36 square feet. However, the tree well area
may be no smaller than 25 feet.
5. All living landscape shall be maintained in a healthy and growing manner, replaced when diseased or dead,
and receive irrigation.
TABLE 14.8.2 URBAN TREE SPECIES LIST
G. Street furniture, lighting and materials.
1. Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be required along all PGBT area streets (except on alleys and PGBT/SH 190
access roads. They shall be no taller than 20 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/448
2. Street lights shall be placed on average 40 feet on center, approximately three feet behind the curb line
unless another placement facilitates a pedestrian zone along the street.
3. The light standard selected shall be compatible with the design of the street and the design of the buildings.
4. Trash receptacles and bike racks shall be required along all type A streets. A minimum of one per each
block face shall be required.
5. Street furniture and pedestrian amenities such as benches are recommended along all type A streets.
6. All street furniture shall be located in such a manner as to allow a clear sidewalk passageway of a minimum
of six feet.
7. Materials selected for paving and street furniture shall be of durable quality and require minimal
maintenance; pavers are discouraged in neighborhood retail/entertainment centers as a primary surface in order
to facilitate walkability.
H. Commercial frontages.
1. Where a commercial frontage is at the ground floor level adjacent to a street, paved hardscape within the
setback range shall be flush with the sidewalk up to the front door at a minimum and match the material of the
sidewalk adjacent.
2. Where there is residential frontage, landscaping is permitted within the setback.
Figure 14.8.1: Streetscape Zone
14.9 Signage. Except as specifically listed below, all other signage and sign standards must comply with the Code.
A. Signage in the PGBT area shall generally be limited to monument signs, multi-tenant monument signs, wall
signs, and other incidental signage.
B. One monument sign per lot may be installed with a maximum area of 60 square feet, a maximum height of eight
feet, with a one foot masonry (brick/stone) border around all sides of the sign that matches the primary building, and
shall also provide the street address with a minimum six inches in height that is decorative metal and of contrasting
color with the monument. Corner lots with double frontage may install a second monument sign along the additional
ROW.
C. A multi-tenant monument sign per street frontage may be located within a unified development consisting of
multiple businesses on the same lot. Signs shall incorporate a one foot masonry (brick/stone) border that matches the
primary building, provide business identification signs on panels, and shall have a maximum area based upon the size
of the development (80 square feet for buildings with three or fewer tenant lease spaces; 100 square feet for projects
with more than three businesses and on less than five acres; and ten additional square feet for every acre over five
acres with a maximum allowed area of 200 square feet; and a height that does not exceed ten percent of the sign's
maximum allowed area).
D. Pylon signs, pole signs, billboards, off-site signage, bandit stake signs, and other signs are prohibited in the
PGBT area.
14.10 Civic/open space requirement and palette.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/448
A. Generally. The design of civic/open space shall be regulated by the civic/open space palette herein, which shall
create a network of open spaces that recognizes the natural qualities of the area while providing a range of both
passive and active recreational opportunities. These opportunities may be accommodated in a variety of spaces
ranging from large regional parks to neighborhood-scaled greens to urban squares and plazas. The open space
network will be serviced by an interconnected network of trails and paths for pedestrians and bicyclists alike.
B. Required open spaces.
1. Non-residential uses. All developments of non-residential uses shall include at least five percent of
civic/open space as defined in this section of the net site area (excluding floodplain and public right-of-way). This
requirement shall not apply when the civic/open space requirement is applied in conjunction with urban living
residential development.
2. Urban living residential uses. See section 14.5 for use criteria.
3. Single family detached-medium density and single family residential attached-dwelling units. If the
commercial requirement is utilized the five percent civic/open space requirement shall apply.
C. Detention pond standards.
1. Stormwater detention for the PGBT district shall be designed and constructed in order to accomplish the
following:
a. Stormwater facilities shall be designed and constructed to function as an amenity for the district.
b. Individual small dry detention ponds for each phase of development are discouraged.
c. When possible, it is encouraged for adjacent properties to work together to create community
stormwater improvements.
2. The city engineer may modify this requirement in part, or in whole, as necessary to facilitate quality
development within the district.
3. Detention areas should emphasize their aesthetic and amenity value by incorporating a variety of plant
materials intended to soften their visual impact, and improve their stormwater management functions.
4. Park standards.
The park will create an important public space that connects the community within the PGBT area and allows
for passive recreation. Parks shall primarily be naturally landscaped with many places to sit on benches or low
walls. Passive recreation activities in parks may include grassy lawns for unstructured and informal active
recreational activities. Appropriate civic elements, fountains or open shelters may be included.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
* Large, open space
* Spatially defined by landscaping and building frontages
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/448
* Paths, trails, open shelters, lawns, trees, and shrubs
* May be lineal, following the trajectories of natural corridors
Typical Uses
* Unstructured and passive
* Recreation casual seating
* Picnicking
5. Green standards.
The green will serve as an important public space for the PGBT area. The green will be available for civic
purposes, commercial activity, unstructured recreation and other passive uses. Greens shall primarily be
naturally landscaped with many shaded places to sit. Appropriate paths, civic elements, fountains, or open
shelters may be included and shall be formally placed within the green.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
* Open space
* Spatially defined by landscaping and building frontages
* Lawns, trees and shrubs naturally disposed, open shelters and paths formally disposed
Size
* Shall have a range of sizes
Typical Uses
* Unstructured and passive recreation
* Casual seating
* Commercial and civic uses
* Residential address
6. Plaza standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/448
Plazas add to the vibrancy of streets within the more urban areas and create formal open spaces available
for civic purposes and commercial activity. Building frontages shall define these spaces. The landscape should
consist of primarily hardscape. If trees are included, they should be formally arranged and of appropriate scale.
Casual seating, along with tables and chairs, should be provided. Plazas typically should be located at the
intersection of important streets.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
* Formal open space
* Primary hardscape surfaces
* Trees and shrubs optional
* Spatiality defined by building frontages
Location and Size
* Range of sizes
* Shall front at least one street
Typical Uses
* Commercial and civic uses
* Casual seating
* Tables and chairs for outdoor dining
* Retail and food kiosks
7. Pedestrian passage standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/448
Pedestrian passages create intimate passageways through buildings at designated locations. These paths
provide direct pedestrian access to residential addresses and create unique spaces for frontages to engage and
enter off of. Pedestrian passages allow for social and commercial activity to spill into the public realm.
Pedestrian passages should consist of a hardscape pathway activated by frequent entries and exterior
stairways. The edges may simply be landscaped with minimal plantings and potted plants.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
* Hardscape pathway
* Frequent entries and frontages
* Exterior stairways
* Defined by building frontages
* Minimal planting and potted plants
* Maintain character of surrounding buildings
Location and Size
* Min. width: 12 feet
Typical Uses
* Pedestrian connection and access
* Casual seating
8. Multi-use trail.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/448
The multi-use trail provides an important place for active recreation and creates a connection to regional
paths and biking trails. The multi-use trail will help activate connections between the open spaces and the uses
throughout the PGBT area. The multi-use trail may have a different character as it passes through the park.
Within the required park, the trail shall be naturally disposed with low impact paving materials so there is
minimal impact to the existing flood plain and landscape.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
* Park multi-use trail
* Naturally disposed landscape
* Low impact parking
* Trees lining trail
* Appropriately lit for safety
Location and Size
* Min. width: 12 feet
Typical Uses
* Active and passive recreation
* Casual seating
APPENDIX 1: REGULATING PLAN
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/448
APPENDIX 2: DEFINITIONS
In addition to definitions in chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 14 of the Code, the following terms shall have the
corresponding interpretations:
Arcade means a portion of the main façade of a building that is at or near the setback range and a colonnade supports the upper
floors of the building. Arcades are intended for buildings with ground floor commercial or retail uses and the arcade may be one
or two stories.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/448
Auto-related uses means establishments that provide retail sales and services related to automobiles, including, but not limited to
tires, batteries, gasoline, etc. Includes car wash, auto repair, gas stations and passenger vehicle leasing, but excludes vehicle
sales unless located within the interior of a building, truck and trailer leasing.
Block means the aggregate of lots, pedestrian passages and rear alleys, circumscribed on all sides by streets.
Block face means the linear dimension of a block along one of its street frontages.
Block face dimensions means the linear dimension of a block along one of its street frontages.
Block perimeter means the aggregate dimension of a block along all of its street frontages.
Building façade line means the vertical plane along a lot where the building's front façade is actually located.
Building frontage means the percentage of a building's front façade that is required to be located at the front setback range as a
proportion of that lot's frontage along the public street. Parks, plazas, squares and pedestrian passages shall be considered as
buildings for the calculation of building frontage.
Figure 8: Building Frontage Diagram
Character area means an area within the PGBT area that creates a distinct urban form different from other areas within the
PGBT area. Character areas are identified in the regulating plan.
Civic/open space means the publicly accessible open space in the form of parks, courtyards, forecourts, plazas, greens, pocket
parks, playgrounds, etc. They may be privately or publicly owned. For all residential uses, privately accessible open spaces, such
as courtyards, porches and balconies may also be considered as civic/open space for the purposes of this Code. Building
façades facing a civic/open space shall be treated as a type A street frontage.
Complete street means a street that not only accommodates various modes of transportation such as automobiles, transit, bikes
and pedestrians, but also establishes a design context that is conducive for redevelopment along the street.
Encroachment means any structural or non-structural element such as a sign, awning, canopy, terrace, or balcony that breaks
the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a setback or public ROW, or above a height limit.
Garden style multifamily residential means multifamily structures that have fewer units in two or more stories. Often called
suburban-style apartments or residential units.
Heavy industrial means uses and buildings that are intended to provide for the development and operation of distribution and
manufacturing uses.
Home occupation means a non-residential use conducted within a residential dwelling or permitted accessory building by a
permanent resident of the building.
Kiosk means a small, temporary or permanent structure often open on one or more sides used for sales in civic/open spaces.
Light industrial means uses that conduct manufacturing, assembling and fabrication and do not depend primarily on frequent
visits of customers or clients, but usually require accessibility to major rail or street transportation facilities. Also referred to as flex
industrial.
Live/work unit means a dwelling unit that is also used for work purposes, provided that the work component is restricted to the
uses of professional office, artist's workshop, studio or other similar uses and is located on the street level and constructed as
separate units under a condominium regime or as a single unit. The “live” component may be located on the street level (behind
the work component) or any other level of the building. Live/work unit is distinguished from a home occupation otherwise defined
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/448
by this Code in that the work use is not required to be incidental to the dwelling unit, non-resident employees may be present on
the premises and customers may be served on site.
Living screen means a street screen composed of landscaping in the form of vegetation.
Figure 9: Living Street Screen Examples
Minor modification means any changes to the PGBT area code that meet the threshold criteria established in section 14.3 and
Table 14.3.1.
Multi-unit residential means a residential building that has 12 residential units or less, including duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes,
etc. Multi-unit residential buildings can appear as a large home from the exterior, but function as a multi-unit building on the
interior. Buildings typically have one main front door, but may also have side and rear entries. Parking is accessed from an alley
or a driveway to the rear of the lot. Parking does not face a public right-of-way.
Duplex is a small- to medium-sized structure that consists of two side-by-side or stacked dwelling units, both facing the street,
and within a single building massing. This type has the appearance of a medium to large single family home and is appropriately
scaled to fit within primarily single family neighborhoods or medium-density neighborhoods. It enables appropriately-scaled, welldesigned
residential infill and is important for providing a broad choice of housing types and promoting walkability.
Figure 10: Multi-Unit Residential Homes
Regulating plan means the zoning map attached herein that shows the character areas, civic/open spaces, streets and other
requirements applicable to the PGBT area subject to the standards in this Code.
Residential loft means a residential unit that is built to retail ready standards and adapted for residential uses.
Retail ready means space constructed at a minimum ground floor height as established in each character area, which may be
used for noncommercial uses and can be converted into retail/commercial use. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for a retail/commercial use in a retail ready space, the space must comply with all building and construction codes for that use.
The intent of the retail ready space is to provide the flexibility of occupying a space in accordance with market demand and
allowing the use in such space to change to retail/commercial uses accordingly.
Setback range means the distance in which a building must be constructed from the street or property line along a type A or type
B street. Publicly accessible and activated people spaces, such as outdoor cafes, patios and plazas differentiated from the
sidewalk shall be allowed to be included in the building façade delineation for purposes of meeting a build-to or setback range
requirement.
Figure 11: Activated People Spaces Serving as Building Frontages
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/448
Single family detached-medium density means single family homes located on smaller lots in traditional or mixed-use
neighborhoods. Types can include patio homes, cottage courts, etc.
Patio homes means single family detached homes located on a small lot that has at least some private yard space, generally in
the back and/or side yards, but also possibly a small front yard. These types of homes may also be called “villa” or “zero lot line”
homes if the homes are located on one of the side property lines.
Figure 12: Single Family Detached Medium Density Homes
Street screen means a freestanding wall or living screen built along the BTZ or in line with the building façade line along the
street. It may mask a parking lot or a loading/service area from view or provide privacy to a side yard and/or strengthen the
spatial definition of the public realm.
Street type means a specific designation for streets in the PGBT area that establishes certain character and cross sections to
improve walkability within the PGBT area.
Townhouse means a small- to medium-sized attached structure that consists of two to eight houses placed side-by-side. This
type of residential building is typically located in a location that transitions from a primarily single family neighborhood into a
commercial corridor. This building type enables appropriately-scaled, well-designed residential infill and is important for providing
a broad choice of housing types and walkability.
Figure 13: Townhouses or Townhomes
Transition zones mean the areas with specific adjacencies within which certain limitations on building heights apply as
established for each character area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/448
Tree well means an unpaved area around the trunk of a tree within the sidewalk area that is either landscaped with ground cover
or covered with a tree grate.
Type A street means the streets identified as such on the regulating plan. Type A streets are the primary pedestrian streets and
buildings along type A streets shall be held to the highest standard of pedestrian-oriented design.
Type B street means the streets identified as such on the regulating plan. Type B streets are intended to primarily accommodate
access to parking, service and other auto-related functions.
Urban living residential means multiple separate housing units for residential inhabitants that are contained within one building or
several buildings within one complex. Can include studio, one and two bedroom units, residential lofts and condos.
Figure 14: Multifamily Residential Units in Mixed-Use Environments
Urban tree means a tree specifically selected for its ability to withstand harsh urban conditions, its upright branching habit and its
non-invasive root system.
(Ordinance 3178, sec. 1(Exh. A), adopted 11/16/09; Ordinance 3312, sec. 1, adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 3837, sec. 1, adopted
11/6/17; Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
Sec. 15. Old Town zoning district.
15.1 Purpose and intent.
A. Generally. The purpose of the Old Town zoning district, hereafter known as the OT district, is to facilitate the
redevelopment and preservation of the Old Town area into a walkable, mixed-use and infill environment with
restaurants, neighborhood amenities, employment, infill housing and open spaces. Development within this district
shall implement the vision adopted in the comprehensive plan, adopted March 2017.
B. Establish specific development standards. The Old Town zoning district regulating plan (Appendix 1), hereafter
known as the regulating plan, establishes the character areas. The respective character areas determine which
specific development standards apply. Creation of different character areas within the Old Town district enables
specific site and locational standards to be applied. Graphic standards are provided for location, height and building
elements.
15.2 Components of the Code.
A. Applicability of other city ordinances. This section governs the Old Town zoning district except where others are
referenced or where other ordinances of Sachse's Code apply and are not in conflict with the Old Town district.
B. Old Town district regulating plan. The Old Town district regulating plan (Appendix 1) establishes the character
areas, recommended civic/open spaces, and setback ranges for the district.
1. Character areas established. The Old Town district regulating plan establishes four character areas:
a. Downtown south (DTS). The center of cultural entertainment and family life in Sachse taking
advantage of trail connectivity throughout the city and the region. The character of DTS shall be gardenesque,
walkable and eclectic.
b. Downtown north (DTN). A mixed-use destination of small scale commercial and urban residential. Its
character should embrace its historic context, focusing on transitions to the surrounding neighborhood.
c. Neighborhood (NBR). A mixed residential transition from downtown north and downtown south
respectively adjacent to the existing neighborhoods.
d. SH 78 commercial (SHC). Takes advantage of the regional commuter traffic while complementing the
adjacent character of downtown north and downtown south respectively.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/448
2. Setback ranges established. Building setback ranges are established on the regulating plan (Appendix 1)
for street frontages where denoted.
C. Development standards. The Code enumerates the development and design standards for the character areas.
15.3 Administration. This section sets forth the provisions for reviewing and approving development applications within the Old
Town district. The intent is to ensure that all development is consistent with the provisions of this Code. All sections of this Code
shall be applied during the review process.
A. Using this Code. The following steps should be followed to determine the uses and the development standards
applicable on the property within the Old Town district:
1. Locate the subject property on the Old Town district regulating plan.
2. Identify (1) the character area in which the property is located and (2) the setback range required for the
property.
3. Review the schedule of uses by character area as listed in Table 15.4.1.
4. Refer to section 15.5 for development standards.
5. Refer to section 15.6 for parking standards.
6. Refer to section 15.7 for street and streetscape design standards.
7. Refer to section 15.8 for signage.
8. Refer to section 15.9 for architectural standards and design guidelines.
B. Development process. If a site plan or site development permit is submitted that is in conformance with this
Code and the regulating plan, the city manager or designee may approve the site plan or site development permit
application administratively. If the site plan or site development permit application is denied, then the applicant shall
have the right to appeal the city manager or designee's decision to the planning commission and then the city council.
C. Development plan approval standards. If a development plan conforms to the standards set forth in this Code,
regulating plan and other applicable city regulations not in conflict with this Code, the development plan shall be
approved. Upon request by the applicant, the authority charged with approving the development plan shall certify the
reason(s) for an action taken.
D. City manager or designee. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the following:
1. Reviewing development plan applications for compliance and giving approval for applications within the Old
Town district.
2. Making determinations on the applications and interpretations of standards in this Code.
3. Approving revisions to previously approved development plans that comply with this Code and all
applicable city ordinances.
4. Reconciling any potential ambiguities or conflicts between other city codes and this Code.
5. Approving any minor modifications to the approved regulating plan per section 15.3(E).
6. Determining if a proposed use is within the intent of permitted uses in the Code so that it may also be
deemed permitted.
E. Minor modifications. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve a request for minor
modifications to the Code that:
1. Does not materially change the circulation on the site;
2. Does not materially change the walkable relationship between the buildings and the street;
3. Does not allow a use otherwise authorized in this Code, unless substantially similar to a use already
permitted; or
4. Does not allow greater height of any building except for non-habitable architectural features.
5. Alternative building placements and/or parking locations may be considered for administrative approval if
the alternative proposal contextually is consistent with the intent of walkability and urbanity of the Code and the
character area within which the development is proposed. If the administrative approval request is not granted,
the applicant may seek a major modification.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/448
The city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve minor modifications per Table 15.3.1. Any
appeals to the decisions of the city manager on minor modifications shall follow the process below:
a. Initiation of an appeal. The applicant may appeal a decision of the city manager or designee. The
written request to appeal shall be submitted to the city manager or designee within 14 calendar days
following the denial decision.
b. Appeal to planning and zoning commission. The commission shall consider the appeal at an open
meeting no later than 30 calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the
director of development services. At this meeting, new information may be presented and considered, if
available, that might alter the previous decision to deny the minor modification. The commission may
affirm, modify or reverse the previous decision by simple majority vote.
c. Appeal to city council. The applicant or the city manager may appeal the commission's decision by
submitting a written notice of appeal to the city manager or designee within 14 calendar days following the
commission's decision. The city council shall consider the appeal at an open meeting no later than 30
calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the director of development
services. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the commission's decision by simple majority vote.
The decision of the city council is final.
Any city council denials of minor modifications or any changes beyond those that meet the criteria in section
15.3 and the thresholds established in Table 15.3.1, shall be processed as an amendment to this Code.
TABLE 15.3.1 MINOR MODIFICATIONS ALLOWED
Standard Minor Modification Allowed Comments
Any Numerical Modification
• Shall be no more than a 10%
(increase or decrease)
modification.
Area/Boundary of Character
Areas
No more than a 15% change
(increase or decrease) in any
character area (aggregate or
per block)
• Shall not eliminate any
character area.
• 15% measurement shall be
based on the total area of that
character area within the entire
Old Town district.
Building Frontage No more than a 30% reduction
in the required building
frontage along each block
• Should also allow for
conditions such as utility
easements; large, existing
trees; or other
physical/topographical
constraints.
Street Screen Waiver of street screen
requirement
• In no case shall any portion of
the surface parking have
frontage along a street without a
required street screen.
Landscaping Alternative landscaping in
terms of quantity, species type,
and/or location may be
submitted for consideration
• Detailed landscape concept
plan shall be submitted for
review in order to be accepted
as an alternative.
Architecture Alternative architectural
concepts that meet the spirit
• Detailed architectural plan
and/or elevations shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/448
and intent of the Code may be
considered, such as modified
storefronts or uniquely themed
users
submitted for review in order to
be accepted as an alternative.
Infrastructure and ROW Alternate design standards • Shall be based on principles of
context sensitive design and
further the overall spirit and
intent of Old Town district.
F. Major modifications. A request for a modification of any of the standards of this Code other than minor
modifications permitted under section 15.3(E), such as a change in use or major spatial modification, shall be
reviewed and processed as a major modification.
1. Major modifications are intended to allow applicants development flexibility to address specific market
opportunities. An application for a major modification shall be in the same manner as a minor modification and
shall be considered by the city council after the planning commission has made a recommendation. The city
manager or designee reviews, makes recommendations on any major modifications and shall forward all
applications to the planning commission for recommendations to city council. In evaluating a major modification,
city council shall consider the extent to which the application meets any of the following:
a. Provides an alternative master plan approach by consolidating multiple properties to create a
predictable, market responsive development;
b. Fits the adjoining context by providing appropriate transitions; or
c. Maintains the overall intent of the comprehensive plan and the Old Town zoning district.
G. Parking. All off-street parking requirements may be modified through alternative parking plans, shared parking
agreements or other similar mechanisms to advance the goals of walkability and connectivity if approved by the city
manager or designee.
H. Non-conforming uses. All non-conforming uses shall be governed by the Code and applicable state law.
I. Non-complying structures and sites. A non-complying structure or site may be altered or enlarged, provided that
such alteration or enlargement shall neither create any new non-conformity, nor shall increase the degree of the
existing non-conformity of all or any part of such structure or site, with the exception of single family structures, which
may be modified creating new non-compliance as long as the original structure of the building is maintained and the
new non-compliance is associated only with a single family use.
Regardless of transfer of ownership, non-complying structures that are utilized for single family residential or
houses of worship may continue in that use in perpetuity if utilized solely for that purpose even if destroyed by act of
God and reconstructed.
15.4 Schedule of uses.
A. Due to the emphasis on urban form over land uses, general use categories have been identified by character area. Uses
not listed on the following schedule, but are substantially similar, may be permitted upon approval by the city manager or
designee.
TABLE 15.4.1 SCHEDULE OF USES
Character Area Downtown
South (DTS)
Downtown
North (DTN)
SH 78
Commercial
(SHC)
Neighborhood
(NBR)
Land Use
Commercial Uses (Office, Retail, Sales and Service Uses)
Retail sales or service P P P NP
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/448
Professional office P P P P/C
Light industrial, including
manufacturing, data centers,
research laboratory
headquarters, laboratories and
associated facilities
NP NP P NP
Heavy industrial NP NP NP NP
Food service uses (full-service
restaurants, cafeterias,
bakeries, snack bars, QSRs,
café seating within a public or
private sidewalk area with no
obstruction of the pedestrian
realm)
P P P NP
Brewery P P P NP
Any use with a drive through NP NP P/C NP
Auto-related uses NP NP P/C NP
Storage facilities NP NP P/C NP
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation Uses
Art galleries, antique, furniture
or electronics studio (retail,
repair or fabrication; excludes
auto electronics sales or
service)
P P P NP
Theater, cinema, dance, music
or other entertainment
establishment
P P P NP
Museums and other special
purpose recreational
institutions
P P P NP
Fitness, recreational sports,
gym or athletic club
P P P NP
Outdoor entertainment venue P P NP NP
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/448
Parks, greens, plazas, squares
and playgrounds
P P NP P
Educational, Public Administration, Health Care and Other Institutional Uses
Child daycare and preschools P P P NP
Schools, libraries and
community halls
P P P NP
Hospital/medical office
buildings
P P P NP
Civic uses P P P NP
Residential Uses
Single family detached-low
density
NP NP NP P
Single family detachedmedium
density
NP NP NP P
Garden style multifamily
residential
NP NP NP NP
Urban living residential P/C P/C P/C NP
Townhome P/C P/C NP P/C
Home occupations P P NP P
Live/work unit P P NP P
Multi-unit (up to 8 units per
structure)
P/C P/C NP P/C
Accessory dwelling unit P P NP P
Assisted living facilities NP NP NP NP
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/448
Other Uses
Municipal facilities P P P P
Hotels P P P NP
Parking, surface (primary use
of property)
P/C P/C P/C NP
Parking, surface (accessory
use of property)
P P P NP
Parking, structured P P P NP
Private attached garage P P NP P
Private detached garage P P NP P
Sales from kiosks P P NP NP
Veterinary clinic P P P NP
P = Permitted
NP = Not permitted
P/C = Permitted with design criteria per Table 15.4.2
B. Use criteria. All uses listed as P/C in Table 15.4.1 shall also meet the following standards.
TABLE 15.4.2 USE CRITERIA
Use Zone Location + Design Criteria
Professional
Office
Neighborhood • Existing homes shall be permitted to be converted to
professional office.
• Shall follow signage requirements as established in
section 15.8.
• Parking:
• Shall be accommodated as on-street parking and shall be
angled or parallel to the curb, or
• Shall be accommodated to the side or rear of the structure,
accessible through a driveway.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/448
• Ground-oriented signage that is decorative and
ornamental, no more than four feet high and non-electronic
is permitted.
Any Permitted
with a Drive
Through
SH 78
Commercial
• Drive through areas shall be screened by a four foot high
street screen.
Auto-Related
Uses
SH 78
Commercial
• Gas pumps and canopies shall not be located at the
corners of the facility's lot.
Storage
Facilities
SH 78
Commercial
• Storage uses shall be a maximum of three stories.
• Shall be 100% indoor access and climate controlled.
Urban Living
Residential
Downtown South
Downtown North
SH 78
Commercial
• Ground floor retail, commercial or other non-residential
required for each urban living residential project.
• Urban living residential shall be either 100%
studio/convertible, one and two bedroom units, residential
lofts or flats, or condos.
• Two bedroom units shall have similar sized bedrooms,
bathrooms and closets.
• Any shared wall, floor or ceiling shall be insulated.
• Surface parking shall be designed to facilitate a
pedestrian-oriented site.
• Shall be no more than two stories within 50 feet of the
property line adjacent to existing single family residential.
Townhome Downtown South
Downtown North
Neighborhood
• Units shall be at least 12 units an acre.
• Lots shall be a minimum of 22 feet wide and alley-loaded.
• Shall be either attached or detached.
• The following additional conditions shall apply to
townhomes within properties either owned or formerly
owned by the Sachse EDC. The townhome use shall be
consistent with, but not limited to:
• Overall positive tax base
• Reinforcing neighborhood commercial uses
• Creating live-work-play context
• Limited infill context that is not the predominant use of a
block
Multi-Unit Downtown South
Downtown North
• Shall have ground floor retail or commercial for each
project.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/448
• Shall be no more than two stories within 50 feet of the
property line adjacent to existing single family residential.
Parking, Surface
(Primary Use of
Property)
Downtown South
Downtown North
SH 78
Commercial
• Required to be temporary use of property as part of
phasing strategy or appropriately screened and landscaped
by incorporating one tree per every 15 spaces planted
within parking islands.
• To be reviewed by city manager or designee.
15.5 Development standards. The following table shall establish the development standards for the four different zones in the
Old Town zoning district.
TABLE 15.5.1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Standard Downtown
South (DTS)
Downtown
North (DTN)
SH 78
Commercial
(SHC)
Neighborhood
(NBR)
Setback Range Setback ranges shall be established in the Old Town district regulating plan
Corner lots shall
be built to the
setback range for
a minimum of 15
feet from the
corner along both
streets or the
width of the
corner lot,
whichever is less
Corner lots shall
be built to the
setback range for
a minimum of 15
feet from the
corner along both
streets or the
width of the
corner lot,
whichever is less
N/A N/A
Heights
Building Height Shall be no more than three stories for the entire Old Town zoning district
First Floor 12 feet (min.) 12 feet (min.) 12 feet (min.) 12 feet (min.)
Buildable Area A maximum of
90% of the lot
area may be
covered by any
building footprint
A maximum of
90% of the lot
area may be
covered by any
building footprint
A maximum of
80% of the lot
area may be
covered by any
building footprint
A maximum of
75% of the lot area
may be covered
by any building
footprint
Building Frontage Min. of 70% of
the building
façade along 5th
Street and
Sachse Road
shall be built
within the setback
range
Min. of 70% of
the building
façade along 3rd
Street shall be
built within the
setback range
N/A Min. of 50% of the
building façade
shall be built within
the setback range
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/448
Min. of 50% of
the building
façades along all
other streets shall
be built to the
setback range
Min. of 50% of
the building
façades along all
other streets shall
be built to the
setback range
Encroachments Canopies, signs, awnings and balconies may encroach over the sidewalk as
long as the vertical clearance is a minimum of eight feet. In no case shall an
encroachment be located over an on-street parking or travel lane.
Streetscape Standards
Sidewalks 6 feet (min.) 6 feet (min.) N/A 6 feet (min.)
Street Trees 30 feet on center
along all public
street frontages
(except alleys)
30 feet on center
along all public
street frontages
(except alleys)
N/A 30 feet on center
along all public
street frontages
(except alleys)
Minimum caliper
three inches and
12 feet high
(min.) at planting
Minimum caliper
three inches and
12 feet high
(min.) at planting
N/A Minimum caliper
three inches and
12 feet high (min.)
at planting
Lot and Block Standards
Lot Width N/A N/A N/A N/A
Lot Coverage 90% 90% 80% 75%
15.6 Parking.
A. Applicable to all character areas. Off-street parking requirements for any and all uses permitted in the district
may be waived or altered subject to a shared parking agreement or a coordinated parking plan approved by the city
manager and his/her designee, subject to appeal to the city council.
1. Parking location. Parking shall only be located behind the principal building; or on the side if no more than
one double-loaded bay and screened at the street with masonry or fence no taller than four feet.
2. Off-street parking. For any parking lot permitted along the side of buildings on lots adjacent to 5th Street or
Sachse Road, it shall be no wider than 65 feet and a street screen shall be provided such that the side of the
parking bays closest to the street shall be screened by a wall or landscape three feet in height.
3. Entertainment, retail and restaurant. The number of off-street spaces required for retail services, retail
goods sales; pharmacies; dry cleaners; art, antique, furniture or electronics studios (retail, repair or fabrication);
restaurants, cafes, delis or coffee shops; and retail bakeries shall be waived for the first 1,500 square feet of
retail floor space (excluding kitchen, administrative and storage space) for a particular use.
4. Residential. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be required for each residential unit, unless a
waiver is approved by the city manager or designee pursuant to a mixed-use shared parking plan, subject to
appeal to the city council. For lots 50 feet or less, parking shall be rear entry, side or pull through.
5. Non-residential uses. A minimum of one off-street parking space per 300 square feet of gross space shall
be required for each non-residential unit.
15.7 Street and streetscape design standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/448
A. Generally. Streets in the Old Town district shall support the overall goal of a mixed-use, compact, pedestrianoriented
neighborhood. Streets should balance all forms of mobility while maximizing convenience for residents and
visitors.
B. Streetscape and landscape standards. Streetscape standards shall apply to all streets within the Old Town
district. Streetscape standards shall address all elements between the building face and the edge of the curb. Typical
streetscape elements addressed are street trees, lighting, street furniture and pedestrian amenities and materials. All
dedicated public ROW and landscaping within the ROW shall be maintained by the city.
C. Street trees and landscaping (within the pedestrian easement).
1. Street trees shall be required on all Old Town district streets (except alleys).
2. Street trees shall be planted per best practices and based on urban tree species and consistent with a
pedestrian zone along the street.
3. Spacing shall be an average of 30 feet on center (measured per block face) along all streets except alleys.
4. The minimum caliper size for each tree shall be three inches and shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height at
planting. Each tree shall be planted in a planting area no less than 36 square feet. However, the tree well area
may be no smaller than 25 feet.
5. All living landscape shall be maintained in a healthy and growing manner, replaced when diseased or dead,
and receive irrigation.
D. Streetscape amenities within commercial areas.
1. Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be required along all Old Town district streets (except on alleys). They shall
be no taller than 20 feet.
2. Street lights shall be placed on average 40 feet on center, approximately three feet behind the curb lines
unless another placement facilitates a pedestrian zone along the street.
3. The light standard selected shall be compatible with the design of the street and the design of the buildings.
4. Trash receptacles and bike racks shall be required along all streets. A minimum of one per each block face
shall be required.
5. All street furniture shall be located in such a manner as to allow a clear sidewalk passageway and a
minimum of six feet.
6. Materials selected for paving and street furniture shall be of durable quality and require minimal
maintenance; pavers are discouraged in neighborhood retail/entertainment centers as a primary surface in order
to facilitate walkability.
E. Commercial frontages.
1. Where a commercial frontage is at the ground level to a street, paved hardscape within the setback range
shall be flush with the sidewalk up to the front door at a minimum and match the material of the sidewalk
adjacent.
2. Where there is residential frontage, landscaping is permitted within the setback.
F. Existing infrastructure.
1. New development shall install new infrastructure subject to city regulations. However, infill residential uses,
including allowed home conversions and excluding urban living residential and other non-residential uses, may
utilize existing infrastructure or alternative design standards, subject to minor modifications approval, for
sidewalks, drainage, paving, access and utilities.
G. Rights-of-way (ROW).
1. Any newly dedicated ROW shall be sufficient to accommodate a street cross section approved by minor
modification that generally provides 24 feet wide concrete paving, allows for on-street parking and other needed
infrastructure, such as drainage, utilities, and sidewalks. Existing ROW may be reduced via the platting or
construction permit process, subject to minor modification approval.
15.8 Signage.
TABLE 15.8.1 SIGN STANDARDS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/448
Sign Type DTS/DTN NBR SHC Standard
Building
Signs
P NP P • For all commercial uses fronting on SH
78: One sign per tenant space; area not to
exceed 50 SF on the façade with the
highway frontage.
• For all commercial uses (retail, office, and
restaurant): One sign per tenant space;
area not to exceed 24 SF along each
public frontage.
• Second-floor commercial uses may be
permitted one second-floor wall sign per
tenant space per public street frontage;
area not to exceed 24 SF on the secondfloor
façade along that public street.
Monument
Signs
NP NP P • One monument sign per street frontage
(no more than two per lot separated by at
least 300 feet) limited to a maximum of 50
SF per sign face and shall not exceed six
feet in height above grade.
Window
Signs
P NP P • Limited to 10% of window area.
• The following shall be exempt:
• Addresses, closed/open signs, hours of
operation, credit card logos, real estate
signs, and now hiring signs.
• Mannequins and storefront displays of
merchandise sold.
• Interior directory signage identifying
shopping aisles and merchandise display
areas.
Blade Signs P NP P • Shall be permitted for all non-residential
uses.
• Six SF maximum per sign face.
• May encroach a maximum of two feet
onto a sidewalk.
• Blade signs shall be attached to the
building or hung under the soffit of an
arcade or under a canopy/awning while
maintaining a vertical clearance of eight
feet from the sidewalk.
• SH 78: Permitted if building is built up to
the minimum setback range.
Fold-Up P P NP • Permitted only for retail, service or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/448
Signs restaurant uses.
• Limited to eight square feet per storefront.
• Sign may not exceed two feet in width or
four feet in height.
• A minimum of four feet of sidewalk shall
remain clear.
• Chalkboards may be used for daily
changing of messages. Readerboards
(electronic and non-electronic) shall be
prohibited.
• Signs shall be removed every day after
the business is closed.
Directory
Signs
P NP P • Shall be allowed for all multi-tenant
buildings only.
• One directory sign shall be integral to the
façade on which the sign is affixed.
Neon Signs P NP P • Shall be limited to no more than 50% of
the permitted window or building sign area.
• Shall be permitted for restaurants,
entertainment uses, and retail shopfronts.
• Artistic neon signs shall be permitted.
LED
Cabinets
NP NP NP • Not permitted within the Old Town zoning
district.
P = Permitted
NP = Not permitted
15.9 Architectural standards and guidelines. The architectural standards and design guidelines for the Old Town district shall
establish a coherent urban character and encourage enduring, attractive and sustainable development. New and infill
construction in the district shall reflect the character of the district.
The key design principles establish essential goals for development in the Old Town district to ensure the preservation,
sustainability and visual quality of this unique environment. Buildings shall be located and designed so that they provide visual
interest and create enjoyable, human-scaled spaces in a garden-esque environment. The key design principles are:
* New buildings shall utilize building elements and details to achieve a pedestrian-oriented public realm with
transitions into human-scaled private places, with connectivity to adjacent neighborhoods and trail systems;
* Compatibility is not meant to be achieved through uniformity, but through the use of variations in building elements
to achieve individual building identity;
* Building façades shall include appropriate architectural details and ornaments to create variety and interest; and
* Open space(s) shall be incorporated to provide public areas integral to the urban environment.
A. General to all character areas.
1. Building orientation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/448
a. Buildings shall be oriented toward the major street front with the primary entrance located on that
street. All primary entrances shall be oriented to the public sidewalk for ease of pedestrian access.
b. At intersections, buildings located on corner lots shall utilize variations in building massing to
emphasize street intersections as points of interest in the district. Maximum building heights shall be
permitted to exceed by 25 percent for approximately 25 percent of the building frontage along each street
façade.
c. Residential uses shall address the primary street unless configured as a courtyard building.
d. Garages shall be located on alleys; pull-through garages are allowed if the garage door is set back
behind the rear façade of the main structure. If front-loaded garages are utilized on single-family residential
lots, the garages shall be no greater than 12 feet wide and set back at least 10 feet from the face of the
main structure closest to the garage or rotated 90 degrees with windows on the wall facing the street.
Front-loaded garages on residential lots less than 50 feet shall not be allowed. Townhomes and courtyard
units shall utilize rear-loaded garages.
2. Pedestrian-friendly building massing and scale.
a. A building's massing shall serve to define entry points and help orient pedestrians.
b. Buildings and/or façades shall emphasize and frame or terminate important vistas.
c. Non-residential and mixed-use buildings in the Old Town district, to the extent practicable, shall
maintain a 25-foot to 35-foot building façade width or multiples thereof.
d. Variations in the rhythms within individual building façades shall be achieved within any block of
building façades with architectural elements such as bays, columns, doors, windows, etc.
e. Breaks in the predominant rhythm may also be used to reinforce changes in massing and important
elements such as building entrances, terminated vistas, or corner sites.
f. Porches, stoops, eaves, awnings, blade signs, arcades, colonnades and balconies should be used
along commercial storefronts and they may protrude beyond the setback range provided that they do not
inhibit pedestrian movement within the public right-of-way. Balconies shall have external bottom supports.
3. Architectural elements and storefronts.
a. Architectural elements shall be designed to the appropriate scale and proportions of the selected
architectural style.
b. An expression line or equivalent architectural element shall delineate divisions between floors of all
buildings.
c. Building entrances shall be defined and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels,
pediments, pilasters, columns, porticos, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and/or others as
appropriate. All building elements shall be compatible with the architectural style, materials, colors and
details of the building as a whole.
d. Ground floor building heights shall be at least 12 feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/448
4. Building materials.
a. At least 70 percent of each exterior elevation shall be brick and/or stone, when mixed, stone shall be
used as a base or foundation material and brick used above the stone. Up to 30 percent may be stucco,
architectural split-face block, glass block or colored and stamped/scored tilt wall. This applies to
townhomes, multi-unit buildings, retail, restaurants, SH 78 commercial, downtown north and downtown
south character areas.
b. Single family detached structures, including professional garden office conversions, may utilize
cementitious fiber board to achieve a lap siding appearance.
c. Retail storefronts may utilize alternative materials for the first floor entry veneer so long as the primary
construction type is masonry.
d. Side and rear façades shall be of finished quality and of the same color and materials that blend with
the front of the building. Rear façades may be painted tilt-wall or painted block matching the same color of
the rest of the building if the rear façade faces a residential alley or is not viewable from a public street,
ROW, or public area of a non-residential use.
5. Driveways, alleys and service areas.
a. Unless otherwise specified, driveways and off-street loading and unloading may be located with
access along a primary street frontage if the property has no access to either an alley or joint use
easement to an adjoining property.
b. Driveway spacing shall be limited to two driveways per each block face or per 200 feet of block face,
unless approved by the city manager or designee when pedestrian design is used to mitigate the additional
driveway crossings.
c. Service and loading/unloading shall be screened per standards in section 15.9.6.
d. Unless required to meet minimum fire access or service access standards all commercial and mixeduse
driveways/alleys shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. Service driveways/alleys shall be a maximum
of 32 feet in width garage to garage.
6. Mechanical and service screening.
a. All buildings shall be designed such that no mechanical equipment (HVAC, etc.) except vents or
stacks is visible from the public right-of-way or open space, whether the equipment is located on the
ground, exterior walls or roof.
b. The screening material used shall be the same as the primary exterior building material used and
raised at least one foot above the top of the mechanical equipment per city standards.
Appendix 1: Regulating Plan
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/448
Appendix 2: Definitions
In addition to the definitions in chapter 11, exhibit 1, article 3, section 14 of the Code, the following terms shall have the
corresponding interpretations:
Alley means the right-of-way for vehicles and pedestrians within a block that provides access to the rear of buildings, vehicle
parking, utility meters, and service areas. An easement for public access is required if the alley is a private right-of-way.
Auto-related uses means establishments that provide retail sales and services related to automobiles, including but not limited to
tires, batteries, gasoline, etc. Includes car wash, auto repair, gas stations and passenger vehicle leasing, but excludes vehicle
sales unless located within the interior of a building, truck and trailer leasing.
Block face dimensions means the linear dimension of a block along one of its street frontages.
Building frontage means the percentage of a building's front façade that is required to be located at the front setback range as a
proportion of that lot's frontage along the public street. Parks, plazas, squares, and pedestrian passages shall be considered as
buildings for the calculation of a building's frontage.
Character area means an area within the Old Town district that creates a distinct urban form different from other areas within the
Old Town district. Character areas are identified in the regulating plan.
Civic/open space means the publicly accessible open space in the form of parks, courtyards, forecourts, plazas, greens, pocket
parks, playgrounds, etc. They may be privately or publicly owned. For all residential uses, privately accessible open spaces such
as courtyards, porches and balconies may also be considered as civic/open space for the purposes of this Code. Building
façades facing a civic/open space shall be treated as a primary frontage.
Encroachment means any structural or non-structural element such as a sign, awning, canopy, terrace or balcony that breaks the
plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a setback or public ROW, or above a height limit.
Garden style multifamily residential means multifamily structures that have fewer units in two or more stories. Often called
suburban-style apartments or residential units.
Home occupation means a non-residential use conducted within a residential dwelling or permitted accessory building by a
permanent resident of the building.
Live/work unit means a dwelling unit that is also used for work purposes, provided that the work component is restricted to the
uses of professional office, artist's workshop, studio or other similar uses and is located on the street level and constructed as
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/448
separate units under a condominium regime or as a single unit. The “live” component may be located on the street level (behind
the work component) or any other level of the building. Live/work unit is distinguished from a home occupation otherwise defined
by this Code in that the work use is not required to be incidental to the dwelling unit, non-resident employees may be present on
the premises and customers may be served on site.
Living screen means a street screen composed of landscaping in the form of vegetation.
Minor modification means any changes to the Old Town district code that meet the threshold criteria established in section 15.3
and Table 15.3.1.
Multi-unit residential means a residential building that has eight residential units or less, including duplexes, triplexes,
quadplexes, etc. Multi-unit residential buildings can appear as a large home from the exterior, but function as a multi-unit building
on the interior. Buildings typically have one main front door, but may also have side and rear entries. Parking is accessed from an
alley or a driveway to the rear of the lot. Parking does not face a public right-of-way.
Duplex is a small- to medium-sized structure that consists of two side-by-side or stacked dwelling units, both facing the street,
and within a single building massing. This type has the appearance of a medium to large single family home and is appropriately
scaled to fit within primarily single family neighborhoods or medium-density neighborhoods. It enables appropriately-scaled, welldesigned
residential infill and is important for providing a broad choice of housing types and promoting walkability.
Plaza means a formal space created within more urban areas for civic purposes and commercial activity. Building frontages
typically define these spaces and landscaping is primarily hardscape. Casual seating, along with tables and chairs, is typically
provided.
Professional office means a home that has been converted into a commercial use or office. An individual may also live within the
home as well. Similar to a live/work unit.
Regulating plan means the zoning map attached herein that shows the character areas, civic/open spaces, streets and other
requirements applicable to the Old Town district subject to the standards in this Code.
Residential loft means a residential unit that is built to retail ready standards and adapted for residential uses.
Retail ready means space constructed at a minimum ground floor height as established in each character area, which may be
used for noncommercial uses and can be converted into retail/commercial use. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for a retail/commercial use in a retail ready space, the space must comply with all building and construction codes for that use.
The intent of the retail ready space is to provide the flexibility of occupying a space in accordance with market demand and
allowing the use in such space to change to retail/commercial uses accordingly.
Setback range means the distance in which a building must be constructed from property line. Publicly accessible and activated
people spaces, such as outdoor cafes, patios and plazas differentiated from the sidewalk shall be allowed to be included in the
building façade delineation for purposes of meeting a build-to or setback range requirement.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/448
Sign, blade means an attached sign oriented perpendicular to the face of the building which projects (vertically or horizontally)
more than 12 inches beyond the surface of the building to which it is affixed or supported.
Sign, directory means a permanent on-site attached wall sign providing direction to or identifying the buildings/suites in the
development.
Signs, fold-up means a portable sign consisting of two panels of equal size, which are hinged at the top and/or a single panel
placed on the ground or pavement so as to be self-supporting.
Single family detached-medium density means single family homes located on smaller lots in traditional or mixed-use
neighborhoods. Types can include patio homes, cottage courts, etc.
Patio homes means single family detached homes located on a small lot that has at least some private yard space, generally in
the back and/or side yards, but also possibly a small front yard. These types of homes may also be called “villa” or “zero lot line”
homes if the homes are located on one of the side property lines.
Street screen means a freestanding wall or living screen built along the setback range or in line with the building façade line
along the street. It may mask a parking lot or a loading/service area from view or provide privacy to a side yard and/or strengthen
the spatial definition of the public realm.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/448
Townhouse means a small- to medium-sized attached structure that consists of two to eight houses placed side-by-side. This
type of residential building is typically located in a location that transitions from a primarily single family neighborhood into a
commercial corridor. This building type enables appropriately-scaled, well-designed residential infill and is important for providing
a broad choice of housing types and walkability.
Tree well means an unpaved area around the trunk of a tree within the sidewalk area that is either landscaped with ground cover
or covered with a tree grate.
Urban living residential means multiple separate housing units for residential inhabitants that are contained within one building or
several buildings within one complex. Can include studio, one and two bedroom units, residential lofts or flats, and condos.
Urban tree means a tree specifically selected for its ability to withstand harsh urban conditions, its upright branching habit and its
non-invasive root system.
(Ordinance 3841, sec. 1, adopted 12/4/17; Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/18)
ARTICLE 4. GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL OR SEVERAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 1. Application of regulations to the uses of a more restrictive district.
1.1 Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more restrictive district, such uses
shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district, unless otherwise specified.
1.2 It is intended that these regulations be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be located on the same lot with or
within a structure used or intended to be used primarily for nonresidential purposes.
Sec. 2. Open space.
2.1 The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific
district regulations set forth in article 3 herein.
(a) An open space or lot are required for an existing building or structure shall not be counted as open space for
any other building or structure.
(b) Open eaves, cornices, window sills, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to
exceed two feet. Open uncovered porches or open fire escapes may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to
exceed five feet. Fences, walls, and hedges in residential districts may be erected in any required yard, or along the
edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed three
feet in height, and no other wall or fence shall exceed eight feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/448
(c) Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than 50 feet, the front yard depth shall be determined by
measuring 50 feet back from the centerline of the street easement.
(d) Except as allowed under article 3, section 3, no dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at
least one street, at least 50 feet in width, for at least 35 feet. A street shall form the direct and primary means of
ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and
egress. Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building may be built in the rear yard.
(e) No minimum lot sizes are prescribed for commercial and industrial uses. It is the intent of this ordinance that lots
of sufficient size be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking, unloading and loading space
required for operation of the enterprise.
(f) On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure or any plant growth
which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet six inches and six feet above any portion of the crown of the
adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and
exterior side lot lines a distance of 30 feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established
to form a right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the front intersection.
(g) Reserved.
(h) Whenever one or more residential, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings are proposed to be located in
a cluster or grouping which has different arrangement, orientation or other site planning variation from that of other
building, structures or uses in the area or on adjacent properties, the architectural design, location, orientation, service
and parking areas of such buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or other
properties in the area, as determined by the planning and zoning commission.
(i) An ornamental fence exceeding six feet in height shall have a ratio of solid portion to open portion not in excess
of one to four.
(Ordinance 3573, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/14)
Sec. 3. Height.
3.1 The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific
district regulations set forth in article 3 herein.
(a) In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as a story.
(b) Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other projections not used for human occupancy may
extend above the height limit.
(c) Churches, schools, hospitals and other public and semipublic buildings may exceed the height limitation of the
district if the minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards required in the district are
increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structure exceeds the
prescribed height limit.
Sec. 4. Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles.
4.1 Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, camping, hauling, motor homes, and mobile homes shall not
be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the
following provisions:
(a) Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and one-half tons rated capacity, shall be
permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or other liquefied
petroleum products be permitted.
(b) Not more than three camping or travel trailers, hauling trailers or motor homes shall be permitted and said
trailers shall not exceed 32 feet in length, or eight feet in width; and further provided that said trailer shall not be
parked or stores [stored] for more than 48 hours unless it is located behind the front building line. A camping or travel
trailer or motor home shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or store in any area
within the incorporated limits except in a trailer court authorized under the ordinances of the city.
(c) A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a trailer court which is in conformity with the ordinances of the
city.
Sec. 5. Off-street automobile and vehicle parking and loading.
5.1 Purpose.
(a) Manage parking so that it is convenient, efficient, and supports an active and vibrant retail environment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/448
(b) Decrease the expansive “seas” of parking that are too common in modern suburbs, noting that most new
development is typically over-parked, resulting in wasted space, unnecessary impervious surface, higher construction
costs, and loss of retail square footage.
(c) Support the creation of shared parking in order to enable visitors to park once at a convenient location and
access a variety of commercial enterprises in a pedestrian and bicycle-friendly environment.
(d) Provide flexibility for changes in land uses which have different parking requirements.
(e) Ensure ease of access to parking.
(f) Provide flexibility for the redevelopment of small sites.
(g) Avoid diffused, inefficient single-purpose reserved parking.
(h) Avoid adverse parking impacts on residential neighborhoods.
5.2 General requirements.
(a) Except for when on-street parking is allowed, all maneuvering of vehicles shall take place on site or within a
mutual access easement or fire lane. No public right-of-way shall be used for backing or maneuvering into or from a
parking space, or for circulation within the parking lot.
(b) Parking spaces shall be clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods.
Non-permanent type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous clear identification of
the space.
(c) All vehicular use areas shall be well-maintained without large cracks or other failures, with back-filled curbs, and
power-washed when appropriate.
(d) No parking or loading area shall be used for storage of inventory, materials, display, sanitation containers, heavy
load vehicles, supplies, or for any other use, except as approved through the site plan process, for temporary
construction, or with a valid seasonal sales permit. Under no circumstances shall a required parking space be used
for any purpose other than parking.
(e) All off-street parking areas shall be kept free of litter, trash, debris, vehicle repair operations, display, and
advertising uses.
(f) The property owner shall be responsible for adequately maintaining all parking facilities, including paving,
striping, elimination of debris, and correction of use violations.
5.3 Administration. In computing the number of parking spaces required for any building or development, the following rules
shall govern:
(a) The term “floor area” means the gross floor area of the specific use. Where fractional spaces result, the parking
spaces required shall be constructed to be the next higher whole number.
(b) The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a
use of similar nature or per regional standard if one can be determined.
(c) The provisions of this section shall be administered by the director who shall have the authority to approve any
plan that is deemed to satisfy the minimum requirements of this section, alternate plans deemed to meet the intent of
the section, including any minor deviations or waivers, and to make necessary interpretations regarding any
subjectivity or frustration of purpose contained herein.
(d) The city council, in compliance with all applicable regulations, may issue a special use permit (SUP), establish a
planned development (PD) district or other special zoning district, or enter into a development agreement or other
economic incentive agreement, which may amend or revise the regulations herein for a certain project or area of the
city.
(e) Due to the unique service nature of government owned and occupied facilities, in addition to the development
costs being of public burden, such facilities may meet the spirit and intent of the regulations contained herein, to the
extent possible, and are not expected to strictly comply.
(f) Shared parking may be considered during the site plan process for uses not normally open, used, or operated
during the same hours as adjacent uses, or when other special circumstances exist. Owner authorization to use those
spaces must accompany any such proposal.
(g) A blanket 15 percent parking reduction may be granted to multi-tenant developments that are 15,000 square
feet or greater, provided there is a dedicated mutual access easement. Where parking exceeds the minimum number
of required spaces by more than 10 percent, landscaping of parking areas shall be increased so that planting islands
shall not be spaced greater than every 10 spaces.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/448
(h) Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling
units, seating capacity, or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces, such
spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change, as determined by the director. Whenever any
building is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then
and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
(i) A parking demand analysis study may be submitted for review for a proposed use.
5.4 Off-street parking. Developments shall provide parking, per the following table:
Assembly Uses (Non-Profit) One space for each four seats in the main auditorium.
Assisted Living Facility, Nursing Home, or Rest
Home
One space for every four beds
Athletic Stadium or Field 50 spaces per field for fields without fixed seating.
Auto Repair Three parking spaces per bay, plus one space for each
500 square feet of retail/office floor area.
Bank or Similar Financial Establishment One space for each 400 square feet of floor area.
Big Box (>50,000 sf) One space for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Bowling Alley Six spaces for each lane.
Car Wash (Self Serve) Two spaces; plus adequate stacking spaces for each
bay.
Car Wash (Automated) One space for each 200 square feet of office/retail floor
area; plus adequate stacking spaces per bay; minimum
of four spaces.
Child Care Center One space for every ten students; plus adequate
stacking spaces for drop-off lane.
Civic/Convention/Community Center Ten spaces plus one additional space for each 300
square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet.
If an auditorium is included as a part of the building, its
floor area shall be deducted from the total and
additional parking provided on the basis of one space
for each four seats that it contains.
Duplex A concrete drive with a minimum one car garage and
one space in driveway, per unit.
Golf Course Minimum 30 spaces per nine holes, plus one space for
each 200 square feet of floor area for country club,
retail, office, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/448
Green House or Nursery One space for each 5,000 square feet of outdoor
storage area; plus one space for each 200 square feet
of indoor floor area.
Health/Fitness Center One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor
area.
High School, College, or University One space for each classroom, laboratory, or
instruction area plus one space for each three students
accommodated in the institution.
Hospitals One space for every two beds and one space per
employee on the largest shift.
Hotel or Motel One space for each room unit, or guest
accommodation plus one space for each 300 square
feet of restaurant, office, or conference area.
Indoor Commercial Amusement One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
Kennel or Stable One space per every 500 square feet of floor area.
Library or Museum Ten spaces plus one space for each 300 square feet of
floor area.
Lodge, Club, or Fraternal Organization One space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
Manufacturing, Processing, Warehousing, and
Industrial Uses
One space for each employee on the maximum
working shift plus one space for each 1,000 square feet
of floor area.
Mini-Warehouse (Self-Storage) One space for each 5,000 square feet of total floor
area.
Mixed Use Building See special zoning districts for parking regulations.
Mobile Home - Manufactured Home A concrete drive with a minimum of two spaces.
Mortuary or Funeral Home One space for each four seats in funeral service
rooms.
Movie Theatre or Cinema One space per four seats.
Multi-Family Residential Two spaces for one and two bedroom units, plus one
additional space for each additional bedroom.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/448
Office, Business or Professional One space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
Office, Medical, Dental, or Health One space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
Outdoor Commercial Amusement One space for every 1,000 square feet within the outer
boundaries of the proposed use, including any
buildings, exhibit booths and areas devoted to the use.
Recreational, Private or Commercial Area or
Building (Other than Listed)
One space for every four persons to be normally
accommodated in the establishment.
Restaurant or Cafeteria One space for every 100 square feet of gross floor
area. Outdoor seating areas (covered or not) under
500 square feet are exempt. When part of a multitenant
development 15,000 square feet or greater, one
space for every 200 square feet.
Retail CBD Oil or Hemp Based Products One space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area
Retail or Personal Service One space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
Retirement Housing One space per five beds.
School, Elementary and Junior High One space for each classroom plus one space for each
four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium, or other
place of assembly.
Single-Family Residential A concrete drive with a minimum of a two car garage
with parking for two cars in driveway is required.
Townhouse Two spaces per unit, enclosed; plus two additional
spaces (driveway or on-street).
Vet or Animal Hospital One space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
5.5 Parking design.
(a) The minimum dimensions for off-street parking shall be as follows:
1. Standard space: 9 feet × 18 feet
2. Parallel space: 8 feet × 22 feet
3. Stacking space: 10 feet × 20 feet
(b) All vehicular use areas shall be concrete. Existing parking areas that are not concrete may maintain or
rehabilitate with existing or upgraded material; however, any associated expansions must be concrete.
(c) Required parking must be located outside the floodplain, except when specially allowed by the city engineer.
(d) The typical drive aisle width shall be 24 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/448
(e) Fire lanes shall be adequately reinforced to withstand heavy vehicle loading, as may be required by the adopted
fire code of the city.
(f) For safety, emergency response, and increased connectivity, cross access between parking areas of adjacent
non-residential parcels shall be provided and is required.
(g) Striping shall be white. Barrier free ramps shall be pavers, stained concrete in muted shades of adobe red or
terra cotta (not blue or yellow), or other approved detectable warning material.
(h) Head-in parking spaces adjacent to buildings shall have a minimum four foot wide clearance between the
leading edge of the parking space and the building.
(i) Dead-end parking is generally prohibited in new non-residential developments.
(j) Continuous drive aisles, when exceeding 300 feet in length, may require off-sets, roundabouts, raised
crosswalks, or other acceptable traffic-calming features.
(k) Lots fronting onto rights-of-way 60 feet wide or greater shall not install a front yard drive cut if said lot is also
accessed by an alley.
(l) Concrete parking shall be a minimum six inches thick, with #3 rebar, 18 inches on center each way. Heavy use
areas (fire lanes, dumpster loading, etc.) may require stricter standards in compliance with the city's adopted
engineering design criteria.
(m) Parking space(s) for persons with disabilities and other associated provisions shall be provided in accordance
to building codes, state laws, and requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(n) At no time after initial approval of the parking area layout, can changes be made to the location or number of
provided spaces, unless approved by the director.
5.6 Supplementary design.
(a) All retail, commercial, and industrial structures shall provide and maintain off-street areas for the loading and unloading of
merchandise and goods that does not block the fire lane and is appropriately and conveniently located. All loading docks must be
screened along their sides.
(b) Schools, day care centers, and similar child training and care establishments shall provide a loading and unloading area on
an off-street, internal drive that does not block the fire lane.
(c) Sufficient queueing spaces shall be provided for uses which regularly require stacking, such as drive throughs and service
bays.
(d) In order to encourage the safe and convenient use of bicycles, each development shall provide at least one bike rack
permanently mounted to the ground. Larger developments with buildings 50,000 square feet or more in area, such as big boxes
or large corner-like developments, may require additional bike racks, not to exceed three bike racks. Required bicycle parking
should be located within 50 feet of an entrance to the building, or a comparable convenient location. Site plans shall call-out the
location of all proposed bike racks.
(e) Decorative paving (integral color stained concrete with the option to be stamped/scored in patterns) shall be provided as
follows:
1. On-site pedestrian cross-walks.
2. At the store front entrances of tenant suites.
3. Drive throughs or drop-off areas.
4. Trail crossings (anywhere).
(f) Decorative paving (integral color stained concrete that is stamped/scored in patterns) shall be provided as follows:
1. At the entrances of each commercial site when ingress/egress is from a ROW in order to provide a “welcome
mat”.
2. At major intersections of on-site drive aisles.
3. Major ROW intersections (intersections of collectors or bigger) and entrances for residential from collectors or
bigger.
(Ordinance 2247, sec. 3, adopted 10/16/06; Ordinance 3238, sec. 1, adopted 9/7/10; Ordinance 3400, sec. 2, adopted 7/2/12;
Ordinance 3622, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/14; Ordinance 3816, sec. 1, adopted 10/2/17; Ordinance 3919 adopted 5/6/19)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/448
Sec. 6. Lot area requirements for septic tanks.
Whenever connection with the sanitary sewer system will require unreasonable expenditure and septic tanks are to be installed
for residential lots, the following requirements shall be met:
6.1 Residential lots shall have an area of at least 39,000 square feet.
6.2 Before a septic tank is installed, the residential lot's owner or the owner's contractor must contact the county's
environmental health division to receive the proper authorization.
6.3 All septic tanks installed within the City of Sachse must meet city, county, state and federal health regulations.
6.4 Where, as a result of necessary percolation tests required by the city, the city engineer deems the minimum lot area
insufficient, the city shall require additional lot area sufficient to accommodate the sanitary facilities deemed necessary by the
city's engineer.
Sec. 7. Architectural design standards.
7.1 Purpose. The purpose of the architectural standards is to set minimum standards for the appearance and quality of
buildings and corresponding site elements which are recognized as enhancing property values and are in the interest of the
general welfare of the city. These standards are not intended to prohibit architectural innovation, nor are they intended to
mandate specific architectural styles and concepts. Rather, they are intended to provide for developments of enduring quality that
provide visual character and interest. The development community is encouraged to seek out new and innovative ways to
implement the standards contained herein that will result in a significant contribution to the visual character of the area and the
city as a whole.
7.2 Applicability and administration.
(a) The regulations provided in this section shall apply to all new construction and all structures within all zoning districts, but
shall only apply to single family residential uses when indicated. Where the regulations of this section conflict with other sections
or provisions of this chapter, the regulations of this section shall apply.
(b) When an existing building, constructed prior to the effective date of this section, is proposed for an addition/expansion that
will increase the square footage of the existing building by less than 50 percent, either by a single expansion or by the cumulative
effect of a series of expansions, similar or like exterior materials may be used on new façades that match the existing building
and architectural theme to the extent possible. Any addition that is 50 percent or greater (of the originally approved floor area)
shall be subject to and compliant with the regulations herein, potentially resulting in the reconstruction of the entire exterior
veneer of an existing structure.
(c) All repair and alterations of exterior façades, including paint and re-paint jobs, of non-residential buildings are required to
obtain a permit from the city and comply with all applicable color regulations contained herein.
(d) Certain structures, such as temporary construction buildings or portable classroom buildings situated on public school or
non-profit property, may be exempt, in compliance with established or future policies adopted by the city council.
(e) The provisions of this section shall be administered by the director who shall have the authority to approve any façade plan
that is deemed to satisfy the minimum requirements of this section, alternate façade plans deemed to meet the intent of the
section, including any minor deviations or waivers, and to make necessary interpretations regarding any subjectivity or frustration
of purpose contained herein.
(f) All exterior façades shall be perpetually maintained and repaired in a safe, reasonably good, and attractive manner by the
owner in a manner that protects against the elements, is structurally safe, and corrects any visual ills or other problems.
(g) The city council, in compliance with all applicable regulations, may issue a special use permit (SUP), establish a planned
development (PD) district or other special zoning district, or enter into a development agreement or other economic incentive
agreement, which may amend or revise the regulations herein for a certain project or area of the city.
(h) Due to the unique service nature of government owned and occupied facilities, in addition to the development costs being
of public burden, such facilities may meet the spirit and intent of the regulations contained herein, to the extent possible, and are
not expected to strictly comply.
(i) The city acknowledges that taller buildings, especially office in nature, are likely to struggle in complying with all of the
regulations contained herein, especially the masonry requirements. It is expected for such projects to include glass curtain wall
on its building elevations, to be reviewed and approved through an alternative process.
(j) Single family tracts with existing PDs (or comparable special zoning) which also include architectural standards may
continue to apply the standards as found in the governing PD. Non-residential tracts and uses with existing PDs (or comparable
special zoning) shall be governed by the standards contained herein.
7.3 Façade plan approval.
(a) Prior to any construction permit being issued, a project's building elevations must be approved by the director.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/448
(b) Sufficient information shall be submitted to evaluate the architectural standards criteria outlined herein as part of the site
plan submittal for all newly proposed and existing structures seeking a permit.
(c) Color elevations shall include:
(1) All façades (whether four or more) of each building.
(2) Proposed exterior materials with a percentage breakdown of each material used, exclusive of windows and
doors.
(3) A calculation chart or graphic demonstrating compliance with the articulation standards.
(4) A listing of the selected auxiliary design standards, described herein, to illustrate compliance. If a landmark
feature is required of the building, please note the feature proposed for credit.
(5) A notation reading, “Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be sufficiently screened from view by parapet
walls, and ground mounted equipment shall be enclosed by masonry wing walls that match the material of the primary
building.”
(6) A notation reading, “All light sources, including wall packs, shall be full cut-offs (i.e. recessed/shielded).”
(7) For any proposed streetscape elements (such as bike racks, trash receptacles, lampposts, tree grates, bollards,
outdoor seating, and/or other street furniture) or screening devices (masonry walls, dumpster screening enclosures,
wing walls around mechanical equipment, etc.), graphics should also be submitted showing the material, color, height,
and any other pertinent details necessary for review.
7.4 Definitions.
Architectural concrete masonry units includes highly textured finish, such as split faced, indented, hammered, fluted, ribbed,
burnished, or similar decorative finish; coloration shall be integral to the masonry material and shall not be painted on; minimum
thickness of one inch when applied as a veneer; shall include light weight and featherweight decorative masonry units.
Big box shall mean a building, usually with a single tenant, which comprises more than 50,000 square feet.
Brick includes severe weather rated kiln fired clay or slate material, can include concrete brick if it is to the same ASTM C216 or
C652 standard and severe weather rated as typical fired clay brick; minimum thickness of one inch when applied as a veneer,
and shall not include underfired clay, sand, or shale.
Director shall mean the director of development services, or his/her designee.
Masonry materials shall mean and include that form of construction defined below and composed of brick, stone, granite, marble,
stucco (three-step hard coat), decorative concrete masonry unit, tilt wall concrete panels, sealed and painted concrete block, and
exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS), and rock or other materials of equal characteristics laid up unit upon unit set and
bonded to one another in mortar.
Non-residential building shall mean those buildings utilized for use other than single family, duplex, and townhome dwelling, to
specifically include commercial, retail, medical, office, and multi-family structures and associated accessory structures.
Residential buildings shall mean those buildings utilized for a single family, duplex, and townhome dwelling.
Stone includes naturally occurring granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other similar hard and durable all weather
stone that is customarily used in exterior building construction; may also include cast or manufactured stone product, provided
that such product yields a highly textured stone-like appearance, its coloration is integral to the masonry material and shall not be
painted on, and it is demonstrated to be highly durable and maintenance free; natural or manmade stone shall have a minimum
thickness of one inch when applied as a veneer.
7.5 Exterior materials.
(a) Category A materials are the primary products which the city prefers commercial buildings to be predominantly constructed
of. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable category A masonry finishing materials are brick and stone.
(b) Category B materials are the secondary products which the city recognizes as masonry materials acceptable for
commercial use, but also as products that should not be the predominant material for a building. Unless otherwise provided for in
this chapter, acceptable category B masonry finishing materials are stucco, architectural concrete block with integrated color
(split-face CMU), and concrete tilt wall (colored/stamped).
(c) Category C materials are accent products acceptable in limited application for architectural features and finishes, such as
window heads, dormers, cornice flashings, and exposed beams, subject to discretionary determination by the director. Unless
otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable category C materials are metal, tile, wood, cementitious fiberboard with
integrated color (in the form of lap siding or board), and exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS - above 14 feet from grade
only).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/448
(d) Prohibited exterior surface materials include cinder block, vinyl, plastic, and aggregate pea-gravel finished surfaces.
TABLE A
Categories Materials
Primary
(Group A)
Brick
Stone
Secondary
(Group B)
Stucco
Split-Face CMU
Tilt-Wall (colored and stamped or scored)
Accent/Finishing
(Group C)
Metal
Tile
Wood
Cementitious Fiber Board
EIFS (only when above grade by 14')
Prohibited Concrete Block (category B for industrial)
Aggregate (category B for industrial)
Vinyl/Plastic
7.6 Non-residential and multifamily design elements. The following apply to nonresidential and multifamily development,
including institutional buildings:
1. Goals and intent.
(1) Buildings should be constructed in a manner that allows flexibility to accommodate a range of uses over
time in order to avoid the need to demolish and rebuild for successive uses.
(2) Buildings should directly contribute to the attractiveness, safety, and function of the street and public
areas.
(3) Buildings should be constructed in a manner, and with materials, that are highly durable and will continue
to endure and be attractive over a long time, especially adjacent to public and pedestrian areas.
(4) It is not the intent of this section to discourage innovation. The use of exceptional design features, such as
tower elements, exposed beams, or other unique and outstanding architectural ornamentation worthy of merit
that make a positive contribution to the surrounding visual environment is encouraged.
2. General design standards.
(1) All buildings within a common development or shopping corner/corridor, as shown on a development plan,
concept plan, or preliminary site plan, or viewed from an aerial map, should have similar architectural styles,
materials, colors, and detailing that compliment and talk to each other without necessarily being monotonous
and precise reflections of one another.
(2) All structures shall be architecturally finished on all four sides with similar styles, materials, colors, and
detailing.
(3) Façades shall generally be built parallel to the street frontage, except at street intersections, where a
façade containing a primary building entrance should be curved or angled toward an intersection.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/448
(4) All buildings shall be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture so that they have a distinct base,
middle, and top, separated by horizontal elements.
(5) All buildings shall be constructed of 100 percent masonry finishing material, as outlined in Table A. At least
two masonry materials shall be used on all exterior façades. Except for stone, no single material shall exceed 80
percent of an elevation area.
(6) Roofs shall be peaked with either hip, gable, or mansard design with a minimum 1:4 pitch, or a parapet
wall or false mansard design (minimum 1:2 pitch) is acceptable only if constructed around the entire perimeter of
a building so that no flat roof shall be visible from a public street or along an active storefront. At all times roofmounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened from view.
(7) For buildings with a visible hip, gable, or mansard roof, allowed materials include metal (standing seam),
slate, or tile (clay or cement, barrel or Roman-shaped).
(8) Windows and glazing shall be limited to a minimum of ten percent and maximum of 70 percent of each
building elevation. Faux windows or elements that create a comparable visual, such as decorative brickwork,
insets of varying materials/colors, or other similar features, are allowed, subject to discretionary review and
approval by the director. All windows should be recessed a minimum four inches from exterior wall finish and
have a maximum exterior visible reflectivity of ten percent.
(9) Murals cannot display or connote a commercial message without abiding by the sign regulations, as found
within the Code.
(10) Columns should be encased in category A masonry material.
(11) All streetscape elements and site amenities, such as bike racks, trash receptacles, lampposts, benches,
bollards, patio furniture, and tree grates, shall be metal, rust and flake/chip resistant, and generally be black
“storm cloud” in color. Minor deviations in color and design that maintain the spirit and intent of the section are
allowed with staff approval. Bollards can be concrete or cast metal and shall be of decorative design with no
bold colors or sleeves.
3. Primary façade design standards. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings which are clearly
visible from a public street or along an active storefront:
(1) Walls, excluding windows, doors and other openings, shall be constructed of a minimum 70 percent group
A materials and a maximum of 30 percent group B materials. A minimum of 20 percent of primary façades shall
be stone.
(2) A big box may use architectural block (split-face CMU) for up to ten percent of each primary façade, in
addition to the 30 percent of group B materials, not to exceed 40 percent total.
(3) All exterior walls of buildings less than 15,000 square feet are considered primary façades, regardless of
orientation.
(4) Primary façades shall incorporate patterns that include changes in either color, material, pattern, module
size, texture, articulation, ornamentation, or a combination thereof that repeat horizontally and vertically.
4. Secondary façade design standards. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings 15,000 square feet
or larger which are not clearly visible from a public street or along an active storefront, or are constructed on a
property line as one of a series of in-line buildings where the wall will become part of a common wall:
(1) Walls, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of a minimum 20 percent group
A materials and a maximum of 80 percent group B materials. However, the color of the walls shall match the
primary façades.
(2) Secondary façades which are adjacent to the primary façade should continue the primary façade
treatment by wrapping the corner. This may be achieved with elements such as cornices, bases, and vertical
elements. In all cases, however, wall surface materials shall wrap the corner.
(3) Visual relief shall be provided, both horizontally and vertically, to break up monolithic expanses of
secondary façades through the use of repeating patterns.
TABLE B
Facades Percentage Breakdown Definition
70% Group A Exterior walls of buildings which are clearly
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/448
Primary 30% Group B visible from a public street or along an active
storefront
Secondary 20% Group A
80% Group B
Exterior walls of buildings 15,000 square feet
or larger which are not clearly visible from a
public street or along an active storefront
5. Building articulation design standards. Primary façades clearly visible from a public street or along an active
storefront shall meet the following minimum standards for articulation:
(1) Horizontal articulation. No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to three times the wall's height
without providing an offset equal to 15 percent of the wall's height, and that new plane shall extend for a
distance equal to at least 25 percent of the maximum length of the first plane.
(2) Vertical articulation. No wall length shall extend for a distance greater than three times the height of the
wall without changing height by a minimum of 15 percent of the wall's height, and that new plane shall extend for
a distance equal to at least 25 percent of the maximum length of the first plane. Pitched roofs shall count toward
achieving vertical articulation, provided they are 65 degrees or less from horizontal.
6. Landmark buildings.
(1) Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street or major access lane or at the intersection of
streets and/or major access lane shall be considered a landmark building.
(2) Such buildings shall be designed with landmark features which take advantage of that location, such as an
accentuated 3D entry and a unique building articulation which is offset from the front wall planes and goes
above the main building eave or parapet line.
(3) Landmark features shall be in proportion to the building and are subject to review and approval by the
director.
7. Building color.
(1) The dominant color of all buildings, including residential and industrial buildings, shall be muted shades of
color that are subtle, neutral, or earth tone. Black and stark white should not be used except as an accent color
or as found within brick and stone. The color of the secondary façades shall match or compliment the primary
façade.
(2) There are no restrictions on accent colors which comprise less than one percent of the building face,
except that no high intensity colors, neon colors, or fluorescent colors shall be used on exterior surfaces of the
building.
(3) Bright, reflective, pure tone primary or secondary colors are permissible only in limited application as
accent colors on canopies and awnings, or other such features. Proportions should be consistent with trim or
accentuation only. Such building trim and accent areas shall not exceed five percent of any single exterior wall
area. Specifically excluded are door and window frames, moldings, cornices, and other such features. This
provision shall not be construed as a license to employ corporate imaging on the primary building façade.
(4) The use of high intensity or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. The use of tube lighting, string lights, or
other similar materials shall not be installed on non-residential buildings, except as allowed by the
photometric/lighting regulations, as found within the Code.
(5) No more than one color shall be used for visible roof surfaces; however, if more than one type of roofing
material is used, the materials shall be varying hues of the same color or complimentary in nature. Awnings and
canopies may incorporate brighter color and branding; however, the primary roof shall not be a bold color.
8. Auxiliary design standards. All structures shall be designed to incorporate no less than four of the architectural
elements from the list below. Buildings over 50,000 square feet must include a minimum of five of the referenced
architectural elements.
(1) Canopies, awnings, porticos with colonnade or arcades;
(2) Raised pilaster cornices (end columns at corner), or quoined corners;
(3) Vertical elements (tower, cupola, lighthouse, turret, arches, etc.);
(4) Windows and doors framed with smooth cobble, cast stone, limestone or other decorative masonry
headers and sills; or dormer windows;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/448
(5) Outdoor patios and/or courtyards integrated into a site's layout that creates a sense of place (landscaped
and furnished for informal and experiential gathering);
(6) Decorative and repetitive ornamentation (non-signage) integrated into the building façade, such as
corbels, medallions, functioning clocks, niches, wrought iron, balconettes, gargoyles, or horizontal and rhythm
patterned brickwork;
(7) Other architectural features approved by the director.
7.7 Industrial building design standards. The following apply to structures constructed in an industrial zoning district and
proposing an industrial and/or manufacturing use, per the use chart of the zoning ordinance:
(a) The main entry or office area of the building shall be articulated both horizontally and vertically by at least two
feet or ten percent of the adjacent wall length. Building corners shall also be articulated, as approved by the director.
(b) Primary exterior façades which are clearly visible from a public street shall be constructed with a minimum ten
percent group A materials and up to 90 percent group B materials. The group A materials noted above shall be
applied to corners, entries, and other areas in order to mitigate monotony and increase aesthetics. A minimum of two
different materials shall be used on primary façades.
(c) Secondary exterior façades not facing a public street may be constructed with up to 100 percent group B
materials.
(d) For industrial buildings, cinder block and aggregate may be considered as category B masonry materials for
secondary façades. The director has authority to declare certain structures with inherent industrial like use, such as
cabinet structures associated with communication towers, to be industrial for the purposes of this section.
(e) A uniform color scheme is required. Colors shall be neutrals, creams, pastels, or deep, rich, non-reflective,
natural, or earth-tone colors. Bold reds, greens, oranges, and other “hot and cold” colors should be avoided.
(f) Structures shall incorporate two of the auxiliary design standards.
7.8 Residential design standards. The following architectural design standards shall apply to all single-family residential and
duplex development:
(a) The exterior finishes of a main building or structure in all districts shall be constructed of 100 percent masonry
finishing material that is comprised of brick, stone, stucco, or a combination thereof.
(b) Cementitious fiberboard or EIFS may be used for architectural features, including window box-outs, bay
windows, roof dormers, columns, chimneys not part of an exterior wall, or other architectural features approved by the
director.
(c) Homes, with elevations adjacent to or facing/backing to a right-of-way categorized as a collector or bigger, even
if separated by an alley or HOA common area, shall be a minimum of two stories in height.
(d) The primary residential structure shall incorporate a minimum of three of the following “gifts to the street” into
each front elevation:
(1) Incorporation of at least two allowed masonry materials (brick, stone, stucco)
(2) Gables, dormers, or other comparable vertical articulation
(3) Covered front porch not less than 100 square feet in area
(4) Recessed entry not less than four feet in depth
(5) Architectural garage door
(6) Architectural pillars, posts, or arches
(7) Bay window facing street, or other comparable horizontal articulation
(8) Brick chimney on exterior front or side yard
(9) Minimum roof pitch 8:12 or variable roof pitch
(10) Separate transom windows
(11) Cast stone accents
(12) Cupulas or turrets
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/448
(13) Garage door not facing street
(14) Roof accent upgrades (tile, slate, standing seam metal)
(15) Decorative driveway paving (enhancements)
(16) Decorative masonry pattern-work integrated into a front façade
7.9 Other site area standards.
(a) Gas pumps and fueling stations.
(1) Roofs of the associated pump canopy of convenience store buildings shall not be flat or straight-lined, and
should be noticeably pitched or otherwise distinguished, subject to review and approval by the director.
(2) Canopy columns shall be fully encased with category A masonry materials that match the main building.
(3) The canopy band face shall be flat with no projections or stripes, be non-plastic and generally a metal or
masonry based material, be primarily one earth-tone color that matches or accents the primary building, may not be
backlit or otherwise illuminated or used as signage, and should generally be no greater than four feet in height, except
as follows:
(i) The canopy band face may utilize one small button logo on each face that can be internally illuminated, as
long as each button logo does not exceed 15 square feet for bands three feet in size and 20 square feet for
bands four feet in size, is generally as tall as it is wide, and does not protrude more than 18 inches from the
canopy in any direction.
(ii) The canopy band face may utilize an external LED halo type light, if properly shielded/recessed and
oriented downward/upward so that only the “wash” is visible.
(iii) The canopy band face may utilize internally illuminated rings, as long as the source is LED, it is flush with
the band face and only protrudes nominally (up to a maximum of six inches), and the size of the ring does not
exceed more than 25 percent for single rings and 50 percent for multiple rings of the thickness of the canopy
band face.
(iv) The canopy band face shall provide 12 inches decorative metal address numbers of a contrasting color on
street facing sides.
(4) Exhaust valves for underground fuel storage tanks shall be designed to be located against a building, dumpster,
screening wall, through the canopy roof, or other structure to mitigate their visual impact and should be an earth-tone
color. If impractical, the exhaust valves may be located in an interior landscape area, if properly screened, but shall
not be located in the exterior landscape buffer adjacent to the public right-of-way.
(b) Mechanical equipment.
(1) Exposed conduits, ladders, exhaust valves, utility boxes and drain spouts shall be a color matching the building,
an accent color, or other earth-tone color.
(2) Outside equipment, coolers, and/or other mechanical items shall be screened in accordance with the screening
standards of the zoning ordinance, or be enclosed by a wing wall with a category A masonry finishing material
matching the primary building. Roof mounted equipment shall be screened by the parapet, not metal screens, nor
visible from public view. Transformers should be placed to mitigate their visual impact.
(3) All new utilities, including any proposed aerial lines, shall be underground.
(4) Shopping cart return bins for uses such as grocery stores shall be constructed of category A masonry walls (or
an enhanced decorative metal railing) and permanently affixed to the ground.
(c) Accessibility and layout.
(1) Pedestrian connections, both internal and connecting to external sidewalks or property boundaries, shall be
provided, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director.
(2) Cross access to adjacent lots shall be provided at all times for both vehicular and pedestrian travelers.
(3) Bay doors shall not be oriented toward the right-of-way.
(4) Drive-through facilities shall provide sufficient stacking spaces, as determined by the director.
(5) The final layout of any proposed development, including building placement, parking lots, fire lanes, gates,
dumpster locations, and other site elements, shall be determined by the director.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/448
(Ordinance 3805, sec. 1, adopted 8/7/17)
Sec. 8. Reserved.
Editor's note – Ordinance 3552, sec. 2, adopted December 2, 2013, repealed sec. 8, which pertained to residential landscaping
requirements and derived from Ordinance 3169, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09. See Article 4, Section 11 for similar provisions.
Sec. 9. Wind energy systems.
9.1 Definitions.
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute.
dB(A) means the sound pressure level in decibels. Refers to the “a” weighted scale defined by ANSI. A method for weighting the
frequency spectrum to mimic the human ear.
Decibel means the unit of measurement used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity.
Sound pressure means the average rate at which sound energy is transmitted through a unit area in a specified direction. The
pressure of the sound measured at a receiver.
Sound pressure level means the sound pressure mapped to a logarithmic scale and reported in decibels (dB).
Tower height shall mean the height of the tower, including the base, wind turbine and blades.
Turbine shall mean the parts of a wind energy system including the blades, generator and tail.
Utility grid wind energy system shall mean a wind energy system designed and built to provide electricity to the electric utility grid.
Wind energy system or system shall mean a wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity through
the use and consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, that has a rated capacity of
not more than 20 kw for residential systems and not more than 100 kw for commercial systems and is intended for on-site
production and consumption of electricity to serve the needs of the consumer.
9.2 General regulations. Wind energy systems meeting the following general regulations shall be permitted by right within any
zoning district. Wind energy systems that fail to meet the following standards may be permitted by special use permit. The
procedures for consideration of an application for a special use permit shall be as specified in article 3, section 11 of the city's
zoning ordinance. Pre-existing wind energy systems lawfully in existence at the time of the enactment of this section shall not be
required to meet the requirements established herein.
(a) Utility grid wind energy systems. Utility grid wind energy systems are prohibited within the city.
(b) Construction standards. A wind energy system must be installed according to the manufacturer's
recommendations and under the seal of a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. Additionally, all
components of a wind energy system shall comply with applicable state and local building codes. Only wind energy
systems utilizing monopole towers shall be permitted. No systems utilizing lattice towers or requiring guy wires shall
be permitted in the city.
(c) Maximum height. Wind energy systems shall not exceed 64 feet in tower height (inclusive of the turbine and
blades) in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are allowed, subject to the regulations set forth in this
section.
(d) Location and setback.
(1) A wind energy system shall only be permitted on lots that are two acres or greater in size (87,120 square
feet).
(2) No wind energy system shall be permitted in the front yard, which is defined as the space between the
street and the front building face of the primary structure. This provision shall include a side yard adjacent to the
street on a corner lot.
(3) The tower structure of a wind energy system shall be set back from all property lines a minimum distance
equal to one and one-fourth times the height of the tower.
(4) Location and setback requirements, including minimum lot size shall be maintained so long as the wind
energy system is in place. If a tower ceases to meet these criteria due to subsequent subdivision of land, the
wind energy system is in violation of this ordinance.
(e) Primary structure required on lot. A wind energy system may be constructed or installed on a lot as a secondary structure
only after a primary structure has been constructed on the lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/448
(f) Sound pressure levels. Sound pressure levels shall not exceed 50 decibels (dBA) between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and
35 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as measured from the properly line closest to the wind energy
system.
(g) Lights. All lighting, including but not limited to, upward lighting, flood lights, or lighting mounted on the structure itself, shall
be prohibited unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). When obstruction lighting is required
by the FAA, such lighting shall not exceed the minimum requirements of said agency.
(h) Signs. No advertising or other signs or flags shall be allowed on a wind energy system.
(i) Prohibited in easements. No portion of a wind energy system shall be placed in easements unless authorized by the
easement holder.
(j) Notice to utility company on grid-interconnected systems. No grid-interconnected wind energy system shall be installed until
the customer provides the building official evidence that the appropriate utility company has been informed of the customer's
intent to install. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
(k) Color. Wind energy system towers shall be a neutral color (i.e. light grey, white) and shall remain painted or finished the
color and/or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer, unless otherwise approved in the special use permit.
(l) City building codes/safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of a wind energy system, the owner of such system
must ensure that it is maintained in compliance with all provisions of the City of Sachse's building codes and zoning regulations.
If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a wind energy system fails to comply with such codes and regulations and/or
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon written notice to the owner of the wind energy system, the owner shall
have 60 days to bring the wind energy system into compliance or be found in violation of this ordinance and be subject to the
fines provided herein.
(m) Collocation. Collocation of any kind shall be prohibited. Wind energy system towers shall not be utilized for any purpose
other than that specified by the manufacturer.
(n) Maintenance and abandonment.
(1) The wind turbines shall be maintained at all times according to the manufacturer's specifications.
(2) A wind turbine that has become unstable leans significantly out-of-plumb, or that poses a danger of collapse
shall be removed or brought into repair within 60 days following notice by the building official to the owner of the lot
upon which the wind turbine is located. The building official may order immediate repairs or removal in the event of
imminent collapse.
(3) If the owner of the wind turbines plans to abandon or discontinue, or is required to discontinue the operation of
the system, the owner shall notify the building official by certified U.S. Mail of the proposed date of abandonment or
discontinuation. Such notice shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation.
i. In the event that an owner fails to give such notice, the wind turbine shall be considered abandoned if the
turbine is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months.
ii. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the property owner shall physically remove the wind turbine
within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” includes, without
limitation, the actual, complete removal of the tower, turbine and all other components of the system and
transportation of such components to an appropriate disposal site.
9.3 Building permit required. A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction or installation of a wind energy
system. An application for building permit must be accompanied by:
(a) The appropriate permit fee as established by the city;
(b) A site plan of the proposed wind energy system at a scale of 1" = 30'. The submittal of the site plan should consist of three
24" × 36" sheets and one 11" × 17" sheet and include:
(1) A survey and legal description of the subject property.
(2) A plan view layout of the proposed wind energy system clearly showing the following:
i. The location of the system.
ii. All components of the system.
iii. Distances to property lines.
iv. Required setbacks.
v. Adjacent land uses and zoning designations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/448
vi. Existing structures on the site.
vii. Natural features such as watercourses and trees.
(c) Elevation drawings showing:
(1) The design and height of the proposed wind energy system; and
(2) Detailed drawings of all system components.
(d) A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of
installation conforms to the International Building Code and National Electric Code. This information is frequently supplied by the
manufacturer.
(1) Standard installation drawing of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base and footings. An
engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the International Building Code and certified by a licensed
professional engineer registered in the State of Texas shall also be submitted.
(2) Evidence of notice to the utility company as provided in section 9.2(j).
(Ordinance 3206, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/10)
Sec. 10. Lighting.
10.1 General. This section establishes minimum criteria for the installation, use and maintenance of outdoor lighting.
10.2 Purpose. The purpose of the lighting standards is to:
A. Preserve and enhance the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of property;
B. Protect drivers and pedestrians on nearby travel ways from disabling glare from non-vehicular light sources that
shine directly into their eyes, thereby, impairing safe travel;
C. Shield neighboring properties from nuisance glare and trespass resulting from improperly directed or unshielded
light sources;
D. Prevent and/or lessen light pollution;
E. Promote efficient design and operation with regard to energy conservation; and
F. Curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment.
10.3 Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Building official means the chief building official for the City of Sachse, or his or her designee, having responsibility to enforce
and administer this article.
Bulb or lamp means the source of electric light. To be distinguished from the whole assembly, lamp is used to denote the bulb
and its housing.
Candela means the unit of luminous intensity in a given direction. It is commonly called one candlepower.
Cutoff fixture means a fixture that provides a cutoff (shielding) of the light emitted.
Diffusing luminaire means one that scatters light substantially in all directions as contrasted with a directional luminaire which
confines its light principally in an angle of less than 180 degrees.
Floodlight means a luminaire designed to project its light in a well-defined area. It is directional in character.
Floodlight beam means the angular spread of light between two orthogonal planes each of which equal ten percent of the
maximum candlepower within the beam.
Footcandle means the amount of illumination provided by one lumen uniformly distributed on one square foot of surface.
Footlambert means the luminance of a surface uniformly emitting, transmitting, or reflecting one lumen per square foot of
surface.
Fixture means the assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It includes the elements designed to give light output
control, such as a reflector (mirror) or defractor (lens), the ballast, housing and the attachment parts.
Full cutoff fixture means a fixture that allows no emission above a horizontal plane through the fixture.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/448
Fully shielded means light fixtures that are constructed so all light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal
plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted, nearly 100 percent cut-off type, as evidenced by
the manufacturer's photometric data.
Glare means direct lighting emitted from a luminary that causes reduced vision or temporary blindness.
High pressure sodium (HPS) means a high intensity discharge lamp where radiation is produced from sodium vapor at relatively
high partial pressures (100 tore). HPS is essentially point source light.
Horizontal plane means a line horizontal to the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted.
Illumination means the density of the luminous flux (lumens) incident on a surface. It is the quotient of the luminous flux divided
by the area of the surface, expressed in footcandles.
Incandescent lamp means any lamp that produces light by heating a filament through use of an electric current.
Installed means the attachment, or assembly fixed in place, whether or not connected to a power source, or any outdoor light
fixture.
Kilowatt (kwh) means a unit of energy equal to the work done by one kilowatt (1,000 watts) of power acting for one hour.
Light source means a device (such as a lamp) which produces visible energy as distinguished from devices or bodies which
reflect or transmit light such as a luminaire.
Light trespass means light falling outside the boundary of property for which it was originally intended or needed. Also referred to
as spillover light or obtrusive light.
Low pressure sodium (LPS) means a discharge lamp where the light is produced by radiation from sodium vapor at a relatively
low partial pressure (about 0.001 tore). LPS is a “tube source” monochromatic light.
Lumen means the quantity of luminous flux intercepted by a surface of one square foot, all points of which are one foot from a
uniform source of one candela. A one-candela source provides 12.57 lumens.
Luminaire means a device or fixture containing a light source and means for directing and controlling the distribution of light from
the source.
Luminance means the luminous intensity per unit projected area of a given surface viewed from a given direction; for purposes of
this article expressed in candelas divided by distance squared.
Mercury lamp means a high intensity discharge lamp where light is produced by radiation from mercury vapor.
Metal halide lamp means a high intensity discharge lamp where light is produced by radiation from metal halide vapor.
Outdoor lighting fixture means an outdoor artificial illumination device, whether permanent or portable, used for illumination
outdoors and shall include but not be limited to devices used for search, spot, flood and area lighting for buildings and structures,
recreational facilities, parking areas, landscape lighting, outdoor advertising displays, billboards, signs, public and private street
lighting and walkway lighting.
Partially shielded means shielding so that the lower edge of the shield is at or below the centerline of the light source or lamp so
as to minimize light transmission above the horizontal plane, or at least 90 percent of the emitted light projects below the
horizontal plane as evidenced by the manufacturer's photometric data.
Photometric means quantitative measurements of light levels and distribution.
Shielding means a physical structure intended to restrict emitted light.
Substantial change means any change to the lamp or bulb that alters the lighting properties of the site, or any change in the type,
style or orientation of a light fixture.
10.4 Applicability and exemptions. The lighting standards for the City of Sachse shall apply to all new construction except as
follows:
A. Outdoor lighting that lawfully exists as of the date of this ordinance shall be deemed a lawful use. Any
substantial change or addition to the existing lighting system, as determined by the Building Official, shall comply with
the provisions of this ordinance. If a site substantially changes more than 25 percent of the lighting on a site or adds
new lighting that increases the number of light fixtures by more than 25 percent, the entire site shall comply with the
provisions of this ordinance.
B. Commercial sites approved as part of a site plan prior to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall
conform to the provisions in place at that time. Any substantial change or addition to the existing lighting system shall,
as determined by the Building Official, comply with the provisions of this section. If a site substantially changes more
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/448
than 25 percent of the lighting on a site or adds new lighting that increases the number of light fixtures by more than
25 percent, the entire site shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. If a use with existing, non-conforming lighting shall cease operation for a period of more than 18 months, then
such nonconforming lighting shall be deemed permanently abandoned. The lighting on such site shall be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the redevelopment or re-use of the site.
D. The following uses shall be exempt from the requirements of this section:
(1) Lighting installed by a governmental agency for public benefit on public rights-of-way, parks, and public
recreation areas;
(2) Temporary special effects of holiday lighting;
(3) Navigation and airport lighting required by the Federal Aviation Administration for operation of airplanes;
and
(4) Emergency lighting by police, fire, and/or municipal, state or federal government authorities.
10.5 Submittal requirements.
A. As part of any site plan application or prior to altering any existing lighting, the applicant shall submit evidence that the
proposed work will comply with this chapter. The submission shall contain, but is not be limited to, the following:
(1) Plans I indicating the location on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports,
reflectors and other devices, and the mounting height of the light;
(2) Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors and other devices shall include, but
is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings; and
(3) Photometric plans showing illumination levels on the property, at the property line and just beyond the property
line, as well as other data such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar data showing the angle of cutoff for light
emissions.
B. The required plans, description, and data provided shall be sufficient to enable the plans examiner to readily determine
whether compliance with the requirements of this chapter will be secured.
10.6 Measurement.
A. Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a direct reading, portable light meter.
The meter shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus five percent. It shall have been tested and calibrated by an
independent commercial photometric laboratory or the manufacturer within one year of the date of use as attested to
by a certificate issued by such laboratory.
B. Method of measurement. The meter sensor shall be mounted or held not more than six inches above ground
level in a horizontal position. Readings shall be taken only after the cell has been exposed to provide a constant
reading. Measurements shall be made when the National Weather Service indicates visibility is six miles or greater
such that measurements will not be adversely affected by atmospheric scatter. Measurements shall be made at least
one hour after sunset or one hour prior to sunrise with the existing questioned light sources on, then with the same
sources off. The difference between the two readings shall be compared to the limitations stated by this section. This
procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and other ambient light. However, if lighting levels comply with the light
sources on then no further reading is needed with the light sources off to demonstrate compliance.
C. Computation of illumination. Illumination at a point may be computed in lieu of measurement. Computation
methods shall consist of an Illumination Engineering Society of North America accepted method, using certified
photometric data furnished by the fixture manufacturer, lamp manufacturer, photometric laboratory, or other reliable
authority satisfactory to the city. Computations shall be based on new, properly seasoned lamps, new and clean
fixtures, and at rated voltage and wattage, with ballasts, lenses, shields, diffusers, and other appurtenances in place,
and with proper regard taken for mounting height, relative elevation, natural and man-made objects and industry
standard maintenance factors.
10.7 Illumination.
A. Limitations on neighboring property. The limit of illumination on neighboring property from one establishment shall be based
on the zoning of the neighboring property. Maximum computed maintained and maximum measured footcandles at the
neighboring property lines shall not exceed:
(1) Single family and two-family residential districts: 0.25 footcandles
(2) Multifamily residential districts: 0.5 footcandles
(3) Agriculture: 1.0 footcandles
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/448
(4) Nonresidential districts (excluding industrial): 3.0 footcandles
(5) Rights-of-way and private streets: 3.0 footcandles
(6) Industrial districts: 5.0 footcandles
(7) Exception. Illumination at interior property lines on contiguous lots in a multitenant nonresidential development
may exceed the above criteria when necessary to provide constant lighting levels of adjoining parking areas, fire
lanes and interior access roadways as determined by the Director of Community Development.
B. Limitations on subject property. The maximum outdoor maintained computed and measured illumination level on the subject
property shall not exceed 20 footcandles at any point, with the following exceptions:
(1) Lighting under canopies (such as service stations) shall not exceed 30 footcandles. All other lighting on the site
shall comply with the provisions of this section.
(2) Lighting for car dealerships shall not exceed 30 footcandles within vehicle display areas.
10.8 Luminance.
A. Calculations generally. If illumination measurements are not practical as determined by the Building Official and no other
means of measuring fixture luminance is immediately available, a computation for measuring luminance may be used to
determine compliance with this article.
B. Luminance calculations using luminaire photometric data. For the purpose of this article, the luminance shall be computed
by the formula:
where I is the fixture candlepower in candelas in the direction of the point from which the calculations are to be made, d is the
shortest distance in feet measured horizontally from the property line to a point directly under the luminaire, and h is the height of
the luminaire above the eye level (at the property line) as explained in Figure A below:
C. Luminance limitations. The luminance on neighboring property from one establishment shall be by zoning of the
neighboring property. The luminance as calculated in subsection (b) shall not exceed the value by zoning as follows:
Luminance
Single-family and two-family residential districts 0.02
Multiple-family residential districts 0.05
Nonresidential districts, streets 0.30
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/448
Industrial districts 0.50
10.9 Effective outdoor lighting. The purpose of the effective outdoor lighting section is to minimize glare, sky glow, light
trespass and excessive energy consumption through the use of appropriate lighting fixtures, practices and systems, while
maintaining safety, security and productivity and curtailing degradation of the nighttime visual environment. The following are
requirements for effective outdoor lighting:
A. Fully shielded luminaries shall be required in all outdoor lighting installations, with the following exceptions:
(1) Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal or
platform shall use a very narrow cone of light or shielded lights for the purpose of confining the light to the object
of interest and minimize light spillover and glare. Compliance with this provision shall be subject to approval by
the building official.
(2) Building facades and architectural features of buildings may be floodlighted when the floodlight fixtures are
equipped with shields and are located so as to limit the fixture's direct light distribution to the façade or feature
being illuminated. The configuration of the floodlight installation shall block all view to the floodlight fixture's
lamps from adjacent properties. Compliance with this provision shall be subject to approval by the building
official.
B. The following lamp types shall be prohibited for outdoor lighting:
(1) Low pressure sodium
(2) Mercury vapor
C. The quality of the light source shall be a minimum of 65 CRI (color rendering index) as indicated by the lamp
manufacturer's data.
D. Outdoor lighting shall be constructed and installed in a manner consistent with this section and shall be located
so as not produce glare or direct illumination across the property line or onto rights-of-way.
E. Pole height.
(1) In parking areas containing zero to 150 parking spaces, the maximum height of lighting pole standards
shall not exceed 25 feet.
(2) In parking areas containing 151 or more parking spaces, the maximum height of lighting pole standards
shall not exceed 35 feet.
(3) For contiguous lots in a multitenant nonresidential development, adjacent parking areas may be combined
for the purposes of calculating parking spaces used to determine maximum pole height.
F. Hours of operation.
(1) Lighting used for the illumination of outdoor sales and eating areas, on-site advertising, assembly areas,
repair areas, and businesses may be operated during the hours that the facilities are open to the public;
(2) Lighting used for the illumination of recreational and sporting areas shall be turned off by 11:00 pm on
Sunday through Thursday and by 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday; and
(3) Lighting used for the illumination of walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking areas and outdoor
security may be operated anytime.
(Ordinance 3455, sec. 1, adopted 2/18/13)
Sec. 11. Landscaping and screening.
11.1 Purpose. The purposes of this section are as follows:
a. To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the processes of air purification,
oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, and stormwater or irrigation runoff retardation, while at the same time
aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement;
b. To assist in providing adequate light and air and preventing overcrowding of land;
c. To ensure that landscaping is an integral part of a development or redevelopment;
d. To enhance the beautification of the city;
e. To enhance property values and to protect public and private investments;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/448
f. To preserve and protect the unique identity and environment of the city and preserve the economic base attracted
to the city by such factors;
g. To conserve energy and natural resources; and
h. To protect and enhance the public health, safety and general welfare.
11.2 Applicability.
a. General applicability. This section shall apply to all development and improvements to property. This shall include, but shall
not be limited to the following:
1. Enlargement of existing development. Applications for building permits for construction work that:
(a) Increases the number of stories in a building on the lot, or
(b) Increases by more than ten percent or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less, of the combined floor areas
of a building, or
(c) Increases the impermeable lot coverage by more than 2,000 square feet.
2. Change of use. Change of use where the value of improvements to the existing building to accommodate the
new use exceeds 30 percent of the tax-appraised value of the structure immediately prior to issuance of a building
permit.
3. Nonconformities. Lots and properties to which lawful nonconforming status is terminated for any reason.
b. Relationship to other requirements.
1. Use-Specific standards. Any use required to provide landscaping or screening pursuant to the use-specific
standards of this Code shall provide such use-specific landscaping or screening. In the event of a conflict between the
use-specific requirements and the general requirements of this Section, the use-specific provisions shall control.
2. Conflicts with other zoning districts. Where landscaping regulations included in the turnpike overlay district and
the mixed use district conflict with the regulations contained herein, the regulations included in the turnpike overlay
district and the mixed use district shall control.
11.3 Administration and enforcement of landscaping provisions.
a. Form and content of application. To be accepted as complete, landscape plans shall be prepared by a person
knowledgeable in plant material usage and landscape design (e.g., landscape architect, landscape contractor,
landscape designer, etc.), prepared in the format specified by the director of community development or his/her
designee and shall contain all information and supporting materials required by this section. Landscape plans
involving grade work or retaining walls shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in
the State of Texas. Irrigation plans shall be submitted with building plans when the building permit application is
submitted to the chief building official for review. In addition, irrigation plans shall be prepared by a licensed irrigator.
b. Maintenance responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the owner (or applicable Homeowner's
Association/Property Owner's Association) to maintain all installed landscaping, screening walls or living screens.
c. Surety. When due to drought restrictions, a property owner seeks a certificate of occupancy prior to landscaping
being installed, the director of community development shall require an irrevocable letter of credit or cash escrow
equivalent to 135 percent of the total cost of the landscaping. Appropriate erosion control measures will need to be
taken by the property owner during the deferral of planting. These measures should include the installation of erosion
control fabric (e.g., Curlex) and other necessary measures.
When drought restrictions have been relaxed and landscape installation is not prohibited, the property owner shall
have 180 days from this time to complete the installation of required landscaping.
d. Certificate of occupancy.
1. Irrigation. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to the complete installation and approval of the
irrigation system as indicated on the approved landscape and irrigation plans, unless otherwise provided in this
section.
2. Water restrictions. When mandated water restrictions do not allow for the installation and watering of new
landscaping, the property owner shall either post surety in accordance with this section or seek a variance from
the city manager in order to obtain a certificate of occupancy. Variances will be reviewed on a case-by-case
basis and the property owner will be required to demonstrate how alternate landscaping measures will reduces
water consumption for the site. If a variance is approved it will only be until such time as vegetative roots are
established for new landscaping.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/448
11.4 Required landscaping.
a. General. In all areas other than single-family and two-family dwellings, at least ten percent of the gross lot area excluding
rights-of-way shall be maintained as landscaped area and shall comply with the following standards:
1. All required perimeter buffers and off-street parking interior landscaping shall be included in the overall minimum
ten percent of gross site landscaping.
2. No tree may be planted within five feet of any impermeable surface or area, unless approved by the director of
community development or a greater distance is required due to tree species.
3. The existing natural landscape character shall be preserved to the extent reasonable and feasible. In an area of
the street frontage containing a stand of trees, the developer shall use good-faith efforts to preserve such trees, and
also shall comply with the tree preservation requirements in this Code.
4. No unapproved landscaping, object, structure, or sign shall be placed within a visibility easement.
5. A minimum of one-third of all trees and shrubs required to be planted as part of perimeter buffers (right-of-way,
compatibility or incompatibility), parking lot landscaping, and single-family residential landscaping shall be droughttolerant
species. These drought-tolerant species shall be chosen from those noted as such in the approved plant list
in this section. This requirement shall not apply to ground-cover.
b. Perimeter buffer landscape requirements.
1. Buffer types.
(a) Right-of-way. Right-of-way (ROW) buffers shall be provided along all street frontages except alleys. ROW
buffers shall not be required for individual single-family or duplex dwellings.
(b) Compatibility. Compatibility buffers shall be provided between all compatible use types, except the case
where single family residential subdivisions are adjacent to other single family residential subdivisions.
(c) Incompatibility. Incompatibility buffers shall be provided between all incompatible use types or
incompatible zoning districts.
Figure 1. Buffer Types
2. Trees and shrubs. Trees and shrubs shall be provided in all perimeter buffers in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) Trees.
(1) ROW buffers. One tree per 50 lineal feet.
(2) Compatibility buffers. No tree requirement.
(3) Incompatibility buffer. One tree per 50 lineal feet.
(b) Shrubs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/448
(1) ROW buffers. One evergreen shrub per three lineal feet, for a maximum of 75 percent of the ROW
frontage.
(2) Compatibility buffers. No shrub requirement.
(3) Incompatibility buffers. No shrub requirement.
3. Walls and fences. If a masonry wall is required within an incompatibility buffer or otherwise provided as part of
the proposed landscaping, the wall shall adhere to the masonry wall standards provided in this Code.
4. Area measurement. The width of access ways that traverse required perimeter landscape buffers shall be
included in the calculation of linear dimension.
5. ROW buffer.
(a) Width. The total width of the buffer along streets, thoroughfares, or other means of vehicular access shall
be ten feet.
(b) Corner lots at the intersection of minor arterials or major arterials. Corner lots at the intersection of minor
arterials or major arterials with collector streets or larger thoroughfares shall provide a minimum landscape area
of 600 square feet located at the intersection corner of the lot.
(c) Planting pattern for perimeter ROW buffer. At least 75 percent of the frontage of parking lots adjacent to a
public right-of-way, within the street yard shall be screened from public streets with evergreen shrubs attaining a
minimum height of three feet, a low masonry wall of a minimum height of three feet, a landscaped earthen berm
of a minimum height of three feet or a combination of the above with a minimum combined height of three feet.
A wall used for parking lot screening should be accompanied with landscape planting in the form of low shrubs
and groundcover to soften the appearance of the wall.
(d) Landscape overhang. Automobile bumpers shall not overhang into the ROW buffer. If the parking stalls
adjacent to the ROW buffer are 18 feet deep, an additional two feet of landscape area shall be required. The
additional two feet of landscape area shall not be included in calculating the required ROW buffer width
requirements.
(e) Additional groundcover. The applicant is also encouraged to plant a variety of ornamental trees and
flowers in addition to the required plantings. Any permeable surface not occupied by trees, shrubs, planting
beds. Signs, or other permitted fixtures shall be surrounded with turf or other living groundcover. Gravel, bark
mulch, or other similar materials are not acceptable.
(f) Sight visibility triangles. Sight visibility triangles shall be maintained at all street, alley or private drive
intersections in accordance with the city's sight triangle guidelines.
6. Compatibility buffer. Compatibility buffers shall serve to provide a minor transitional buffer between similar land
uses. The minimum width of a compatibility buffer is five feet.
7. Incompatibility buffer. An incompatibility buffer shall be required between all incompatible use types or
incompatible tracts in a planned development in accordance with the requirements of Table 1, Incompatibility Buffer
Standards.
TABLE 11.4-1. INCOMPATIBILITY BUFFER STANDARDS
Buffer Type Width Wall/Fencing Type
Required
Maximum Tree
Spacing
Type 1 10-ft. Masonry Wall (1) 50-ft. O.C.
Type 2 15-ft. Masonry Wall 50-ft. O.C.
(1) Living Screen may be considered as an alternate to a masonry wall for a Type 1 Incompatibility Buffer. The
living screen shall be considered in accordance with the alternative landscape plan provisions contained herein.
(a) Landscape requirements. An incompatibility buffer shall consist of a continuous, opaque landscape
barrier. The landscape barrier shall either be a hedge, fence or a wall. Shrubs and trees required pursuant
to other sections of this Code shall be provided in addition to the wall/fencing type requirements shown in
Table 1.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/448
(b) Determining incompatibility buffer type. The type of incompatibility buffer required shall be the
highest buffer type based on the height or use difference between adjacent uses, in accordance with Table
5.4-3, Required Incompatibility Buffer Types-Height and Table 5.4-4, Required Incompatibility Buffer Types-
Use. In the case of a conflict, the most restrictive buffer type shall be required.
TABLE 11.4-2 REQUIRED INCOMPATIBILITY BUFFER TYPES-HEIGHT
Building Height Difference Between
Adjacent Uses
Required Buffer Type
14-28 feet Type 1
Greater than 28 feet Type 2
TABLE 11.4-3 REQUIRED INCOMPATIBILITY BUFFER TYPES-USE
Existing Use Type Proposed Use Type Required Buffer Type
Single-Family Multifamily Type 1
Residential (All types) Commercial Type 1
Residential (All types) Institutional/Public Type 1
Residential (All types) Industrial Type 2
Residential (All types) Utility Type 2
c. Off-street parking landscaping requirements. Off-street parking and interior vehicular use areas shall be subject to the
following landscaping requirements. Plantings required by this Section's perimeter buffer landscape requirements shall not be
used to satisfy these requirements.
1. General. The required percentage of interior parking lot landscaping shall be devoted to living landscaping which
includes grass, ground cover, plants, shrubs and trees.
2. Required percentage of planting area. There shall be eight square feet of permeable interior landscaping for
each parking space. This permeable space shall be grass, shrubs, living groundcovers, trees or a combination of
these materials. Gravel, bark mulch or other similar materials are not acceptable.
3. Exemption. Areas used for parking or vehicular storage which are under, on, or within buildings are exempt from
these standards.
4. Parking landscape islands. Interior areas of parking lots shall contain landscape islands located so as to best
relieve the expanse of paving. Landscape islands must be located no farther apart than every 12 parking spaces and
at the terminus of all rows of parking. Terminal islands shall contain at least one tree. The remainder shall be
landscaped with shrubs, turf, ground cover or other appropriate material not to exceed three feet in height.
Landscaping islands shall have a minimum size of ten feet by 18 feet measured from inside of curb to inside of curb
and shall be separated from vehicular use areas by a six-inch non-mountable curb.
5. Trees. A minimum of 75 percent of all trees required in the interior planting area shall be canopy trees.
Ornamental Trees substituted at a rate of 2:1, may count as one required tree, not to exceed 25 percent of the total
required trees. Where only three or fewer trees are required, those trees shall all be canopy trees. The minimum
requirement for canopy trees shall not be less than one tree for every ten parking spaces.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/448
6. Wheelstops. Wheelstops shall be installed no closer than two feet from the landscaped area to prevent cars from
parking too close to trees or damaging shrubs and screens and to allow routine landscape maintenance.
7. Parking structures. Perimeter planters shall be provided along the exterior of parking structures located within
500 feet of a public right-of-way or residential zoning district. Planters shall provide a total of one-half square foot of
planting area for each linear foot of facade per parking level. Planting areas may be arranged in linear fashion or
clustered at intervals or on levels, and shall be provided with permanent irrigation to permit watering of plant
materials. The perimeter planter requirement may be altered if in conflict with the architectural character of the
structure, subject to approval of an alternative landscape plan.
d. Single-family residential development requirements.
1. Applicability. The provisions in this section titled, “single family residential development requirements” shall not
be applicable to lots zoned R-39 (39,000 square feet) or larger.
2. Individual lot requirements. The following landscaping requirements must be met prior to request for final building
inspection:
(a) Planting of at least four shade trees per dwelling unit, of at least three-inch caliper and seven feet tall;
(b) Mandatory trees shall be a minimum of five feet from all property lines;
(c) Sodding of entire yard, consisting of front, side and rear; and
(d) Planting of at least 12 shrubs (five-gallon minimum) in the front yard.
(e) An automatic irrigation system shall be installed to maintain all required landscaping. All plant material
shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition, and must be replaced with plant material of similar
variety and size if damaged, destroyed or removed.
3. Entryway areas. A minimum landscape area of 900 square feet shall be located at the intersection corner of
residential subdivisions and at the main entrance to the subdivision. This landscape area shall provide a minimum
distance of 40 feet from the projected corner of the intersection on both sides. No trees shall be planted in this area.
4. Masonry wall required. Unless otherwise approved by the city council, a masonry screening shall be provided
along the rear and/or side property lines of residential districts when the area backs up to and/or sides a street which
is designated on the city's thoroughfare plan as a thoroughfare. Screening walls shall be not less than six feet in
height and designed in accordance with city requirements. A living screen may be proposed as an alternative
landscape plan.
11.5 General landscaping requirements and standards. The following criteria and standards shall apply to landscape materials
and installation.
a. Quality.
1. Conformance. The best professional practices of the American Society of Landscape Architects, the International
Society of Arboriculture and the American Nursery and Landscape Association regarding planting, installation,
trimming, and fertilization, shall apply to this section. In addition, plant materials used in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter shall conform to the standards of the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-
2004, or equivalent thereof.
2. Approved plant list. Plant materials shall be from the City of Sachse Approved Plant List contained in this
section. Plant materials must be suitable for local soil conditions and climate. Specifically, plant materials should have
high heat tolerance and lower water consumption, where possible.
3. Material. Grass seed, sod and other material shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests and
insects.
4. Species diversification. Plant material selection for any area of a lot shall provide species diversity so as to
minimize impacts from species-specific disease. No more than 25 percent of any tree type (e.g., canopy tree,
ornamental tree) shall be of the same species. A minimum of four different species shall be used as canopy trees and
a minimum of four different species shall be used as ornamental trees. The various species shall not be grouped in
close proximity and should be distributed throughout the lot.
b. Plant measurements.
1. Canopy trees.
(a) Minimum height. Canopy trees shall have a minimum height of 12 feet at time of installation.
(b) Minimum caliper size. Canopy trees shall be a minimum of three-inch caliper as measured 12 inches
above ground.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/448
2. Ornamental trees.
(a) Minimum height. Ornamental trees shall have a minimum height of eight feet at time of installation.
(b) Minimum container size. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of 30 gallon container size.
3. Shrubs.
(a) Minimum container size. The minimum container size for shrubs shall be three gallons.
(b) Minimum height. Shrubs shall have a minimum height of 24 inches at time of installation and shall obtain a
minimum height of 36 inches within two years of planting.
(c) Minimum spacing. Shrubs shall be planted at a minimum spacing of three feet on center and capable of
achieving a solid visual screen within one year of planting.
c. Plant Material Substitutions.
1. Due to seasonal planting issues and a lack of plant availability, approved landscape plans may require minor
revisions. Revisions to approved plans shall be approved by the director of community development or his/her
designee.
2. Ornamental trees may be substituted for canopy trees at a ratio of two ornamental trees to one canopy tree.
d. Proximity to overhead utilities. To minimize conflicts with overhead power lines and overhead utility installations, the
applicant may substitute trees with a mature height of 25 feet or less for canopy trees when planting within ten feet from either
side of overhead power lines.
e. Shrub beds. Beds shall be mulched with a minimum two-inch layer of shredded hardwood or cypress mulch. Irrigation for
shrub beds shall be separated from turf areas.
f. Maintenance. Every owner and person in control of property shall keep landscaped areas in a well-maintained, safe, clean,
and attractive condition at all times. Such maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other such materials or plants not a part of the
landscape.
2. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition, and must be replaced within 30 days
with plant material of similar variety and size (size not to be smaller than the minimum required by this section at the
time of replacement) if diseased, damaged, destroyed, or removed. If replacement cannot or should not be effected
within the 30-day period due to seasonal temperatures, an extension may be approved by the director of community
development if requested in writing, stating when such planting is to be accomplished. No planting delay of over 90
days shall occur. When replacement of landscape material conflicts with watering restrictions, such surety for
replacement of landscape materials shall be posted in an amount equal to 135 percent of the total cost of the
landscaping.
3. Turf, grass and ground cover shall be mowed, trimmed and edged, and maintained at the proper height.
4. Proper pruning shall be done.
5. Watering shall be done on a regular basis, subject to any city drought contingency plan in effect at the time.
6. Landscape lighting shall be maintained in working order.
7. Irrigation systems shall be maintained in working order.
8. Property owners and persons in control shall maintain and keep clean property and areas situated between the
property and the paved portion of any street, alley or right-of-way, as well as any abutting waterway.
9. The property owner shall be responsible for any landscaping, irrigation and maintenance of any right-of-way area
between the property line and the curb line. In the case of new development, turf grass/ground cover shall be installed
in the right-of-way area between the property line and the curb line and be consistent in material and/or type with the
installed turf grass/ground cover on the adjacent property.
g. Landscaping on or affecting public property.
1. The city has the authority to plant, preserve, spray, trim, or remove any tree, shrub, or plant on any parkway,
alley, or public ground belonging to the city to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or break any branch of any tree or shrub or injure in any way the bark of
such tree or shrub growing on public property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/448
3. The city has the authority to trim or remove, or to order the trimming or removal, of vegetation that conflicts or
interferes with the delivery of public services, or that creates a hazard or nuisance to public rights-of-way or
easements.
h. Irrigation. All landscape areas and open space shall be provided with an adequate, inconspicuous, and complete-coverage
automatic irrigation system. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated according to the following standards:
1. Irrigation systems shall be calibrated and designed to provide the appropriate amount of water that relates to the
plant species, and shall not over-water.
2. All planted areas shall be irrigated.
3. All irrigation systems shall be equipped with rain and freeze sensors and shall comply with backflow and crossconnection
regulations.
4. Drip or soaker irrigation shall be used in all vegetated areas exclusive of turf grass areas.
5. No control valve shall be located within an easement for transmission towers.
11.6 Screening standards.
a. General. The placement of natural landscape materials (e.g., trees, shrubs, and hedges) is the preferred method for
buffering differing land uses, for providing a transition between adjacent properties, and for screening the view of any parking or
storage area, refuse collection, utility enclosures, or other service area visible from a public street, alley, or pedestrian area.
Plants may be used with fences or berms to achieve the desired screening or buffering effect. Plant material should be mature
enough at the time of planting to provide an effective buffer or screen, and should be planted in an appropriate location to allow
for desired growth within a reasonable period of time.
When used to screen an activity area such as a parking lot, landscaping shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists or pedestrians
or interfere with public safety.
b. Screening of service and off-street loading spaces. All service areas and designated off-street loading spaces on a site shall
be screened from all public and more restrictive, conforming adjacent uses. Screening shall comply with the following standards:
1. To the maximum extent feasible, service and off-street loading areas shall not be visible from public streets.
2. Service and off-street loading areas shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and landscaping
so that visual and acoustic impacts are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets.
3. Service areas shall be concealed by a method of screening comprised of materials at least six feet in height
measured from the horizontal plane passing through the nearest point of the off-street loading space or service area.
Such screening may be provided by using one of any of the following methods; however, off-street loading spaces
located adjacent to residentially zoned property or existing residential uses shall utilize a masonry wall per the
requirements in this section.
(a) Masonry wall pursuant to the standards set forth in this section.
(b) Living screen in accordance with the standards contained herein.
c. Dumpster and trash compactor screening.
1. Dumpsters shall be enclosed on three sides with six-foot masonry walls constructed of the same materials and
finishes as the buildings; a solid double metal gate shall be required on the fourth side, and shall be kept closed at all
times other than for immediate access. The opening shall not face, or shall be screened from, a public street or
access easement.
2. An eight-foot wall constructed of the same materials and finishes as the buildings shall be provided around
compactors.
3. Screens are not required for dumpsters in nonresidential developments when located in the service area and
screened by the buildings, wing wall or screening wall from public view.
4. Dumpsters are required and shall be identified on a site plan for all developments that require a site plan. The
specific screening requirements specified in this section shall be placed on the site plan.
d. Masonry wall standards.
1. Design and materials. A masonry screening wall shall consist of a reinforced wall of the same materials, color,
and texture as used on the primary structure on the site, having a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height
of eight feet. A graphic detail and schedule of materials shall be shown on the plan. The masonry wall shall be
designed and built in accordance with the City of Sachse Standard Construction Details; the designs shall be signed
by a structural engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/448
2. Engineering requirements. Plans and specifications for the wall shall be submitted with the civil plans and
approved by the city engineer.
3. Installation of landscaping between wall and alley prohibited. Where a masonry screening wall erected pursuant
to this section abuts an alley, any required landscaping shall be installed between the nonresidential use and the
screening wall, rather than between the screening wall and the alley.
4. Maintenance easement. A minimum five-foot wall maintenance easement shall be required within residential lots
that abut the masonry screening wall. Wall maintenance easements shall be dedicated to or owned, and maintained,
by the homeowners' association.
5. Conflict with easements. If the placement of the wall conflicts with an easement, the wall shall not encroach upon
the easement, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.
6. Additional requirements.
(a) The wall shall be designed so that water will drain under, through, and away from the wall on all sides. No
ponding of water shall be allowed.
(b) Unless otherwise constrained by topography, curvature, and location of infrastructure, where walls are
aligned with residential alleys, the face of the wall or column shall be a minimum of one foot from the property
line.
(c) Masonry wall construction shall be in accordance with City of Sachse Standard Construction Details.
(d) Slip-form or similar type walls are prohibited.
e. Living screen standards. If a living screen is authorized, it shall consist of a berm and plant materials and shall comply with
the following standards:
1. The berm shall have a minimum side slope of four to one and a minimum crown width of one and one-half feet.
2. The berm shall undulate from one foot to the maximum height not to exceed five feet in height.
3. Large evergreen-type shrubs shall be selected from the approved planting materials list and planted in
accordance with specifications herein. In addition, the plant materials shall:
(a) Be located in a bed that is of a width suitable for the required plant spacing, but at least five feet wide. The
director of community development or his/her designee may require a wider bed width depending on type,
species and/or growing habit.
(b) Be planted in staggered rows over the entire length of the bed unless the director of community
development or his/her designee approves an alternative planting density as being capable of providing a solid
screen within one year of planting.
(c) Be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting and provides the required visual barrier.
4. A wrought iron fence or similar steel fence having a minimum height of not less than six feet nor more than eight
feet in combination with evergreen plant material is required if a living screen is proposed.
11.7 Tree preservation.
a. Tree preservation. There is hereby created and established a tree preservation program to provide a valuable amenity to
the urban environment and to establish terms and provisions to apply to real property within the city, as follows.
b. Definitions. Terms in this section shall have the following definitions.
Caliper. Diameter of the trunk of a newly installed tree (planted within the previous year) as measured 12 inches above grade, or
the diameter of an existing tree measured at the DBH of four and one-half feet above the ground, measured from the root flare at
the base of the tree.
Buildable area. The actual base area of a building and an area not to exceed six feet around the foundation necessary for
construction and grade transitions.
DBH. Diameter at breast height (DBH), is the tree trunk diameter measured in inches at height of four and one-half feet above
ground level.
Tree. Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which will attain a trunk diameter of two inches or more when measured at a
point four and one-half foot above ground level as measured from the root flare, and which will attain a minimum mature height of
12 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/448
Tree, protected. A tree as listed in the Protected Tree List, subsection i., Figure 1, that has a diameter of six inches or greater
measured at four and one-half foot above ground. For a multi-trunk tree, the diameter shall be the total diameter of the largest
trunk plus one-half of the diameter(s) of each additional trunk.
Tree, unprotected. Any existing tree that is not a protected tree per the definition of “protected tree” in this section.
c. Enforcement responsibility. The City Manager of the City of Sachse shall designate a member of the city's staff who shall
have the responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this article. References herein made to the performance of certain
functions by the city shall be deemed references to performance by the city manager's designee.
d. Applicability. This section shall apply to the following properties.
1. All real property upon which any protected tree is located, excluding developed single-family and two-family
residential property.
2. All vacant and undeveloped real property.
3. All real property to be subdivided or re-subdivided, including record plats and replats.
4. The yard areas of all developed property, excluding developed single family and two-family residential property.
5. All easements and rights-of-way, excluding those included on a record plat and filed in the plat records of the
county.
e. Exceptions. The following exceptions from the terms and provisions of this section are hereby authorized and granted.
1. The terms and conditions of this section allow trees located in necessary public rights-of-way and easements to
be removed without a tree removal permit and prior to the issuance of a building permit.
2. In the event that any protected tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to
endanger the public health, welfare or safety, and requires immediate removal without delay, authorization for removal
may be given by the parks and recreation director, or designee, and the protected tree may then be removed without
obtaining a written permit as herein required.
3. During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, storm, flood or other act of God, the requirements of this
section may be waived as may be deemed necessary by the city manager.
4. All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this section only in relation
to those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee, that are so planted and growing for the sale or
intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of the licensee's business.
5. Utility companies franchised by the city may remove, cut or prune protected trees that endanger public safety
and welfare by interfering with utility service, except that where the trees are on properties developed for single-family
or duplex use, disposal of the trees shall be at the option of the property owner(s).
6. The mowing, clearing and grubbing of brush located within or under the drip lines of protected trees shall be
allowed, provided the mowing, clearing or grubbing is accomplished by hand or by mowers. The use of bulldozers,
loaders or other construction or earth moving equipment for this purpose shall not be allowed.
7. For recreational property or uses, such as golf courses, ball fields, etc., of the property shall include that portion
of the property necessary for the construction of the recreational improvements, including sufficient adjacent area to
allow the normal operation of construction equipment.
8. Tree mitigation is not required for any tree located within the buildable area of a lot or site as defined herein.
9. The following species of trees are exempt from the protection and preservation requirements stated within this
section except when located in a floodplain or watercourse as defined by the city or other government agency and
when these species have a DBH of ten inches or greater.
Species Common Name
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Populus spp. Poplar, Cottonwood
Mesquite
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/448
Prosopis glandulosa
Gleditsia triacanthos Honey Locust
Maclura pomifera Bois d'Arc
f. Tree management plan required.
1. Along with the submittal of an application for approval of a detailed development plan, site plan, subdivision plat,
clearing and grading plan, erosion control plan or public improvement construction plan, a tree management plan
shall be submitted to the community development department and any lot one acre or greater must have a plan
submitted by a landscape architect. See subsection i. for tree preservation and mitigation requirements.
2. The tree management plan shall:
(a) Show the location, species, and caliper of all protected trees.
(b) Identify those trees proposed to be removed and those to be protected.
(c) Show the methods of preservation of the trees to be protected.
(d) Show the location of proposed building pads, drives, parking, and all easements which will affect existing
trees on the site.
(e) Show the location of all floodplain limits, and general grading limits of cut and fill.
3. The tree management plan is not required to protect trees that are:
(a) Injured, dying, diseased or infested with harmful insects;
(b) In danger of falling, interferes with utility service or creates unsafe vision clearance;
(c) In any manner creating a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare
or safety.
g. General requirements related to protected trees.
1. No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or effectively destroy through damaging, any
protected tree on any real property within the city without an approved tree management plan as provided herein.
2. Under no circumstances shall the clear cutting of protected trees on any real property within the city be allowed
prior to the approval of a tree management plan for the property.
3. Unless otherwise approved by the city, no construction or construction-related activity shall occur under the
canopy or drip line of any protected tree or group of protected trees.
4. No person, directly or indirectly, shall replant, relocate, transfer or move from one location to another any
protected tree on any real property within the city without approval from the city.
5. All protected trees are required to be protected from the harmful effects of nearby construction. In order to insure
survival of protected trees during the construction process the following shall be required:
(a) Prior to construction or land development, the developer shall clearly mark with three-inch wide red ribbon
or tape all protected trees within 30 feet of a public right-of-way, public easement or buildable lot area, as
included on the applicable approved and filed recorded plat.
(b) Prior to construction or land development of the subdivision, the developer shall establish designated
parking areas for the parking and maintenance of all vehicles, trailers, construction equipment and related items
and designated stockpile areas for the storage of construction supplies and materials during construction of the
subdivision. The location and dimensions of said designated areas shall be clearly identified on both subdivision
construction and site plans and shall be approved by the city prior to construction or land development of the
subdivision.
(c) Designated parking and stockpile areas shall be completely fenced with chain-link fencing and gated for
safety purpose and to separate protected trees from the construction area and related construction activity. The
designated parking and stockpile areas may be combined into one fenced area provided the preservation of
protected trees is not adversely affected or jeopardized.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/448
(d) Supplies and pipe and other items that are customarily unloaded where installed shall be required to be
stored within the designated stockpile areas.
(e) During construction, the developer shall prohibit the cleaning of equipment or materials and/or the disposal
of any waste material, including, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc., under the
canopy or drip line of any protected tree or group of protected trees.
(f) If a foundation, street or alley pavement, utility line, on-site sewerage facility, pool, tennis court, patio,
sidewalk, drive or parking lot, as approved by the city, must be constructed within the drip line of a protected
tree, it shall be constructed no closer than five feet from the trunk of the protected tree and the canopy of the
tree pruned appropriately to balance the effect of damage to the roots.
6. During construction no attachments or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be
attached to any protected tree.
7. To accommodate grade changes of six inches or greater, a retaining wall or tree well of rock, brick, landscape
timbers or other approved materials shall be constructed around the tree no closer than the drip line of the tree. The
top of the retaining wall or tree well shall be constructed at the new grade.
h. Enforcement and penalty.
1. Enforcement.
(a) The city manager or his designee shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Each tree removed or transplanted without a permit shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Violation of this ordinance shall not constitute an exemption to the replacement requirements of this
ordinance. The removal of protected trees shall be mitigated according to requirements contained herein.
2. Penalty.
(a) Any person violating a provision of this chapter, upon conviction, is guilty of an offense punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500.00 for each incident. Each tree upon which there exists a violation of this chapter or
failure to abide by, or comply with, any provision or requirement of this chapter, shall constitute a separate
incident and subject the offender to separate penalty.
i. Tree preservation and mitigation.
1. Protected trees, as listed below in Figure 1, that are healthy and growing on a site must be preserved or
replaced at the rate of one hundred percent of the lost caliper inches.
Figure 1. Protected Tree List
Species Common Name
Carya illinoinensis Pecan
Ilex vomitoria Yaupon Holly
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum
Magnolia grandiflora Southern Magnolia
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak
Shumard Oak
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/448
Quercus shumardii
Quercus texana Texas Red Oak
Quercus virginiana Live Oak
Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
Quercus spp. Oaks (all others not listed)
Ulmus americana American Elm
Ulmus crassifolia Cedar Elm
Bumelia lunuginosa Chittamwood
Diospyros virginiana Common Persimmon
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green Ash
Juglans nigra Black Walnut
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar
Lagerstroemia indica Crape Myrtle
Prunus Mexicana Mexican Plum
Sophora affinis Eve's Necklace
Pinus spp. Pines
Pyrus calleryana Bradford Pear
Existing trees may be used to fulfill the tree planting requirements specified in other city ordinances provided that
such trees are in a healthy and growing condition. When existing trees are used to fulfill screening and landscape
requirements, existing tree locations shall be accepted, and the formal spacing requirements may be waived.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/448
2. Required large tree plantings may count towards the mitigation of lost caliper inches. The minimum tree caliper
inch specified in the landscape requirements supersedes the minimum replacement tree size, specified in this section.
3. If, due to the size, shape or topography of the intended site of development a tree mitigation plan for the site of
development is unworkable, the City may approve a tree management plan that provides for the mitigation of
protected trees through either the planting of replacement trees at an off-site location in private open spaces, or the
payment to a city reforestation and tree management fund of an amount equal to 100 percent of the replacement cost.
4. The city manager shall determine the monetary value of a replacement tree by contacting landscape companies,
plant nurseries, or garden centers for the price of a four-inch caliper tree installed, then averaging that cost to
determine the mean cost of a four-inch tree; and then dividing by four to determine the mean cost of a one-inch tree
installed. The mean cost of a one-inch tree installed is then multiplied by the required number of replacement tree
inches proposed for fee payment in lieu of planting. Said formula is represented as follows:
((A+B+C+D)/4)/4* X = Replacement Tree Escrow Fee, where A, B, C, and D represent the installed cost of a fourinch
tree from four sources, and where X represents the required number of replacement tree inches.
j. Waivers.
1. The city council after conducting a public hearing, shall hear appeals from decisions of the city manager and may
approve a tree removal permit and approve a waiver to all or a portion of the requirements to provide for replacement
trees for the following:
(a) A public or recreational use or structure but not including rights-of-way or easements.
(b) A private use that usually requires large areas of open space (impervious surface).
(c) Development of heavily forested sites where the strict compliance of the requirements of this chapter, as
amended, will unreasonably burden the use of the property.
k. Tree care. There is hereby created and established a tree care program to provide full power and authority over the care of
all trees, plants and shrubs located within public rights-of-ways, parks and public places and aids in the proper growth of a
landscape program to enhance the beauty of the city.
l. Care of public trees.
1. The city manager shall have the responsibility, to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs
within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, parks, and public grounds, as may be
necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. This
shall include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or any municipal water or sewer line, or
any tree that is affected by fungus, insect, or other pest disease.
2. Every owner of any tree or shrub overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall, in accordance to the
city pruning guidelines, prune the branches so that such branches shall not [severely] obstruct the light from any
street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection; will not obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks;
will not obstruct vision of traffic signs; and will not obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection. If the property
owner fails to do so, the parks and recreation director and/or his or her designee shall give ten days' notice to the
property owners to take action, otherwise the city shall have the right to remove or prune any tree or shrub on private
property which threatens the safety of those who may use a city street or city park. A fee shall be assessed for this
service on an hourly basis. Fees will be based on the current hourly wages of city maintenance workers.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to attach any cable, wire, rope sign or any object to any
city tree, plant or shrub without written permission from the city manager.
m. Tree preservation board.
1. Board membership. The tree preservation board shall consist of the members of the parks and recreation
commission.
2. Term of office. The board shall elect its own officers and each officer shall serve for a term of two years or until a
successor is appointed.
3. Meetings. The board shall meet a minimum of four times each year. All stated meetings shall be open to the
public. The board chairman may schedule additional meetings as needed.
4. Officers. The board shall annually select one of the members to serve as chair, and may appoint a second
member to serve as vice-chair, and may appoint a third member to serve as secretary.
5. Duties. The duties of the tree preservation board shall include:
(a) To review the tree management plan, tree preservation and mitigation guidelines, and the tree care
program as may be necessary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/448
(b) To promote the protection of healthy trees and provide guidelines for the replacement and/or replanting of
trees necessarily removed during construction, development, and redevelopment.
(c) To uphold rules and regulations governing the protection and preservation of native or established trees
within the city, which provide for purification of air and water, provide for shade, windbreaks and the cooling of
air, provide for open space and more efficient drainage of land, thus reducing the effects on soil erosion.
(d) To study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update periodically a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposal of public trees and shrubs on city property.
(e) To review and recommend specific beautification projects and public awareness programs to the parks
and recreation department, city manager and/or city council as may be appropriate.
(f) Coordinating and promoting Arbor Day activities.
(g) Submitting the annual application to renew the tree city USA designation; and
(h) Other duties that may be assigned by the city council.
11.8 Alternative landscape plan.
a. Purpose and intent. An Alternative Landscape Plan (ALP) is intended to promote the preservation and incorporation of
existing native vegetation or specimen trees, or for the innovative use of plant material and improved site design.
b. Applicability. Any landscape plan application may be eligible to apply for an ALP.
1. Design principles. To qualify for consideration an application for an ALP shall demonstrate compliance with the
following principles.
(a) Innovative use of plant materials and design techniques in response to unique characteristics of the
specific site.
(b) Preservation and/or incorporation of existing native vegetation.
(c) Use of a variety of plant material in excess of minimum requirements.
(d) Incorporation of naturalistic design principles, such as variations in topography, meandering or curvilinear
plantings, and grouping of dominant plant materials in a manner consistent with existing native vegetation.
(e) Integration of landscaping with on-site pedestrian facilities as well as potential connections to existing or
proposed adjacent pedestrian facilities.
(f) Use of additional shade trees to create a greater canopy effect.
(g) A greater degree of compatibility with surrounding uses than a standard landscape plan would offer,
provided the resulting landscape conforms to the design principles and guidelines of this section.
(h) Use of water-efficient irrigation systems and xeriscaping at appropriate locations.
(i) Incorporation of specific environmental attributes such as soil, hydrology, and vegetative communities
unique to the site, and which are compatible with environmental features on-site and on adjacent properties.
2. Allowable modifications to standards. The standards that can be modified through the use of an ALP are listed
below. Any standard not listed herein shall not be eligible to be modified through an ALP.
(a) Perimeter buffer landscape requirements; trees and shrubs.
(b) Perimeter buffer landscape requirements, ROW buffer width.
(c) Perimeter buffer landscape requirements, compatibility buffer standards.
(d) Perimeter buffer landscape requirements, incompatibility buffer standards.
(e) Single-family residential development requirements, entryway areas.
(f) Single-family residential development requirements, masonry wall requirements.
(g) Dumpster and trash compactor screening.
c. Application requirements. An application for an ALP shall be in a form established by the director of community development
or his/her designee, and shall include a narrative and any necessary supporting documentation that clearly details and
demonstrates compliance with this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/448
d. Approval. ALPs must be submitted in conjunction with a landscape plan application subject to the following requirements.
1. Required findings. An ALP shall only be approved upon finding that:
(a) There are unique characteristics of the property, site design or use that warrant special consideration to
modify or deviate from the requirements of this section and that these characteristics are not self-created.
(b) The ALP meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of this section, while recognizing the unusual site
design or use restraints on the property.
(c) Approval of the ALP will provide for both increased consistency and compatibility with adjacent projects
located in the general vicinity of the property.
(d) The ALP conforms to the requirements of this section and no modifications are requested except those
explicitly provided for in this Section.
2. Approval process. Application for an ALP shall be reviewed in accordance with the approval process set forth in
this Code.
3. Appeals. If an application for an ALP is denied by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant may appeal
the decision to the city council. An appeal shall be filed in writing with the director of planning not more than 20 days
after the rendering of the decision or action taken by the planning and zoning commission. The city council shall vote
by simple majority vote of those members present at the meeting to either approve or deny the appeal, which decision
shall be final and binding.
11.9 Approved plant list. The following is a list of plants and trees recommended for required landscape areas. Plants and
trees marked with an asterisk require lower water needs.
TABLE 11.9-1 GRASSES (TURF)
Common Name Botanical Name
Bermuda Grass Cynodon dactylon
Big Blue Stem Andropogon gerardii
Blue gamma* Bouteloua gracilis
Buffalo Grass* Buchloe dactyloides
Eastern gamma grass Tripsacum dactyloides
Green, Sprangletop Leptochloa dubia
Indian Grass Sorghastrum nutans
Little Blue Stem Schizachyrium scoparium
Muhly Deer Muhlenbergia lindheimer
Muhly Seep Muhlenbergia reverchonii
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/448
Prairie Dropseed Sporobolus heterolepis
Prairie Wild Rye Elymus canadensis
St. Augustine Stenotaphrum secundatum
Zoysia Grass Zoysia sp.
TABLE 11.9-2 GRASSES (ORNAMENTAL)
Common Name Botanical Name
Big Bluestem* Andropogon geradii
Muhly Grass* Muehlenbergia lindheimeri
Pampas Grass* Cortaderia selloana
Sideoats gramma* Boutelowa curtipendula
Silver Bluestem* B. laguroides
Spithead Bluestem* Andropogon ternarius
Switchgrass* Panicum virgatum
TABLE 11.9-3 GROUNDCOVERS
Common Name Botanical Name
Ajuga Ajuga reptans
Asiatic Jasmine Trachelospermum asiaticum
Avens White* Geum Canadense
English Ivy Hedera helix
Frog fruit* Phyla nodiflora
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/448
Horseherb* Calyptocarpus vialis
Liriope Liriope muscari
Monkey Grass* Ophiopogon japonicus
Mountain Pea* Leguminosae
Pigeonberry* Rivina humilis
Santolina* Santolina sp.
Snake Herb* Dyschoriste linearis
Trailing Juniper* Juniperus sp.
Vinca Vinca major
Water Clover Marsilea macropoda
Wintercreeper Euonymous Euonymous fortunei
Wood Violet* Viola sp.
Woody Stemodia Stemodia lanata
TABLE 11.9-4 VINES
Common Name Botanical Name
Alerian Ivy Hedera canariensis
Boston Ivy Parthenocissus tricuspidata
Carolina Jessamine Gelsemium sempervirens
Clematis Clematis sp.
Confederate Jasmine Trachelospermum jasminoides
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/448
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens
Coralvine* Antigonon leptopus
Crossvine Bignonia capreolata
English Ivy Hedera helix
Fig Ivy Ficus pumila (repens)
Ground Ivy* Glechoma hederacea
Lady Banksia Rose* Rosa banksia
Silverlace Vine Polygonum aubertii
Trumpet vine Campsis radicans
Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus
Wisteria* Wisteria sp.
TABLE 11.9-5 DWARF SHRUBS (1 to 3 feet)
Common Name Botanical Name
Coral Berry* Symphoricarpos orbiculatus
Dwarf Burford Holly* Ilex cornuta rotunda burfordii
Dwarf Chinese Holly* Ilex cornuta rotunda
Dwarf Pittosporum* Pittosporum tobira wheeleri
Dwarf Yaupon Holly* Ilex vomitoria nana
Nandina: Harbour Dwarf, Gulf Stream,
nana*
Nandina sp.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/448
Red Yucca* Hesperaloe parvifolia
Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis
Sacahuista Nolina texana
Yucca Yucca sp.
TABLE 11.9-6 SMALL SHRUBS (3 to 5 feet)
Common Name Botanical Name
American Beautyberry Callicarpa americana
Aromatic Sumac* Rhus aromatica
Black Dalea Dalea frutescens
Bridal Wreath Spirea Spirea cantoniensis
China Rose Rosa chinensis
Damianita Compositae chrysactinia mexicana
Desert Spoon Dasylirion wheeleri
Drawf Burning Bush* Euonymus alata ‘Compacta'
Dwarf Burford Holly* Ilex cornuta rotunda burfordii
Dwarf Yaupon Holly* Ilex vomitoria ‘Nana'
Edward Goucher Abelia Abelia goucher
Flame Anisacanthus Anisacanthus q. wrightii
Flowering Quince Chaenomeles japonica
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/448
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora
Grayleaf Cotoneaster Cotoneaster glaucophylla
Indian hawthorne Raphiolepsis indica
Japanese Boxwood* Buxus japonica
Juniper* Juniperus sp.
Knockout Rose Rosa ‘Radcon'
Leatherleaf mahonia* Mahonia bealeii
Miniature Crepe Myrtle* Lagerstroemia indica
Nandina compact* Nandina domestica compacta
Nolina, Lindheimer* Nolina lindheimeri
Nolina, Texas* Nolina texana
Red Barberry* Berberis thunbergii atropurpurea
Skeleton-Leaf Goldeneye* Viguiera stenoloba
TABLE 11.9-7 MEDIUM SHRUBS (6 to 9 feet)
Common Name Botanical Name
Agarita* Mahonia trifoliata
Althea Hibiscus syriacus
American Beautyberry* Callicarpa americana
Apache Plum Fallugia paradoxa
Aromatic Sumac* Rhus aromatica
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/448
Bridal Wreath Spirea* Spiraea spp.
Burford Holly* Ilex cornuta burfordii
Chinese Horned Holly Ilex cornuta
Dwarf Burning Bush* Euonymus alata ‘Compacta'
Dwarf Crepe Myrtle* Lagerstroemia indica
Dwarf Wax Myrtle* Myrica pusilla
Eleagnus Eleagnus fruitlandi
Forsythia Forsythia intermedia spectabilis
Fraser Photinia Photinia x fraseri
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora
Green Pittosporum Pittosporum tobira
Indian Hawthorne Raphiolepsis indica
Italian Jasmine Jasminum humile
Juniper* Juniperus sp.
Nandina* Nandina domestica
Pomegranate* Punica granatum
Smooth Sumac* Rhus glabra
Texas Sage* Leucophyllum sp.
Variegated Pittosporum* Pittosporum tobira variegata
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/448
Winter Honeysuckle Lonicera fragrantissima
TABLE 11.9-8 ORNAMENTAL TREES (10 to 35 feet)
Common Name Botanical Name
American Holly* Ilex opaca
American Smoke Tree Cotinus obovatus
Aristocrat Pear Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat'
Arizona Cypress Cupressus arizonica
Birds of Paradise* Caesalpinia gilliesii
Buckeye, Mexican* Ungnadia speciosa
Buckeye, Red* Aesculus pavia
Buckeye, Texas* Aesculus arguta
Carolina Buckthorn* Rhamnus caroliniana
Cherry Laurel Prunus caroliniana
Chinese Photinia Photinia serrulata
Chinese Pistache Pistacia chinensis
Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica
Desert Willow* Chilopsis linearis
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/448
Flameleaf Sumac Rhus lanceolata
Goldenball Lead Tree Leucaena retusa
Goldenrain tree Koelreuteria paniculata
Hawthorne* Crataegus spp.
Hollywood Juniper* Juniperus chinensis ‘Torulosa'
Japanese Black Pine Pinus thunbergi
Japanese Persimmon* Diospyros kaki
Juniper, Blue Point* Juniperus chinensis ‘Blue Point'
Juniper, Wichita Blue* Juniperus scopulorum ‘Wichita'
Magnolia ‘little gem' Magnolia ‘Little Gem'
Maple, shantung Acer trucatum
Mexican Plum* Prunus mexicana
Panicled Golden Raintree Koelreuteria paniculata
Pomegranate* Punica granatum
Possumhaw* Ilex decidua
Redbud* Cercis sp.
Russian Olive* Eleagnus angustifolia
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum
Savannah Holly Ilex x attenuata ‘Savannah'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/448
Texas Persimmon Diospyros texana
Texas Pistache Pistacia texana
Vitex* Vitex agnus-castus
Wax myrtle Myrica cerifera
Yaupon Holly* Ilex vomitoria
TABLE 11.9-9 CANOPY TREES (above 35 feet)
Common Name Botanical Name
American Elm* Ulmus americana
Arizona Cypress* Cupressus arizonica
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum
Bigelow Oak* Quercus sinuata var. breviloba
Black Locust Robinia pseudoacacia
Bur Oak* Quercus macrocarpa
Caddo Maple* Acer saccharum var.caddo
Cedar Elm* Ulmus crassifolia
Chinquapin Oak Quercus muhlenbergii
Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodora
Durrand Oak* Quercus sinuata var. sinuata
Lace Bark Elm Ulmus parvifolia
Lacey Oak* Quercus glaucoides
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/448
Live Oak Quercus virginiana
Magnolia, Southern Magnolia grandiflora
Maple, Bigtooth Acer saccharum ‘Caddo'
Pecan Carya illinoensis
Persimmon, common Diospyros virginiana
Pine, Afghan, Mondell or Eldarica* Pinus eldarica
Pistachio, chinese Pistacia chinensis
Shumard Red Oak* Quercus shumardii
Texas Ash* Fraxinus texensis
Texas Red Oak* Quercus texana
Thornless Honey Locust* Gleditsia triacanthos
Western Soapberry* Sapindus drummondii
(Ordinance 3552, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/13)
Sec. 12. Accessory structures.
12.1 General requirements. The following standards shall apply to all zoning districts.
(a) An accessory building or structure is a subordinate building/structure, the use of which is secondary to and
supportive of the main building or primary use. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be permitted without a main
building or primary use in existence.
(b) No accessory structure shall be used as a dwelling, unless otherwise allowed by the base zoning district.
(c) No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the primary building has
commenced, and no accessory structure shall be used unless the primary building on the lot is also being used.
(d) No accessory structure shall be permitted to have a building footprint in excess of the building footprint for the
primary structure, except for accessory structures located on lots that are one acre in area or greater, which can also
exceed the height of the primary structure.
12.2 Residential requirements. The following standards shall apply to all single-family residential zoning districts.
(a) All accessory structures over 120 square feet in size require a building permit. Permanent and/or engineered
foundations may be required for accessory structures, per the adopted international codes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/448
(b) Accessory structures shall be located behind the front building line with a minimum side yard and rear yard
setback of three feet. For accessory structures located on corner lots there shall be a side yard setback from the
intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot and shall conform to
front yard requirements in every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings
and accessory structures on an interior lot.
(c) When an accessory structure is greater than 400 square feet, that building shall be required to adhere to the
setback requirements for a primary structure in the underlying zoning district.
(d) All accessory structures of 120 square feet or less shall be exempt from the exterior material and permitting
requirements; however, all setbacks must be met, and the building must be located behind the front building line.
(e) An accessory structure of between 120 square feet and 400 square feet, and which is an enclosed structure,
shall have exterior walls constructed of building materials other than metal that are weather resistant, including the
roof; provided, however, that if the primary structure on the lot has a metal roof, the accessory structure may also
have a metal roof of a similar type.
(f) The exterior walls and roof of an accessory structure over 400 square feet in size and which is enclosed shall be
constructed of building materials that match the exterior building material(s) of the primary structure.
(g) An accessory structure on a lot that is one acre in area or greater may utilize metal, wood, or cementitious fiber
board for its exterior material and roof. All such structures shall meet the setbacks that apply to the primary structure.
(h) Any metal walls or roofing for accessory buildings shall not be less than 26 gauge, roll-formed ribbed or
standing seam sheeting containing a factory-applied non-reflective finish with a manufacturer's warranty of not less
than 20 years for the structure and finish and should have “baked-in” or integral color finishes as opposed to paint.
Corrugated “barn tin” is prohibited. Alternative materials may be used for legitimate agricultural facilities.
(i) The number and size of accessory structures permitted on residential lots shall be regulated by the maximum lot
coverage permitted in the zoning district, or 35 percent when not specified.
(j) Carports are allowed behind the front building line of the primary building and shall not exceed 500 square feet in
area.
(k) When an accessory structure is higher than 15 feet, that building shall be required to adhere to the setback
requirements for a primary structure in the underlying zoning district. At no point shall the height of the accessory
structure exceed the primary structure or allowed height of the underlying zoning district, whichever is less.
12.3 Commercial requirements. The following standards shall apply to all non-residential, commercial, office, retail, industrial,
and multi-family zoning districts and uses.
(a) Accessory buildings and structures are considered commercial buildings and shall obtain all necessary permits
and inspections and abide by all applicable codes and masonry regulations. Modular storage units, portable on
demand storage containers, donation bins, and drop off bins/trailers are considered accessory structures and require
permits.
(b) Accessory structures with pervious roofs, such as decorative pergolas or arbors, may be constructed with firetreated
and rot-resistant wooden material. An open air pavilion shall encase its columns in masonry that matches the
primary building.
(c) Accessory structures shall not conflict with site features such as fire lanes, landscape buffers, required parking,
or other identified features deemed pertinent during the permit review process.
12.4 Accessory dwelling units. Whether located on the ground as a free standing structure or erected over a private garage or
within another structure, the following regulations apply.
(a) An accessory dwelling unit may not be sold separate from the sale of the entire property, including the primary
dwelling unit, and shall be located on the same lot as the primary structure.
(b) An accessory dwelling unit must have a permanent foundation and cannot be mobile or have a chassis.
(c) Utility services shall be metered by the same meter as those serving the main structure on the premises.
(d) Shall abide by the same setback, height, and architectural regulations as the primary structure. An accessory
dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in area, excluding any associated garage or unconditioned space.
(e) Unless otherwise allowed by the base zoning district, only lots of one-half acre or greater in area may have an
accessory dwelling unit, and only one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot.
(Ordinance 3573, sec. 1, adopted 3/17/14; Ordinance 3623, sec. 1, adopted 10/20/14; Ordinance 3876, sec. 2, adopted 7/16/18)
ARTICLE 5. NONCONFORMING USES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/448
A nonconforming status shall exist under the following provisions of this ordinance:
(1) When on the effective date of this ordinance the use or structure was in existence and lawfully constructed,
located and operating in accordance with the provisions of the prior zoning ordinance or which was a nonconforming
use thereunder, and which use or structure does not now conform to the regulations herein prescribed for the district
in which such use or structure is located.
(2) When a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use
or structure is located was in existence at the time of annexation to the City of Sachse and has since been in regular
and continuous use.
Any nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued (for indefinite periods of time) subject to such regulations as the
board of adjustments may required [require] for immediate preservation of the adjoining property prior to ultimate removal of the
nonconforming use. The building official may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another, providing the
use is within the same or a more restrictive classification as the original nonconforming use. In the event a nonconforming use of
a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of a more restrictive classification it shall not be later changed to a less
restrictive classification of use and the prior less restrictive classification shall be considered to have been abandoned. Existing
residences located in nonresidential districts may be improved, maintained, or rebuilt as conforming structures.
If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, the elements, or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to
conform to the provisions of this ordinance. In the case of a partial destruction of a nonconforming use not exceeding 75 percent
of its reasonable value, reconstruction will be permitted but the site or function of the nonconforming use cannot be expanded.
If a nonconforming use on a particular parcel shall cease operation for a period of more than six months, then such
nonconforming use shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned and shall not be reinstituted on that parcel or any other
parcel in any district which does not permit the discontinued use. For the purpose of this paragraph, to “cease operation” shall
mean to intentionally abandon the nonconforming use. The temporary suspension of a use shall not constitute abandonment,
provided the property is not used during the period of suspension for any other purpose.
ARTICLE 6. PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commence the construction, enlargement or structural alteration of any
building or structure in the city, or using or occupying the same without first applying for and securing a building permit, or to use
or occupy same without first securing a certificate of occupancy and compliance from the city secretary or such other official
designated by the city council. Application shall be made on forms furnished by the city secretary.
ARTICLE 7. SPECIAL PARKING AND AREA REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
Sec. 1. Vision clearance.
1.1 On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required, no wall, fence, structure, sign, tree, shrub or hedge may be
maintained as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view and when topography prevents a clear view, this bank shall be
removed.
Sec. 2. Building lines.
2.1 The front building line of the main building hereafter constructed in residence districts, or altered in such manner as to
change the position of such front building line, shall be located the distance required from the front lot line as may be required in
the residential district in which such dwellings are located.
2.2 Open porches of dwellings may extend into the front yard a distance of ten feet from the main line of the building. Cornices
and eaves of the main building may project not more than three feet into the front yard.
Sec. 3. Lot area.
3.1 On any lot separately owned on the date this ordinance becomes effective, a single-family dwelling may be erected even
though such lot has less area than required by these regulations.
Sec. 4. Location of dwellings and buildings.
4.1 Only one main building for single-family, with permitted accessory buildings, may be located upon a lot or platted tract.
Every dwelling shall face or front upon a street or officially approved place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have
a minimum width of 35 feet. Where a lot or tract of land is used for commercial or industrial purposes, more than one main
building may be located upon the lot but only when such buildings conform to all the open space, parking and density
requirements applicable to the uses and district, when all such main buildings face upon a street or officially approved place,
other than an alley.
ARTICLE 9. UNPLATTED PROPERTY
Sec. 1. Zoning required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/448
1.1 The planning and zoning commission shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within the city limits until the area
covered by the proposed plat shall has been permanently zoned by the city council.
Sec. 2. Annexation pending.
2.1 The city planning commission shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within any area where a petition or ordinance
for annexation or recommendation for annexation to the city is pending before the city council.
Sec. 3. Simultaneous hearings.
3.1 In the event the planning and zoning commission holds a hearing on proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, at the
same time hold a hearing upon the permanent zoning that is to be given to the area or tract to be annexed, and make a
recommendation on both matters to the city council, so that the city council can, if it desires, act on the matter of permanent
zoning and annexation at the same time.
ARTICLE 10. ENFORCEMENT
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or such other person as may be
designated by the city manager. All applications for building permits on tracts of five acres or less shall be accompanied by a plat
or plot plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the
building to be erected, the use of the property and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of
these regulations. A careful record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the city secretary, or such other
person as may be designated by the city manager.
ARTICLE 11. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and
approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $200.00, and each day that
such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or
part thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed or shall exist, any architect, builder, contractor, agent,
person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violations
shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided.
ARTICLE 12. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Sec. 1. General description.
1.1 The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or change by ordinance, the boundaries of the district or the
regulations herein established as provided by the Statutes of the State of Texas.
Sec. 2. Review by planning and zoning commission.
2.1 Before taking action of any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the governing body shall submit the same to the
planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report.
Sec. 3. Public hearing before planning and zoning commission.
3.1 The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any amendments or change prior to
making its recommendation and report to the city council. When any such amendment or change relates to a change in
classification or boundary or a zoning district, written notice of public hearing before the planning and zoning commission on the
proposed amendment or change shall be mailed to all owners of real property lying within 1,000 feet of the property on which the
change is requested. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail
such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
When any such amendment relates to a change of a zoning regulation or to the text of this ordinance not affecting specific
property, notice of the public hearing of the planning and zoning commission shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Sachse without necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time
and place for such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than ten days from the
date of publication. (Ordinance 2244, sec. 3, adopted 10/2/06)
Sec. 4. Public hearing before governing body.
4.1 A public hearing shall be held by the governing body before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change.
Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Sachse stating the time
and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication.
Sec. 5. Circumstances dictating voting requirements.
5.1 If a written protest is submitted against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the
lots or land included in such proposed change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/448
therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the city council.
ARTICLE 13. VALIDITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held
unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the
part so dedicated to be invalid or unconstitutional.
ARTICLE 14. WHEN EFFECTIVE
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and publication, as the law in such cases provides, and it is
accordingly ordained.
Schedule I. Reserved.
Editor's note – Ordinance 3887, sec. 1, adopted September 17, 2018, repealed Schedule I, which was a table that pertained to permitted
uses and derived from Ordinance 1725, adopted April 3, 2000; Ordinance 2015, adopted May 5, 2003; Ordinance 2072, adopted April 19,
2004; Ordinance 2247, adopted October 16, 2006; Ordinance 3074, adopted August 18, 2008; Ordinance 3126, adopted April 6, 2009;
Ordinance 3147, adopted July 6, 2009; Ordinance 3206, adopted April 19, 2010; Ordinance 3209, adopted May 3, 2010; Ordinance 3256,
adopted October 4, 2010; Ordinance 3375, adopted March 19, 2012; Ordinance 3400, adopted July 2, 2012; Ordinance 3463, March 18,
2013; Ordinance 3560, adopted January 20, 2014; and Ordinance 3573, adopted March 17, 2014. For similar provisions see chapter 11,
exhibit 1, article 3, section 13.2.
[Secs. 1, 2. - Reserved.]
Sec. 3. [Violations.]
That any person violating or attempting to violate any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties and provisions
contained in this ordinance.
Sec. 4. [Severability.]
That the provisions of this Ordinance are severable, so that the invalidity of one or more provisions shall not affect the validity of
those valid portions.
Sec. 5. [Effective date.]
That this Ordinance shall become and be effective immediately upon its adoption and publication as required by law, and it is
accordingly so ORDAINED.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 3rd day of April, 1995.
ATTEST:
The City of Sachse, Texas.
/s/ Terry Smith
/s/ Larry Holden
City Secretary
Mayor
CHAPTER 12
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-1. Curfew for minors.
A. Definitions. In this section, the following words and terms shall be interpreted as follows (unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning):
(1) Curfew hours means:
(a) 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the following day on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday;
and
(b) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/448
(2) Emergency means, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life, or damage to property. For purposes of this definition,
“serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death, serious permanent disfigurement or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(3) Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
(4) Guardian means:
(a) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(b) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
(5) Minor means any person under the age of 17 years.
(6) Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing, or conducting
any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
(7) Parent means a person who is:
(a) A natural or adoptive parent or step parent of another person; or
(b) A person at least 18 years of age and with written authorization from a parent or guardian to have the care
and custody of a minor.
(8) Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes
but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
(9) Remain means to:
(a) Linger or stay unnecessarily; or
(b) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person
in control of the premises.
B. Offenses.
(1) A minor commits an offense if he or she purposefully remains, walks, runs, stands, drives or rides about or upon
any public place or in the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.
(3) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
C. Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was:
(a) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(b) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian without detour or stop;
(c) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(d) Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without
detour or stop;
(e) Involved in an emergency;
(f) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor, if the
neighbor did not complain to the police about the minor's presence;
(g) Attending an official school or religious activity or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or
going to or returning from, without detour or stop, an official school or religious activity or other recreational
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/448
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
(h) Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(i) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas
Family Code Ch. 31, as amended.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph (3) of subsection B of this section that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the Sachse Police Department that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and the minor refused to leave.
D. Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender his or
her age and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense under subsection C of this section is present.
E. Penalties.
(1) A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500.00.
(2) When required by V.T.C.A., Texas Family Code sec. 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original
jurisdiction over a minor who violates paragraph (1) of subsection B of this section and shall refer the minor to juvenile
court.
(Ordinance 1244, sec. 1, adopted 3/6/95; Ordinance 1600 adopted 6/15/98; Ordinance 1844 adopted 4/16/01; Ordinance 2067,
sec. 1, adopted 3/15/04; Ordinance 3328, sec. 1, adopted 10/17/11; Ordinance 3604, sec. 1, adopted 8/18/14; Ordinance 3807,
sec. 1, adopted 8/7/17)
Sec. 12-2. Emergency management program.
A. Organization. There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Sachse, which shall be held by the
mayor in accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director;
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and
for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this section. The director may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the
director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the City of Sachse shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
B. Emergency management director powers and duties. The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management
director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an
ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Sachse, and
shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the
implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring,
continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed with
the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this section. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means
calculated to brings its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the
disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the City of Sachse emergency management organization as well as
the training of emergency management personnel.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/448
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management
organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, or federal, emergency management
organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the
carrying to of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of
the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of
an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the
countywide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including
acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and
other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during
a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975.
C. Emergency management plan. A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a
current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this section. As
provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency
Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the
recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and
agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at
all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this section and have the effect of law during
the time of a disaster.
D. Interjurisdictional program. The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Dallas and the
mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Dallas and shall
have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint
emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency
management insofar as said program may affect the City of Sachse.
E. Override. At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this section shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override any existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
F. Liability. This section is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety and neither the City of Sachse, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with, or
attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be liable for
any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises
who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Sachse a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to
inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons
during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in
interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
G. Commitment of funds. No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this section without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to
bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared
disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and
necessary for the protection of health, life, and property.
H. Offenses; penalties.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this section, or to do any act
forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this section.
(2) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Sachse, unless authority to do
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/448
so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(3) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the
termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by this section.
(4) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $500.00.
(Ordinance 1802 adopted 10/16/00)
Sec. 12-3. Regulation of sex offender residency.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, words, phrases and the derivations thereof shall have the
meanings given herein:
Minor shall mean a person younger than 17 years of age.
Permanent residence shall mean a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Premise where children commonly gather shall mean a public park, private or public school, day care center as such terms are
defined in the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sachse, any public or non-profit recreational facility, video arcade
facility, or children's oriented eating establishments, as those terms are defined in Article 481.134 of the Health And Safety Code
of the State of Texas. For the purposes of this section, planted street medians are not public parks.
Temporary resident shall mean a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely
abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
(b) Offenses. For each person required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the
“database”) because of a violation involving a victim who was a minor as defined herein, it is unlawful for that person to establish
a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any “premise where children commonly gather.”
(c) Evidentiary matters; measurements.
(1) It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if that person's record appears on the
database and the database indicates that the victim was a minor as defined herein.
(2) For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by
following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property
line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein above, or, in the case of multiple
residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of
the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein.
(3) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the City of Sachse. The city shall review the map at
least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Sachse Police Department.
(d) Culpable mental state not required. Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an
offense defined by this chapter.
(e) Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has
complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this
section.
(2) The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring
such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person required to register on the database is a minor.
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or
temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the
permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas.
(5) The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who
was erroneously listed on the database.
(f) Penalty. An offense under this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.00 for each offense.
(Ordinance 2238, sec. 1, adopted 9/18/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/448
Sec. 12-4. Illegal smoking products.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking
products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Sachse.
B. Definitions.
1. “Person” shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed
business.
2. “Illegal smoking product” shall mean any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any
blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any
one or more of the following chemicals:
a. Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia divinorum,
whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts;
b. 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and
homologues;
c. (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]
chormen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
d. 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or
e. Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073).
3. “Ingestion device” shall mean equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including:
a. A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen,
hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
b. A water pipe;
c. A carburetion tube or device;
d. A smoking or carburetion mask;
e. A chamber pipe;
f. A carburetor pipe;
g. An electric pipe;
h. An air-driven pipe;
i. A chillum;
j. A bong; or
k. An ice pipe or chiller.
C. Sell, offer, gift, display or possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly
display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product.
D. Use or possession of ingestion devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion
device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product.
E. Defense. It shall be a defense to a violation of this section that any act described in this section is under and pursuant to the
direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.
(Ordinance 3230, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/10)
Sec. 12-5. E-cigarette regulations
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the purchase, use, or possession of e-cigarettes by minors; and prohibit
the sale of e-cigarettes to minors, hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Sachse.
B. Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/448
1. “Electronic cigarette” or “e-cigarette” shall mean any device that uses an atomizer or similar device that allows
users to inhale nicotine vapor or other vapor without the use of fire, smoke, or ash. The definition of e-cigarette shall
include, but is not limited to, electronic cigars, electronic cigarillos, or electronic pipe, and any cartridge or other
component of the device or related product including any liquid products that are manufactured for use with ecigarettes.
2. “Minor” shall mean any individual younger than 18 years of age.
3. “Person” shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed
business.
C. Sell, distribution, or offering for sale to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell, distribute, or offer for sale any
e-cigarette to any minor within the territorial limits of the City of Sachse.
D. Use, purchase, or possession of e-cigarette by minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to use, purchase, or possess with
intent to use any e-cigarette within the territorial limits of the City of Sachse.
E. Purchase of e-cigarettes by a minor utilizing false information. It shall be unlawful for any minor, in order to acquire an ecigarette,
to state to any person engaged in the business of selling e-cigarettes that such minor is 18 years of age or older, or
presents to any such person a document or writing that purports to establish that such minor is 18 years of age or older.
F. Defense. It shall be a defense to a violation of subsection D. and E. above if the minor is:
1. In the course and scope of the minor's employment by a person or entity holding a permit issued by the state
authorizing the person to engage in the business of being a distributor, wholesaler, bonded agent or retailer of ecigarettes;
or
2. In the presence of a parent, guardian, spouse or other adult to whom the minor had been committed by a court.
(Ordinance 3551, sec. 1, adopted 12/2/13)