CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: August 1, 1978 
Effective: August 1, 1978 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Eloise Smith 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jim Sybert 
Joe Soto 
Albert Hernandez 
Ruben De Leon 
David Green 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Sylvia Ibarra 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Thomas Lay 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code is a republication of the ordinances of South Houston of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fifteenth section of Chapter 9 is 9-15. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-5 and 4-6 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-5.1, 4-5.2, 4-5.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as Chapter 12.1. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them, and in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice President of Production and Peggy Lamar, Editor, Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Sylvia Ibarra, City Secretary, for her supervision, cooperation and interest during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of South Houston, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of South Houston, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of South Houston, Texas. 2005. 
ORDINANCE NO. 641 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston, Texas; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein; Providing for the Effective Date of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas: 
Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of chapters 1 to 24, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas" and such Code shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the city council on or before September 6, 1977, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 1st day of August, 1978, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before September 6, 1977, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference thereto are hereby repealed from and after the 1st day of August, 1978. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), as provided in section 1-7 of such Code. 
Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 4 of this ordinance and section 1-7 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city secretary may consider most expendient. It shall be the express duty of the city secretary, or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 8. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of South Houston to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 4 of this ordinance. 
Section 9. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 10. This ordinance shall become effective on the 1st day of August, 1978. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 1st day of August, 1978. 
	/s/ Eugene Kitch 
      Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ La Nelle Chafin 
      City Secretary 	
 	 
CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF HARRIS 
This Code of Civil and Criminal Ordinances of the City of South Houston, adopted and enacted on this the 1st day of August, 1978 as the "Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas" by ordinance of the City Council effective the 1st day of August, 1978, and after the adoption and publication of the adopting ordinance as required by law, is hereby duly authenticated and approved. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto subscribed my name as Mayor of the City of South Houston, attested by the City Secretary with the seal of the city affixed hereto, this 1st day of August, 1978. 
	/s/ Eugene Kitch 
      Mayor 
 	 
(SEAL) 
ATTEST: 
/s/ La Nelle Chafin 
      City Secretary 	
 	 
 
CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the South Houston Code. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Alderman; councilman. The word "alderman" or "councilman" shall mean a duly elected member of the City Council of the City of South Houston. 
City. The term "the city," "this city" or "city" shall mean the City of South Houston, in the County of Harris and State of Texas. 
Code. The words "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given, or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council, this council, the council, city council. Whenever the term "council," "this council," "the council" or "city council" is used, it shall mean the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
County. The term "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean Harris County, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, board, commission, or other agency, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of South Houston." Reference to any specific officer shall also be deemed to include his duly authorized assistants and representatives. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The word "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 312.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several section of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to city depositories; 
(5)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(6)  Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates to be charged by utility companies; 
(7)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract or agreement; 
(8)  Ordinance No. 514, being the zoning ordinance set out in Appendix A of this Code, and amendments thereto, including ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 1-5. - Code does not affect prior offenses, contracts, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Boundaries of city. 
(a)  The boundaries of the city are and shall be those defined as follows: 
Beginning at the southwest corner of the H. T. and B. R. R., Section No. 5, which point is also the southeast corner of the Mary Nichols, Section No. 6; 
Thence, from said point of beginning, due west a distance of 10 feet to a point for corner; 
Thence, north 10 feet due west of and parallel with the common boundary line between said H. T. and B. R. R., Section 5, and Mary Nichols, Section No. 6, to the common boundary line between said Mary Nichols, Section No. 5, and the Callahan and Vince Survey; 
Thence, east along the south line of said Callahan and Vince Survey, crossing the G. H. and H. R. R. right-of-way, and continuing east along the north side of Winkler and Allen Streets to the center line of Berry Bayou; 
Thence, in a general southeasterly direction with the center line of Berry Bayou, with its meanders, to a point where the north right-of-way line of Kolb Road projected westerly in the same direction would intersect said center line of Berry Bayou; 
Thence, east along said projection of the north right-of-way line of Kolb Road and continuing along the north right-of-way line of said Road to a jog in said Road (said point being on the east right-of-way line of Martinville Road); 
Thence, south along the east right-of-way line of Kolb Road a distance of approximately 100 feet to another jog in said Road; 
Thence, east along the north right-of-way line of Kolb Road, and continue east in the same direction with said north right-of-way line produced to a point which is 10 feet due east of the west right-of-way line of Shaver Street; 
Thence, south 10 feet due east of and parallel with the west right-of-way line of Shaver Street to the intersection of Shaver Street and Spencer Highway, and continuing south in the same direction to the center line of Spencer Highway; 
Thence, west with the center line of Spencer Highway to a point which is 10 feet due east of the point of intersection of the west right-of-way line of Shaver Street (that part of Shaver Street which is south of Spencer Highway) which, if projected would intersect said center line of Spencer Highway; 
Thence, south 10 feet due east and parallel with said projection and continuing southerly 10 feet due east and parallel with the west right-of-way line of Shaver Street to a point which is 10 feet due east of the intersection of the west right-of-way line of Shaver Street and the northeast right-of-way line of the Allen and Genoa Road; 
Thence, due west to the west right-of-way line of Shaver Street; 
Thence, south crossing said Allen and Genoa Road and continuing south with the west right-of-way line of Shaver Street to the point of intersection of said line with the north right-of-way line of Edgebrook Drive, said point also being the southeast corner of the school site on which the South Houston High School and Pearl Hall Elementary School are located; 
Thence, west along the south line of said school site to its southwest corner; 
Thence, north along the west line of said school site to its northwest corner, same being in the south line of H. T. and B. R. R., Section No. 4; 
Thence, west along the south lines of H. T. and B. R. R., Section Nos. 4 and 5, to the southwest corner of said Section No. 5, said point being also the southeast corner of the Mary Nichols, Section No. 6, and being the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(b)  All annexations of territories to the city, which territories are included in the description contained in subsection (a) above, are hereby in all things ratified and confirmed, and all territories included within such description which were not included within the original boundary lines or corporate limits of the city are hereby reannexed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 501, §§ 1, 2, 12-4-62)  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violation. 
Whenever any city ordinance which governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, is violated, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, such violation, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine or penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); all other violation of this code or any ordinance of the city in which an act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, other than fire safety zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, such violation, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same offense under the laws of the state. Each and every day any violation of this Code or any ordinance shall continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 10-16-90; P.C. Ord. No. 917, § 1, 10-15-91)  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: …" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired, 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: …" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advisory board to humane department, § 4-8; elections, Ch. 7; electrical board, § 8-22 et seq.; automobile advisory committee, § 23-2; zoning board of adjustment, App. A, §§ 7.1, 7.2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Adoption of state law in lieu of charter. 
The provisions of Title 28, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas of 1925, relating to cities and towns, be and they are hereby adopted and accepted in lieu of any existing charter of the city and in lieu of any and all other provisions of law in conflict therewith. 
(Ord. of 2-8-27) 
State Law reference— Type A general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 6.  
Sec. 2-2. - "Town" changed to "city." 
The name of the "Town of South Houston" is hereby changed to the "City of South Houston." 
(Ord. of 2-8-27)  
Sec. 2-3. - Appointment of municipal officers, department heads and volunteers. 
(a)  Appointments generally. This section is enacted in order to clarify who is the appointing officer with authority to appoint officers in various departments of the city administration who are not elective and any new officers created by city council. It is hereby declared that the mayor shall appoint all nonelective officers, heads of departments, employees and such other persons as prescribed in city ordinances and the statutes of the State of Texas; subject to approval of a majority of city council. 
(b)  Officers and department heads. 
(1)  Officers. The city engineer, chief of police, municipal judge, relief municipal judge, city prosecutor, city secretary, tax assessor and collector, city attorney, health officer, (medical director, plumbing, electrical, and building inspectors), director of finance and treasurer are offices of the city whose positions are to be filled by the mayor upon the mayor's appointment, subject to confirmation by the majority of council. Nothing in this section shall preclude the appointment of an employee of the city to any one or more of the foregoing positions. No employee of the city shall be required to assume appointive office. The mayor has the authority to appoint any firm, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or any other entity recognized by law to provide the services of the position on a contract basis, subject to confirmation by the majority of council of the appointment and of the contract terms. The office and/or position of assistant code enforcement officer is hereby abolished. The office and/or position of chief financial officer is hereby abolished. 
(2)  Department heads. The positions of superintendent of repair and maintenance, supervisor of street and bridge and supervisor of sanitation, superintendent of sewer and water systems, superintendent of parks and playgrounds, and director of the community center are heads of their various departments. The department head positions are to be filled by the mayor, after approval by the majority of the city council. Nothing in this section shall preclude the appointment of an employee of the city to any one or more of the foregoing positions. No employee of the city shall be required to assume such position. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. 
(1)  In the event the mayor shall appoint persons to fill any appointive position of office who does not have the approval of the majority of the city council at the first regular council meeting following the election of the mayor, then the city council shall fill such appointive position or office on or before the third regular council meeting after the election of the mayor, by a vote of a majority. 
(2)  If a vacancy occurs in an appointive position or office at any time other than as set out in (c)(1) above, the mayor shall make such appointment not later than the second regular meeting of the city council after the vacancy occurs. If the mayor fails or refuses to do so, the city council shall make such appointment on or before the next regular meeting of the city council, after that meeting in which the mayor fails or refuses to act by a majority vote thereof. All appointments are subject to the approval of a majority of city council. If, after six (6) months from the date of the vacancy, the mayor has failed to name a person acceptable to a majority of council mayor may be deemed by a two-third ( 2/3 ) majority of council to have failed or refused to fill the vacancy. If the mayor is deemed to have failed or refused to fill the vacancy, the city council, by majority vote, shall make such appointment on or before the next regular meeting of the city council at which a quorum was present and voting, after that meeting in which the mayor was deemed to have failed or refused to act or after the action determining failure or refusal to act becomes final, whichever is applicable. 
(d)  Positions of special trust and confidence. The following positions of special trust and confidence, appointed as prescribed by ordinance, shall be afforded the status of department head relative to budgeting, leadership and responsibility to the mayor or city council. They shall not receive pay and are classed as volunteers: 
(1)  Fire chief; 
(2)  Fire marshal; 
(3)  Director of emergency medical service. 
(e)  Positions appointed by police civil service commission. The following position, as prescribed in the Local Government Code, and serving at the pleasure of the South Houston Police Civil Service Commission, shall be afforded the status of department head relative to budgeting. The pay and allowances of this position are as prescribed by the city council. 
(1)  Director of police civil service. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 5-17-66; Ord. No. 572, § 1, 6-3-69; Ord. No. 811, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 956 (9-92), § 1, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 98-007, § 2, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 2, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 2005-28, § 2, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2006-33, § 2, 11-21-06; Ord. No. 2013-17, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2014-08, 5-13-14) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted November 6, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code. Such ordinance abolished the job position superintendent of street and bridge and created the supervisor of street and bridge. Therefore, this reference was changed at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-3.1. - Classification of municipal officer. 
There shall be no employees of the City of South Houston, Texas, classified as a municipal officer except the members of the governing body, the secretary, treasurer, assessor and collector, municipal attorney, marshal, municipal judge, associate municipal judge, city prosecutor and municipal engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 3-18-03) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2003-04, § 1, adopted March 18, 2003 did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 2-3.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-4. - Terms of officers. 
The term of office for the city engineer, health officer, chief of police and judge or recorder of the municipal court shall be two (2) years, coincident with the regular mayoral term. If a vacancy occurs during the terms, the person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve the balance of the existing term before appointment to a full two (2) year term. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 2, 5-17-66)  
Sec. 2-5. - Removal of officers and department heads. 
(a)  All municipal officers and department heads shall be removed as provided by law. 
(b)  Persons holding positions as department heads, other than as officers as described herein, shall be subject to removal by city council at will upon its own initiative; provided, that any final removal shall be by a majority vote of the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(c)  The city council may remove a municipal officer of the city for incompetency, corruption, misconduct, or malfeasance in office after provid 
(2)  The duties and responsibilities currently required to be discharged by the city building inspector; and 
(3)  The duties imposed by law, both statutory and by ordinance, upon the city health officer. 
(c)  Those duties and responsibilities set out in section 2-23(b)(1) and (2) immediately above shall be discharged by the chief inspector who shall also oversee all of the responsibilities of the department, except those coming under the jurisdiction of the health officer. 
(d)  The city inspector shall meet those qualifications as are now provided for the office of building inspector, and shall be paid a salary as fixed in the annual budget of the City of South Houston. 
(e)  The above named department head shall have the same authority and discretion over personnel employed in their respective department as are now exercised by other city department heads. 
(f)  In addition to those duties and responsibilities specified above, the above named department head shall likewise discharge such other duties and responsibilities as the city council may from time to time direct. 
(g)  The above named department head shall be subject to removal under the existing provisions relating to city department heads. 
(Ord. No. 713, §§ 1(A), 2—4, 2-8-84; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 4-19-88)  
Sec. 2-24. - Emergency medical services department created. 
(a)  Establishment of emergency medical services department. There is hereby established a city emergency medical services department for the purpose of rendering emergency on-scene care, medical rescue services as required and providing for transporting of acutely sick or injured persons from within the city to the nearest available emergency care facility. Such service will be maintained and as a volunteer service department of the City of South Houston. 
(b)  Definition of emergency. Emergency, as it is applicable to the emergency medical service shall be construed to mean a sudden unexpected happening; an unforseen occurrence or condition; perplexing contingency or complication of circumstances; a sudden or unexpected occasion for exigency; urgency and pressing necessity. An emergency is an unforseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. 
(Ord. No. 812, § 1, 9-20-88)  
Sec. 2-25. - Bad checks; dishonored instruments. 
(a)  Used to pay city indebtedness. If any party attempts to pay any bill, charge, fee, tax, fine or other indebtedness or obligation to the city by check, money order or similar instrument, and if the instrument is dishonored, then: 
(1)  The bill, charge, fee, tax, fine or other indebtedness or obligation shall be deemed to remain unpaid; and 
(2)  An additional fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) ("dishonored instrument fee") shall be payable to the city by the maker of any such instrument that is dishonored upon presentment. Such fee shall be in addition to the total amount of such bill, charge, fee, tax, fine, or other indebtedness or obligation, and applicable late fees, for which the instrument was tendered. If the city refers such instrument to a collection agency or an attorney for collection, the fee for such dishonored instrument shall, instead of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), be the amount charged to the city by the collection agency or attorney or forty dollars ($40.00), whichever is less. The city shall not accept checks from any person, firm, or corporation, that has tendered any dishonored instruments in any twelve-month period. 
(b)  Exception to this policy. This section does not apply in the case of checks, money orders or similar instruments dishonored in the course of any attempt to pay any bill, charge, fee, tax, fine or other indebtedness or obligation by a check, money order or similar instrument drawn on or issued by a financial institution which has had its funds frozen by involuntary or voluntary action, if such freezing occurs after the attempt to pay the bill, charge, fee, tax, fine or other indebtedness or obligation in such manner. In such event the party attempting such payment shall not be charged the dishonored instrument fee if the bill, charge, fee, tax, fine or other indebtedness or obligation is paid within ten (10) days from the date such party has been mailed a written notice that payment on the check, money order or similar instrument has not been honored. 
(Ord. No. 95-001, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-95; Ord. No. 2001-09, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2014-25, § 1, 8-26-14)  
Sec. 2-26. - Finance department financial procedures and internal controls. 
(a)  The city council finds it necessary for the adoption of formal written procedures to be utilized by the city finance department and departments of the city making financial transactions whether accounts payable or accounts receivable. 
(b)  The written procedures found in exhibit A hereto attached shall be the official written policies and procedures for the city's finance department and other such departments making financial transactions. Exhibit "A" shall be made a part of the financial procedures manual of the city. The manual shall from time to time be expanded by the adoption of further financial procedures through the city council. 
(Ord. No. 97-016, §§ 1—3, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 97-017, §§ 1—3, 7-22-97) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A referred to above has not been included herein, but can be found on file with the city.  
Sec. 2-27. - City drug and alcohol testing policy. 
The following is the drug and alcohol testing policy for employees and certain volunteers of the city of South Houston: 
(1)  Drug/alcohol testing generally. The city shall conduct testing, in accordance with federal regulations, of commercial motor vehicle operators for use of alcohol or a controlled substance that violates law or federal regulation. The city shall also conduct random testing of all other city employees and conduct reasonable suspicion testing if it is believed that an employee has violated the city's prohibition against use of alcohol or controlled substances. 
(2)  Applicability: 
(a)  These testing requirements apply to every full-time or part-time city employee, fire department volunteers, and emergency medical service volunteers. 
(b)  All city employees are subject to random testing and reasonable suspicion testing if it is believed that an employee has violated the city's policy concerning prohibition against the use of alcohol or controlled substances. 
(3)  Testing procedures. The city shall ensure that all alcohol or controlled substances testing conducted under this policy complies with the procedures set forth in 49 C.F.R. Part 40. 
(4)  Notification. All city employees shall receive a copy of the city policy and administrative guidelines for controlled substance and alcohol testing. Each such employee shall sign an acknowledgment form indicating that prior notification material has been received and understood. 
(5)  Employee consent to alcohol or controlled substance testing: 
(a)  Prior to administration of an alcohol or controlled substance test, affected applicants and employees will be asked to sign a city consent form authorizing the test and permitting the release of test results to city officials. The consent form shall provide a space for individuals to acknowledge that they have been notified of the city's alcohol and controlled substance policy. 
(b)  Refusal to grant consent may result in nonemployment, reassignment, or termination of employment. 
(6)  Tests required. Required testing includes pre-employment, post-accident, random, reasonable suspicion, followup, and return-to-duty testing. No employee shall refuse to submit to a post-accident alcohol or controlled substances test, a random alcohol or controlled substances test, a reasonable suspicion alcohol or controlled substances test, or a followup alcohol or controlled substances test. An employee who refuses to submit to alcohol or controlled substance reasonable suspicion test shall be deemed to have violated city policy and may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(7)  Pre-employment. As a condition of employment, a job applicant with the city shall receive a verified negative test result from a medical review officer for alcohol and controlled substances. 
(8)  Post-accident. As soon as practicable following an accident involving bodily injury, a commercial motor vehicle, a city-owned motor vehicle, or city-owned equipment the city shall test each employee: 
(a)  Who was performing safety-sensitive functions with respect to the vehicle, if the accident involved the loss of human life, property damage, bodily injuries; and/or 
(b)  Who receives a citation under state or local law for a moving traffic violation arising from the accident. 
An employee who is subject to post-accident testing shall remain readily available for such testing or may be deemed by the city to have refused to submit to testing. However, this provision shall not be construed to require the delay of necessary medical attention for injured people following an accident or to prohibit an employee from leaving the scene of an accident for the period necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to obtain necessary emergency medical care. 
The city shall provide employees with necessary post-accident information, procedures, and instructions, prior to the employee's operating a city-owned motor vehicle of city-owned equipment, so that employees will be able to comply with these requirements. Post-accident testing is the primary responsibility of the employee. 
The results of a breath or blood test for the use of alcohol or a urine test for the use of controlled substances, conducted by federal, state, or local officials having independent authority for the test, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section, provided such tests conform to applicable federal, state, or local requirements, and that the results of the tests are obtained by the city. 
(9)  Random testing. The city shall randomly select a sufficient number of employees for controlled substance and alcohol testing during each calendar year. The percentage rates for alcohol and controlled substances may vary from year to year as determined by the mandate of the Omnibus Transportation Employees Testing Act of 1991. 
The selection of employees for random alcohol and controlled substances testing shall be made by a scientifically valid method, such as a random number table or a computer-based random number generator that is matched with employees' Social Security numbers, payroll identification numbers, or other comparable identifying numbers. Under the selection process used, each employee shall have an equal chance of being tested each time selections are made. 
The city shall ensure that random alcohol and controlled substances tests conducted under this policy are unannounced and that the dates for administering random alcohol and controlled substances tests are spread reasonably throughout the calendar year. 
Each employee who is notified of selection for random alcohol and/or controlled substances testing shall proceed to the test site immediately; provided, however, that if the employee is performing a safety-sensitive function at the time of notification, the city shall instead ensure that the employee ceases to perform the safety-sensitive function and proceeds to the testing site as soon as possible. 
An employee shall be tested for alcohol only while the employee is performing job functions, just before the employee is to perform job functions, or just after the employee has ceased performing such functions. 
(10)  Reasonable suspicion: Alcohol. The city shall require an employee to submit to an alcohol test when there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has violated the city's policy regarding alcohol. The city's determination that reasonable suspicion exists to require the employee to undergo an alcohol test must be based on specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning the appearance, behavior, speech, or body odors of the employee. 
For CDL drivers, reasonable suspicion alcohol testing may occur only if the required observations are made during, just preceding, or just after the period of the workday that the employee is required to be in compliance with this policy and the employee is performing job functions, is about to perform job functions, or has just ceased performing such functions. 
All city employees shall be required to submit to an alcohol test when there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has used or is using alcohol prior to reporting for duty or while on duty or prior to or while attending any city function on or off city property. 
(11)  Reasonable suspicion: Controlled substances. The city shall require an employee to submit to a controlled substances test when there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has violated the prohibitions of this policy concerning controlled substances. The city's determination that reasonable suspicion exists to require the employee to undergo a controlled substances test must be based on specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning the appearance, behavior, speech, or body odors of the employee. The observations may include indications of the chronic and withdrawal effects of controlled substances. 
A written record shall be made of the observations leading to a controlled substance reasonable suspicion test and signed by the supervisor who made the observations within twenty-four (24) hours of the observed behavior or before the results of the controlled substances test are released, whichever is earlier. All city employees shall be required to submit to a controlled substance test where there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has used or is using a controlled substance prior to reporting for duty or while on duty, or prior to or while attending any city function on or off city property. 
(12)  Trained observers. For reasonable suspicion tests of any city employee authorized by this policy, the required observations for alcohol and/or controlled substances reasonable suspicion testing shall be made by a trained supervisor. The person who makes the determination that reasonable suspicion exists to conduct an alcohol test shall not conduct the alcohol test of the employee. Persons designed to determine whether reasonable suspicion exists to require an employee to undergo testing shall receive at least sixty (60) minutes of training on alcohol misuse and receive at least an additional sixty (60) minutes of training on controlled substances use. The training shall cover the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of probable alcohol misuse and use of controlled substances. 
(13)  Return-to-duty. In the event that an employee is allowed to return to duty, before an employee returns to duty after engaging in conduct prohibited by this policy concerning alcohol, the employee shall undergo a return-to-duty alcohol test with a negative result. 
In the event an employee is allowed to return, before an employee returns to duty after engaging in conduct prohibited by this policy concerning controlled substances, the employee shall undergo a return-to-duty controlled substances test with a result indicating a verified negative result for controlled substances use. 
(14)  Followup. In the event an employee who has engaged in conduct prohibited in this policy or any other city policy regarding alcohol and controlled substances is allowed to return to work, and in the event a determination is made that an employee is in need of assistance in resolving problems associated with alcohol misuse and/or use of controlled substances, the city shall ensure that the employee is subject to unannounced followup alcohol and/or controlled substances testing as directed by a substance abuse professional. 
Followup alcohol testing shall be conducted only when the employee is performing job functions, just before the employee is to perform job functions, or just after the employee has ceased performing job functions. 
(15)  Prohibitions: Alcohol. If any city employee tests positive for alcohol, no employee shall report for duty or remain on duty after having tested positively. The employee may be subject to termination. 
No city employee shall be on duty or operate a motor vehicle while the employee possesses alcohol. If the city has actual knowledge that the employee possesses alcohol, the employee shall not be permitted to drive or continue to drive a commercial motor vehicle. The city employee may be subject to termination. 
No employee shall use alcohol while performing job functions. If the city has actual knowledge that an employee is using alcohol while performing job functions, the employee shall not be permitted to perform or continue to perform job functions. 
No city employee shall report for duty while under the influence of alcohol nor shall they consume alcohol while on duty or while attending a city-related function. The employee shall be removed from his/her regularly assigned duties until an employment decision is made. The employee or other employee may be subject to termination. 
No employee required to take a post-accident alcohol test shall use alcohol for eight (8) hours following the accident or until he or she undergoes a post-accident alcohol test, whichever occurs first. 
(16)  Prohibitions: Controlled substances. No city employee shall report for duty or remain on duty when the employee uses any controlled substance, except when the use is pursuant to the instructions of a physician who has advised an employee that the substance does not adversely affect the employee's ability to safely operate a commercial motor vehicle, or with regard to any other employee when the employee has been advised that the substance does not adversely affect the employee's performance of regularly assigned duties. 
The city may require an employee to inform the employer of any therapeutic drug use. 
No city employee shall report for duty or remain on duty if the employee tests positive for controlled substances. If the city has actual knowledge that an employee has tested positive for controlled substances, the employee shall not be permitted to drive or continue to drive a commercial motor vehicle or to perform or continue to perform safety-sensitive functions; or in the case of any other city employee, the employee shall be removed from his/her regularly assigned duties until an employment decision is made. The employee may be subject to termination. 
(17)  Consequences. With regard to commercial motor vehicle operators, consequences required by federal law for violating this policy include the following: 
(a)  Removal from job functions: 
1.  No employee shall perform job functions, including driving a motor vehicle or operating equipment, if the employee has engaged in conduct prohibited by this or other city policies regarding use of alcohol or controlled substances. 
2.  The city shall not permit any employee to perform safety-sensitive functions, including driving a commercial motor vehicle, if the city has determined that the employee has violated this policy. 
3.  In cases where an employee is also employed in a nondriving capacity by the city, disciplinary action imposed for violation of alcohol and controlled substances policies shall apply to the employee functions only. However, upon recommendation of the employee's supervisor, disciplinary measures up to and including termination of employment with the city may be considered for nondriving functions. 
(b)  Required evaluation and testing. No employee who has engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy shall be permitted to perform any job functions, including driving a commercial motor vehicle, unless the employee has been referred for evaluation and treatment. 
(18)  Other alcohol-related coverage. No employee tested under the provisions of this policy who is found to test positive for alcohol shall perform or continue to perform job functions for the city, including driving a motor vehicle or operate equipment, nor shall the city permit the employee to perform or continue to perform job functions until the start of the employee's next regularly scheduled duty period, but not less than twenty-four (24) hours following administration of the test. 
Except as provided above, the city may not take any action under this policy against an employee based solely on a positive test showing an alcohol concentration less than 0.04. This provision does not prohibit the city from taking any action otherwise consistent with law based on its own authority. 
(19)  Other penalties. Except as expressly provided in this policy, nothing in the federal regulations shall be construed to affect the authority of the city with respect to the use or possession of alcohol or the use of controlled substances, including authority and rights with respect to testing, rehabilitation, and other penalties. 
(20)  Referral, evaluation, and treatment. Each employee who has engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy shall be advised by the city of the resources available to the employee in evaluating and resolving problems associated with the misuse of alcohol and use of controlled substances, including the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of substance abuse professionals and counseling and treatments programs. 
Each employee who engages in conduct prohibited by this policy shall be evaluated by a substance abuse professional who shall determine what assistance, if any, the employee needs in resolving problems associated with alcohol misuse and controlled substances abuse. 
In the event that an employee is permitted to return to work, before the employee returns to duty requiring the performance of the safety-sensitive function after engaging in conduct prohibited by this policy, the employee shall undergo a return-to-duty alcohol test with a negative result if the conduct involved alcohol or a controlled substance test with a verified negative result if the conduct involved a controlled substance. 
In addition, if the employee is allowed to return to work and if he/she is identified as needing assistance in resolving problems associated with alcohol misuse or controlled substance abuse: 
(a)  He/she shall be evaluated by a substance abuse professional to determine that the employee has properly followed any rehabilitation program prescribed by the substance abuse professional; and 
(b)  He/she shall be subject to unannounced followup alcohol and controlled substances tests administered by the city following the employee's return to duty. 
With regard to all other city employees who violate the city's policies on alcohol and controlled substances, consequences include disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
With regard to all applicants who violate the city's policies on alcohol and controlled substances, consequences include rejection of application or withdrawal of employment offer. 
(21)  Records. The city shall maintain records of its alcohol misuse and controlled substances use prevention programs as provided in 49 C.F.R. section 382.401. The records shall be maintained in a secure location with controlled access. 
(22)  Reports. The city shall prepare and maintain an annual calendar year summary of the results of its alcohol and controlled substances testing programs performed under this policy. By March 15 of each year, the city shall complete the annual summary covering the previous calendar year. 
(23)  Policy requirements. The city shall provide educational materials that explain the federal requirements and the city's policies and procedures with respect to meeting these requirements and shall ensure that a copy of these materials is distributed to each employee prior to the start of alcohol and controlled substances testing under this policy and to each employee subsequently hired or transferred into a position that requires driving a motor vehicle. Written notice to representatives of employee organizations of the availability of this information shall also be provided. 
The materials to be made available to employees shall include detailed discussion of at least the following: 
(a)  The identity of the person designated by the city to answer employee questions about the materials. 
(b)  The categories of employees who are subject to the provisions of this policy. 
(c)  Sufficient information about the safety-sensitive functions performed by those employees to make clear what period of the workday the employee is required to be in compliance with this policy. 
(d)  Specific information concerning employee conduct that is prohibited by this policy. 
(e)  The circumstances under which an employee will be tested for alcohol and/or controlled substances under this policy. 
(f)  The procedures that will be used to test for presence of alcohol and controlled substances, protect the employee and the integrity of the testing process, safeguard the validity of the test results, and ensure that those results are attributed to the correct employee. 
(g)  The requirement that an employee submit to alcohol and controlled substances tests administered in accordance with this policy. 
(h)  An explanation of what constitutes a refusal to submit to an alcohol or controlled substances test and the attendant consequences. 
(i)  The consequences for employees found to have violated this policy, including the requirement that the employee be removed immediately from job functions, and the procedures for referral, evaluation, and treatment. 
(j)  The consequences for employees found to have a positive alcohol test. 
(k)  Information concerning the effects of alcohol and controlled substances use on an individual's health, work, and personal life; signs and symptoms of an alcohol or a controlled substances problem (the employee's or a co-worker's); and available methods of intervening when an alcohol or a controlled substances problem is suspected, including confrontation, referral to any employee assistance program, and/or referral to management. 
(24)  Reasonable suspicion testing. All city employees are subject to drug/alcohol testing if there is reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee has violated the city's policy concerning prohibition against the use of alcohol or controlled substances. 
(25)  Restrictions. Employees testing positive for the use of a controlled substance, dangerous drug or other drug or alcohol on a drug or alcohol test based on reasonable suspicion or on required alcohol and substance test may be subject to termination. 
Any person testing positive for the use of a controlled substance, dangerous drug or other drug or alcohol on a required pre-employment or annual drug or alcohol test shall not be hired. 
(Ord. No. 97-022, 8-5-97)  
Sec. 2-27.1. - Meal expenses. 
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas that a maximum per diem rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) be established for meals (excluding alcoholic beverages) for City of South Houston employees and appointed officials on the occasion of said employees and officials attending continuing education classes, seminars, conferences, meetings, workshops, and the like. 
(Ord. No. 99-004, 2-23-99) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 99-004, adopted February 23, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 2-27.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-27.2. - Dress code. 
The City of South Houston adopts a dress code establishing business casual as the preferred manner of dress for all office and clerical employees; which prohibits all clerical employees from wearing jeans, jogging, and work out clothes or clothes which give the appearance of being jeans, jogging, or work out clothes; which prohibits all clerical employees from wearing T-shirts and tank tops; which prohibits all women clerical employees from wearing see through or low cut tops, and from wearing dresses and skirts that are shorter than two (2) inches above the top of the knee; and further, which prohibits visible tattoos or body piercing, except earrings, for all clerical employees. 
(Ord. No. 99-010A, 6-22-99) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 99-010A, adopted June 22, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 2-27.2 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-27.3. - City administrator. 
(a)  Position created. The position of city administrator is hereby created. 
(b)  Appointment. The city administrator shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, and may be discharged by the mayor with the consent of city council. 
(c)  Salary. The salary of the city administrator shall be set by the council. 
(d)  Duties. The city administrator shall be head of the administrative departments of the city, and shall have supervision of all administrative officers and employees. He shall perform all other such duties as prescribed by the mayor and city council. He shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper administration and operation of all city departments and affairs, and shall make frequent reports to the mayor and city council. 
(e)  Other duties. The city administrator may also serve as city secretary for the city and perform the duties and exercise the powers prescribed for such officer. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, adopted December 5, 2000, provided for inclusion of a new § 2-25. Inasmuch as § 2-25 was previously enacted by Ord. No. 95-001, §§ 1, 2, adopted 2-7-95, the provisions of Ord. No. 2000-18 have been included as § 2-27.3 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 2-27.4. - Public works director. 
(a)  Position created. The position of public works director is hereby created. 
(b)  Appointment. The public works director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, and may be discharged by the mayor with the consent of city council. 
(c)  Salary. The salary of the public works director shall be set by the city council. 
(d)  Duties. The public works director shall have supervision of the following departments of the city: Street and bridge, sanitation, water and sewer, parks and recreation, vehicle maintenance and humane. He/she shall perform all other such duties as prescribed by the mayor and city council. He/she shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper administration and operation of all city departments and affairs under him/her, and shall make frequent reports to the mayor and city council. 
(e)  Other duties. The public works director shall also serve as supervisor of the water and sewer department and perform the duties and exercise the powers prescribed for such office. 
(Ord. No. 2003-22, § 1, 12-16-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-22, § 1, adopted December 16, 2003, provided for inclusion of a new § 2-26. Inasmuch as § 2-25 was previously enacted by Ord. No. 97-016, §§ 1, 3, adopted 7-8-97, the provisions of Ord. No. 2003-22 have been included as § 2-27.4 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 2-27.5. - Community development committee. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Community Development Committee of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(b)  The community development committee shall consist of seven (7) members, including the chairman. Each shall have a vote. These seven (7) individuals shall be residents of the city and shall serve two-year terms. The first term of office for the seven (7) appointees and all future terms shall coincide with all other appointed offices in the city and shall be named by the mayor, with the concurrence of council, as provided in the City Code. Their meetings shall be governed by the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(c)  The community development committee shall recommend action to the city council and may not independently act or contract. The committee shall consist of persons whose experience shall provide a balanced expertise to the city in matters of planned and desirable economic development. 
(d)  The purpose of the committee shall be to promote state of local economic development and to stimulate business and commercial activity in the municipality: 
(1)  By development of information and relationships in the public and private sector for the orderly, planned and beneficial development of South Houston, Texas. 
(2)  By recommendation to council of appropriate action, contracts, gifts or grants in furtherance of this purpose. 
(3)  By acting as focal group and monitoring for council and the citizens of South Houston the opportunities for development, the progress of the development we attract and the retention of the development in place. 
(e)  This entity shall be created under the authority of Section 380.001 (a) and (b) of the Texas Local Government Code and not under the Development Corporation Act of 1979 (Article 5190.6 V.A.C.S.). 
(f)  Henceforth, the mayor shall appoint the seven (7) members including the chairman of the community development committee, subject to confirmation of those appointments by council, as provided in the City Code for all such mayoral appointments. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, §§ 1—6, 3-28-00) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2000-06, §§ 1—6, adopted March 28, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 2-27.5 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 2-27.6. - Powers of the mayor. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 99-009, § 1, adopted June 22, 1999, reinstated the powers of the mayor. This section pertained to removal of powers of the mayor by Ord. No. 98-014, adopted 10-13-98 and Ord. No. 98-016, adopted 10-27-98.  
Sec. 2-27.7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-07, § 1, adopted July 13, 2010, repealed § 2-27.7, which pertained to ordinance adoption and derived from Ord. No. 2006-19, §§ 1—3, 6-20-06.  
Sec. 2-27.8. - Real property sales at public auction. 
(a)  That any prospective buyer of city-owned real property who requests that the city sell the real property at public auction in compliance with the V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 253.008, be responsible for providing "earnest money" to the city in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to cover the estimated costs of the public auction (including, but not limited to, the appraisal fee, city incurred attorneys' fees and the publication fee). 
(b)  The two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) earnest money shall be deposited with the city prior to the city's incurring any costs associated with the public auction. 
(c)  That if the buyer who requested the public auction is awarded the high bid at the public auction, the two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) "earnest money" will then be applied and credited toward the purchase price of the real property, the appraisal cost, attorneys' fees, and publication fee. 
(d)  That if the buyer who requested the public auction is not awarded the high bid at the public auction, then the buyer who is the successful high bidder at the public auction shall cover the cost of the appraisal fee, the city incurred attorneys' fees, and the publication fee. After the high bidder pays the costs referenced above, then the city shall, within a reasonable time, refund the two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) earnest money to the bidder who requested the public auction, paid the earnest money to the city, but was not the high bidder. 
(e)  That if there are no bids at the public auction and no sale materializes, then the bidder who requested the public auction and paid the two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) earnest money to the city shall forfeit the lesser of the two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) earnest money or the total sum of costs incurred by the city that is tabulated after the conclusion of the public auction. The most the bidder will forfeit under subsection (e) is two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500). If the total sum of costs incurred by the city that is tabulated after the conclusion of the public auction is less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), then the city shall refund the difference to the bidder within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, §§ 1—5, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 2-27.9. - Certificate pay for state-mandated certification—Code enforcement. 
(a)  That code enforcement employees shall receive the following monthly certificate pay structure for each respective certificate earned by the employee: 
Code enforcement certificate ..... $50.00 
These payments shall be based on the number of certificates held by the employees as of October 27, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 3-3-09) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2009-07, § 1, adopted March 3, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 2-27.9 at the editor's discretion.  
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-28. - Participation in Texas Municipal Retirement System—Elected. 
The city council of the City of South Houston, Texas, on behalf of said city hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those thereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act, and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79)  
Sec. 2-29. - Same—Notification of board of trustees. 
The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the City of South Houston, Texas, has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in said system. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79)  
Sec. 2-30. - Same—Affects all employees of participating departments. 
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his employment. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79)  
Sec. 2-31. - Same—Rate of deposits. 
In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of five (5) percent of the full earnings of each employee of said departments. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79)  
Sec. 2-32. - Authorization of updated service credits; increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  Authorization of updated service credits. 
(1)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A. Government Code Tit. 8, Subtit. G, §§ 853.401 through 853.404, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A. Government Code § 853.402(d) of the TMRS Act). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A. Government Code § 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said V.T.C.A. Government Code § 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A. Government Code § 853.402(c) of the TMRS Act). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A. Government Code § 853.401(d) of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(b)  Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A. Government Code § 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(c)  Dates of allowances and increases. The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2007, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under V.T.C.A. Government Code § 853.404(e) of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in V.T.C.A. Government § 853.404(d) of the TMRS Act. 
(d)  Increased municipal contributions. That effective January 1, 2007, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is two hundred (200) percent of such member's accumulated deposits for each month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. 
(e)  Effective date. Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on the first day of January 2007. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 777, § 1, 12-15-87; Ord. No. 822, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 855, §§ 1—3, 12-27-89; Ord. No. 885, §§ 1—3, 10-16-90; Ord. No. 921 (12-91), §§ 1—4, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 2006-34, §§ 1—3, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 2-33. - Contribution of city—Rate. 
For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement, a sum that is one hundred fifty (150) percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality current service accumulation fund. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79)  
Sec. 2-34. - Same—Remittance to board of trustees; consideration of prior service. 
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the City of South Houston, Texas, the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the City of South Houston, Texas, under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79)  
Sec. 2-35. - Effective date. 
Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall become effective on October 1, 1979. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 8-21-79)  
Sec. 2-35.1. - Supplemental benefits fund. 
(a)  The City of South Houston, Texas, by its city council hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of said city (as above defined) participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Chapter 312, Acts Regular Session, 56th Legislature; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in said fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the City of South Houston, Texas, has elected to participate and have the employees of the above mentioned departments participate in the supplemental benefits fund of said system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in said fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental benefits fund of said system. The City of South Houston, Texas, may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to said fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund. 
(d)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of said city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, provided that the rate of contribution to said fund shall not exceed one-half of one percentum of the earnings of the employees of said city who are covered under said fund; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(e)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the supplemental benefits fund shall be effective October 1, 1979. 
(Ord. No. 653, § 1, 9-4-79)  
Sec. 2-35.2. - Supplemental death benefits. 
(a)  That the City of South Houston hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning on the first day of the calendar month following written notification to the system of the adoption of this section, for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Section XIX of the TMRS Act (Article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended) for each of the city's employees who are members of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided in said Section XIX for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city. 
(b)  The City of South Houston is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of adoption of this section and of the participation of the city in said fund. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 9-4-79)  
Sec. 2-35.3. - Deposits and credits for active service in armed forces. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 853.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 853, Title 8, Government Code as amended, the City of South Houston hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in Section 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00). The City of South Houston agrees that its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 922 (12-91), §§ 1, 2, 12-3-91) 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted by §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 922 (12-91), adopted Dec. 3, 1991, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 2-35.3.  
Sec. 2-36. - Early retirement. 
Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A. Government Code §§ 854.105 and 854.202, 854.405 of Subtit. G of Tit. 8, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of South Houston, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the "system"): 
(a)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may terminate employment and remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity at any time after that member attains an applicable age and service requirement, if that member has at least five (5) years of credited service performed for one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under V.T.C.A. Government Code § 854.202(c) of the Act or are subject to V.T.C.A. § 854.102(e) of the Act. 
(b)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is at least sixty (60) years old and has at least five (5) years of creditable service performed for one or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility under this subsection or are subject to V.T.C.A. Government Code § 854.102(e) of this subtitle. 
(c)  The rights, credits and benefits herein above authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 1, 12-15-87; Ord. No. 2005-39, § 1, 11-1-05)  
Sec. 2-37. - Retirement and severance fund. 
(a)  The retirement and severance fund shall be segregated from the other monies of the city and that only those amounts necessary for the payment of incurred liabilities as heretofore described shall be withdrawn from the principal and accrued interest. 
(b)  The sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each month shall be deposited in the fund and the general fund and the system fund shall pay an appropriate apportioned amount into the fund. The establishment of a permanent budget line item in both the system and general fund accounts is authorized for this purpose to be known as the retirement and severance fund account. 
(c)  One year from the date of establishment of what shall be known henceforth as the retirement and severance fund account and each succeeding year thereafter an audit of the account shall be conducted with a view toward increasing or decreasing the monthly funding based upon prevailing conditions of personnel manning and historical expenses relative to the purpose of the fund. The audit may be conducted by in-house personnel and should changes in the monthly funding be necessitated, a request to do so, in the form of a budget amendment effective at the next semi-annual budget review and approval process shall be made by the mayor. The amounts contained in the retirement and severance fund account shall be reported to the city council and the public as a portion of each finance resolution. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 3, 9-26-89) 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted by § 3 of Ord. No. 848, adopted Sept. 26, 1989, and designated as § 2-44.1, have been redesignated and included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 2-37.  
Sec. 2-37.1. - Benefit accumulation fund. 
Pursuant to Section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its account in the benefit accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the system's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 1, 10-23-12)  
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL POLICY 
 
Sec. 2-38. - Personnel policy adopted by reference; contents. 
(a)  The personnel policy of the city, inapplicable to the police department where inconsistent with state legislative civil service rules, as attached hereto and made a part hereof, is hereby approved and adopted. 
(b)  The personnel policy incorporated herein for all purposes, contains a Table of Contents; Section I, Authority in Administration; Section II, Initial Employment Information and Requirements; Section III, Attendance and Absence; Section IV, Administrative Policies; Section V, Discipline, Appeals and Grievances; Section VI, Fringe Benefits; Section VII, Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(Ord. No. 800, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 2011-39, §§ 1, 2, 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-04, §§ 2, 4, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 2, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-09, § 2, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2014-30, § 1, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 2, 6-9-15) 
Editor's note— The text of the personnel policy adopted in § 2-38 is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city.  
Secs. 2-39—2-47. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SOCIAL SECURITY 
 
Sec. 2-48. - Execution of agreements. 
(a)  The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of securing federal old age and survivors insurance coverage and benefits for employees of the city under applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for the purposes stated in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Social security for municipal employees, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 606.  
Sec. 2-49. - Duties of city secretary. 
The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and reports, as required by the state department of public welfare in connection with the federal old age and survivors insurance program. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, § 3)  
Sec. 2-50. - Fund established. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the state and federal laws relative to the federal old age and survivors insurance program, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the City of South Houston Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, § 4)  
Secs. 2-51—2-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLICE CIVIL SERVICE 
 
Sec. 2-59. - Implementation. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the adoption of the Policemans Civil Service Act (Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Article 1269m) by the citizens of South Houston in a referendum election of April 7, 1984. The provisions of said Act are to be fully implemented upon the effective date of this ordinance Number 717, adopted August 7, 1984 and effective from and after October 1, 1984. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 1, 8-7-84) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, § 1 of Ord. No. 717, adopted Aug. 7, 1984, has been codified herein as § 2-59.  
Sec. 2-60. - Classifications. 
There are hereby established the following classifications of employees within the South Houston Police Department which shall be subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Ch. 143, Policemen's Civil Service, to wit: Cadet, patrolman, sergeant and captain. 
(Ord. No. 722, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 727, § 1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 12-10-85; Ord. No. 740, § 2, 7-29-86; Ord. No. 2007-17, § 2, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 4-1-08; Ord. No. 2009-31, § 2, 11-10-09)  
Sec. 2-61. - Number of positions. 
There are hereby established the following number of authorized positions in each of the foregoing classifications, to wit: 
Classification 	Number of Authorized Positions 
Patrolman 	23 
Sergeant 	5 
Captain 	2 
 
(Ord. No. 722, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 725, § 2(A), 2-14-85; Ord. No. 727, § 1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 729, § 2, 7-2-85; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 12-10-85; Ord. No. 740, § 2, 7-29-86; Ord. No. 808, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 844, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 938 (4-92), § 1, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 2002-18, § 1, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2003-18, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 1, 12-2-03; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 2, 4-1-08; Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-13-15; Ord. No. 2017-41 , § 1, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 2-62. - Pay schedules. 
That effective October 1, 2018, the rate of hourly pay for all classified civil service employees of the City of South Houston, according to the years of service in the classification held, shall be as follows: 
Classification 	Cadet 	First, second and third years 	Fourth, fifth and sixth years 	Seventh, eighth and ninth years 	Tenth, eleventh and twelfth years 	Thirteenth and more years 
Patrolman 	$22.18 	$23.24 	$24.99 	$26.75 	$28.50 	$31.42 
 
Classification 	First, second and third years 	Fourth, fifth and sixth years 	Seventh and more years 
Sergeant 	$31.55 	$32.01 	$32.88 
 
Classification 	First, second and third years 	Fourth and more years 
Captain 	$33.18 	$34.34 
 
The number of years in a classification shall be based on: (i) the individual officer's "Entry on Duty" date, as that term is defined in the civil service rules, or (ii) on the individual's classification appointment date. 
(Ord. No. 722, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 725, § 2(B), 2-14-85; Ord. No. 727, § 1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 12-10-85; Ord. No. 734, § 1, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 740, § 2, 7-29-86; Ord. No. 840, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 895, § 1, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 901, § 1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 97-032, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2001-02, §§ 1, 2, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 2006-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 2007-18, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2007-23, §§ 1, 2, 11-20-07; Ord. No. 2008-21, §§ 1, 2, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 2016-20, §§ 1, 2, 10-11-16; Ord. No. 2018-18 , §§ 1, 2, 10-23-18)  
Sec. 2-63. - Certificate pay for state-mandated certification. 
The police officers of the city shall receive the following monthly certificate pay structure for each respective state-mandated certificate, above basic required levels, earned by the police officer, which consists of a maximum of three (3): 
Intermediate certificate is worth: ..... $50.00 
Advanced certificate is worth: ..... $75.00 
Master certificate is worth: ..... $125.00 
All instructor certificates shall be grandfathered at one hundred dollars ($100.00). No additional instructor certificates will be issued. 
These payments shall be based on the number of certificates held by the police officers at the beginning of the fiscal year, e.g., October 1. No payments shall be made for those certificates earned by the police officers after October 1 and continuing to the end of the fiscal year. 
The police department dispatcher employees shall receive the following monthly certificate pay structure for each respective certificate earned by the employee: 
Intermediate telecommunication ..... $50.00 
These payments shall be based on the number of certificates held by the employees as of October 27, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 99-029, § 1, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2003-15, § 1, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 2003-15A, § 1, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 2005-41, § 2, 11-1-05; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 1, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2015-18, § 2, 11-24-15)  
Sec. 2-64. - Office of director of firefighter's and police officer's civil service. 
(a)  There is hereby created the officer of director of firefighters' and police officer's civil service (known as "director"). The director shall be appointed by the civil service commissioners. The commission may remove the director at any time. 
(b)  The director shall serve as secretary to the commission and perform work incidental to civil service system as required by the commission. 
(c)  The city council hereby sets the salary of the civil service director at a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month and a per hour rate of eight dollars ($8.00) per hour that the director works in the performance of the work for the civil service commission. 
(d)  The appointment of the civil service director and salary shall become effective as of March 31, 1988. 
(Ord. No. 797, § 1, 6-7-88)  
Secs. 2-65—2-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-015, § 2, adopted April 19, 1994, repealed former art. IV, §§ 2-81—2-86, relative to city council meetings, and § 1 of said Ord. No. 94-015 enacted a new art. IV, §§ 2-81—2-88, to read as herein set out. The provisions of former art. IV derived from Ord. No. 726, §§ 1—6, adopted April 16, 1985. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Definitions. 
Interested party means any person who claims an interest in a matter on the council's agenda and is so situated that the disposition of the agenda may, as a practical matter, impair or impede the person's ability to protect that interest. 
Nonresident means any person who does not have a legal fixed domicile within the boundaries of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
Presiding officer means the mayor who shall preside at all meetings of the governing body. If the mayor is absent, fails, is unable, or refuses to act, the president pro tempore shall preside. If the mayor and the president pro tempore are absent, fail, are unable, or refuse to act, any alderman may be appointed to preside at the meeting by a majority of the aldermen in attendance. 
Resident means any person having a legal fixed domicile within the boundaries of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
Secretary means the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94)  
Sec. 2-82. - Time and location of regular meetings. 
The governing body shall hold its regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at a place and time designated on the agenda. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 96-010, § 1, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 96-029, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 97-002, § 1, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 97-021, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 98-013, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 98-015, § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 98-025, § 1, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 2000-111, § 1, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 7-7-09)  
Sec. 2-83. - Agenda. 
(a)  The secretary shall make public, in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, an agenda containing all business to be discussed at a meeting of the city council. 
(b)  Any city council member or mayor wishing to place any item(s) on the council agenda may submit the item(s) in writing to the secretary not later than 12:00 noon of the fourth day preceding the meeting. The secretary shall designate verbatim, and post on said agenda for each city council meeting, in the chronological order requested, any items timely requested by any one or more city council members, or the mayor, for inclusion and consideration and/or action on the agendas of meetings of the South Houston City Council, without modification. No other member or members of the governing body may preclude, prevent, impede or otherwise interfere with the inclusion or consideration of such agenda items and/or action thereon. 
(c)  Any resident or non-resident wishing to address or discuss with the city council a topic which has not been placed on the council agenda may submit a written request to the secretary to place such topic on the agenda. Such written request must be received not later than 12:00 noon on the fourth day preceding the meeting. If the request is approved by any member of the governing body of the City of South Houston, the secretary shall place the item(s) on the agenda of the council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 95-018, § 1, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 96-007, § 2, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 5-16-06)  
Sec. 2-84. - Parliamentary procedure. 
To ensure that the will of the majority prevails while the right of the minority to be heard is protected, "Robert's Rules of Order" shall prevail at all meetings of the city council to the extent that "Robert's Rules of Order" does not conflict with the Texas Open Meetings Act, state statute, or this ordinance. Unless otherwise prescribed by law, council action on all motions shall be decided by a simple majority vote of the council. All of the chairman's decisions regarding procedures, including the chairman's refusal to allow a motion to be considered, are subject to appeal by any member of the council. A simple majority vote is all that is required to overrule the chairman on procedural issues. If the chairman refuses to honor the appeal, the person making the appeal may state the question and put the question to a vote. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94)  
Sec. 2-85. - Minutes. 
(a)  The city secretary shall attend each meeting of the governing body and shall keep, in a record provided for that purpose, accurate minutes of the governing body's proceedings. 
(b)  A council member shall have the privilege of entering an abstract of his statements on any subject pertaining to city business and affairs in the minutes. 
(c)  The city secretary, with consent of the council, may enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming regularly before the council. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94)  
Sec. 2-86. - Presentation to the city council. 
(a)  Request by resident. Any resident who wishes to address the council on any matter on the council agenda may do so by signing a list provided at any time prior to opening of the meeting and specifying the particular subject matter of such address. If the subject matter listed by the resident who wishes to speak refers to an agenda item that has been placed on the agenda for the particular council session, the resident will be allowed to speak prior to any council action on that agenda item. 
(b)  Request by nonresident. Any nonresident wishing to address the council shall notify the secretary and specify his interest in the matter being considered twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time the meeting is being held. Upon timely notification, a nonresident shall be permitted to address the council when the applicant claims an interest in a matter on the council's agenda, and he is so situated that the disposition of the agenda may, as a practical matter, impair or impede his ability to protect that interest. 
(c)  Reading of protests, etc. Upon complying with the provisions of this section, interested persons may, at their discretion, address the council by reading of protests, petitions, or communications in regard to matters under the council's consideration. 
(d)  Written communication. All interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the council by written communication regarding matters under the council's consideration. 
(e)  Recognition. No person shall address the council without first being recognized by the presiding officer or a majority of members of the council in attendance. 
(f)  Procedure. Each person, upon being properly recognized, shall address the council through the microphone provided for the use of the public and give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records, state the subject he wishes to discuss, state whom he is representing if he represents an organization or other persons, and unless further time is granted by majority vote of the council, shall limit his remarks as follows: When speaking on agenda items, limit to five (5) minutes or, if speaking on nonagenda items, to ten (10) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a whole and not to any member thereof. Members of council may enter into discussion with or question the person addressing council. 
(g)  Spokesperson for group. In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the council and, in case additional matters are to be presented by any other member of said group, to limit the number of such persons addressing the council. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94)  
Sec. 2-87. - Rules of decorum. 
(a)  Members of the governing body. While the council is in session, all members of the governing body must preserve and maintain order and decorum. 
(1)  Subject matter. Every member desiring to speak shall confine discussion to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(2)  Interruptions. A member of the city council shall not be interrupted while speaking. 
(3)  No member of the governing body shall speak during the citizens' hearing, except as herein permitted, and all members shall refrain from making expressly impertinent, slanderous, discourteous or profane remarks and shall not willfully utter loud, threatening or abusive language, nor engage in any disorderly conduct which would impede, disrupt, or disturb the orderly conduct of any meeting, hearing, or other proceedings. 
(4)  No member of the governing body shall violate any portion of section 2-87, as amended, including, but not limited to, subsection (a)(1) styled "subject matter" which says; "Every member desiring to speak shall confine discussion to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language." This quoted portion of subsection (a)(1) is interpreted to apply to all other portions of the agenda when the public is restricted from speaking. 
(b)  Persons addressing council. Any resident may address council during the citizens' hearing portions of any agenda. Addressing council means that comments shall be directed to council, not questions asked of council. Those who are permitted to address council do not include members of the governing body. This is for citizens, as distinguished from council members, because council members are not restricted to one part of the agenda and they have adequate time to speak during the rest of the meeting when the public is not allowed to speak. The public only has these two (2) agenda positions to make their desires known to council. The citizens' hearing for agenda items to be limited to five (5) minutes from the time he or she commences talking. The citizens' hearing for nonagenda items to be limited to three (3) minutes from the time he or she commences talking. No council member shall be permitted to speak or interrupt during the citizens' hearing portion of the agenda, without the consent of a majority of council, unless an express exception applies, and his or her attempt to speak during the citizens' hearing shall be out of order. These are the exceptions: 
(1)  The mayor may speak on parliamentary procedure and shall speak to preserve order. During the citizens' hearing portion of the agenda, the mayor shall confine his or her comments to the ceremonial aspects of his or her role and to matters pertaining to how the meeting shall proceed. On any item other than a discussion of procedure or reasonable and valid point of order, he or she shall not permit a council member to speak without the approval of a majority of council. 
(2)  A council person may speak to exercise his or her right to remove a disorderly member of the audience, allowed herein and to raise points of parliamentary procedure on a valid point of order. 
(3)  A council person may speak about removal of violators of decorum rules and during and about parliamentary matters dealing with rulings or actions by the presiding officer, but not otherwise. 
Any member of the public making expressly impertinent, slanderous, discourteous or profane remarks or who willfully utters loud, threatening or abusive language, or who engages in any disorderly conduct which would impede, disrupt, or disturb the orderly conduct of any meeting, hearing, or other proceedings, shall be called to order by any member of the governing body, and if such conduct continues, may, at the discretion of any member of the governing body, be removed and barred from further audience before the council during the meeting. Such removal power shall not be exercised to eject from the meeting a voting member of council, or any officer, employee or consultant, for the city scheduled to assist council (as part of his or her job) in meetings to make a presentation or give testimony about a particular agenda item on the agenda when that agenda item is under deliberation, at the meeting at which he or she is in attendance. Physical intimidation, taunts, threats or similar menacing conduct shall not be tolerated from a member of the audience or from a member of the governing body. If a mayor or member of council persists in such unacceptable behavior, he or she may be publicly censured by council and council may pursue other remedies until such conduct ceases or that person is no longer a member of council. The remedy for boorish and/or menacing behavior in a public official shall be reprimand, censure, impeachment or removal from office but not removal from a meeting at which he or she has a right to vote, unless he or she commits a breach of the peace or a violation of the Texas Penal Code. In other words, this section shall not be used to remove such an official, but there are limits to such conduct that may justify removal. 
(c)  Members of the audience. No person in the audience shall engage in disorderly conduct such as hand clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, use of profane or vulgar language, yelling, holding placards and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs the peace and good order of the meeting. 
(d)  Persons authorized to be within certain area. No person except members of the council and the city staff shall be permitted past the speaker's stand without the consent of the presiding officer or a majority vote of council members in attendance. 
(e)  No member of the public shall violate any portion of section 2-87 of the South Houston Code, as amended. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this section and the penalties shall be those provided for ordinance violation in the City Code. 
(g)  The provisions of this section are severable. If any portion is declared to be unenforceable, the remaining portions shall be enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 97-018, §§ 1—5, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 97-020, §§ 1—5, 8-5-97)  
Sec. 2-88. - Lighting for cameras and recording devices. 
Supplemental lighting for television and motion picture cameras shall be used only with the exercise of extreme discretion with regard to the intensity and duration of such lighting and with a view to creating the least amount of interference with or disturbance of the proceedings of the council and the least amount of discomfort to council members and the public in attendance. The majority of council members shall have the authority to determine whether the intensity and/or duration of supplemental lighting is such that it disturbs the proceedings of the council and upon making such a determination require that the use of such lighting be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 94-015, § 1, 4-19-94)  
Secs. 2-89—2-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 892, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 1990, amended the Code by the addition of provisions designated as Art. V, which provisions have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as §§ 2-101—2-116. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Definition of municipality records. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form of characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by South Houston or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the City of South Houston and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provision of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(1), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-102. - Additional definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the record maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 2-110. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-107. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-105. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-108. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, of the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(2), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-103. - Municipal records declared public property. 
All municipality records as defined in section 2-101 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipality official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or complied them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(3), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-104. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(4), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-105. - Records management officer—Designation. 
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(5), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-106. - Same—Duties. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in it implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipality office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the municipality; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor record retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the municipality and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in their records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of municipality [records] is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the municipality on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the municipality noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(8), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-107. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
A records management committee consisting of the department head's records liaison officers is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(6), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-108. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission of the municipality. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(7), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-109. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(9), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-110. - Records liaison officers—Designated. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as a records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for the department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(10), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-111. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program, in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(11), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-112. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect recordkeeping procedures and needs to the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a record control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(12), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-113. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-108 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on a record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head shall request in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(13), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-114. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(14), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-115. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-108 shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-108. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(15), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-116. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the municipality, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of municipality records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1(16), 11-21-90)  
Sec. 2-117. - Fees—Birth certificates and death certificates. 
The City of South Houston shall charge a fee or fees, as set forth in the following schedule for issuance of birth certificates and death certificates: 
Issuance of a birth certificate ..... $22.00 
Additional copies ordered at the same time, each ..... $3.00 
Issuance of a death certificate ..... $20.00 
Additional copies ordered at the same time, each ..... $3.00 
Fees collected on the issuance of a vital statistics record ..... $1.00 
(Ord. No. 2004-28, § 1, 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2005-46, § 1, 12-6-05; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-118. - "Dead-letter" file. 
No document may be removed from an employee's personnel file, except by council action. Any council action removing any document from any employee's personnel file shall be attached to the document to be removed and refiled in a "dead-letter" file to be kept and maintained by the human resources department as a public record. 
All other documents shall remain in the employee's personnel file for the retention period. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 1, 3-6-07)  
Secs. 2-119—2-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CITY-OWNED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, adopted December 21, 1993, amended the Code by the addition of §§ 2-200—2-208, which provisions have been redesignated at the discretion of the editor as §§ 2-131—2-139. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Assignment of vehicles. 
Individuals may be assigned a city-owned vehicle by the city council if they meet one of the following criteria: 
(a)  They work alone and are away from the usual worksite a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the scheduled work time; 
(b)  The vehicle is a special use vehicle specific to the job or is used for transporting special equipment; or 
(c)  The individual to whom the vehicle is assigned is a person with on-call status. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-132. - Responsibility. 
Employees or other individuals assigned said vehicles will be responsible for seeing that the vehicle is kept in good working condition and for maintaining its current state vehicle inspection status. Maintenance service and repair shall be in accordance with usual city practices. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-133. - Home storage restrictions. 
An individual assigned a vehicle for home storage, rather than on work-site storage, may drive that vehicle to and from home provided all the following factors are met: 
(a)  Adequate safe parking is available; 
(b)  The home is within one mile of South Houston city limits, or is within the city limits; 
(c)  The vehicle is not used for personal business, except as specified in this policy. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-134. - Home storage assignments. 
City employees who may be assigned a city-owned vehicle for home storage are: 
(a)  Personnel with substantial emergency responsibilities; 
(b)  Police officers assigned a marked vehicle under police department policy approved by the governing body. 
(c)  The city's warrant officer is exempt from the provisions of this article VI pertaining to the city-owned vehicle assigned to him. 
(d)  One detective on call is authorized for home storage of his vehicle during the times that he is designated as "detective on call". 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 2004-11, §§ 1, 2, 4-20-04)  
Sec. 2-135. - Special vehicles. 
Special vehicles which can respond directly to a call or emergency and are assigned to an individual on call may be stored at home provided all the conditions in sections 2-131 through 2-139 of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 2-136. - Statement of policy. 
Employees' convenience does not constitute a basis for home storage authorization and the city has no obligation to provide employees means of transportation to and from work. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-137. - Marking of vehicles. 
All city vehicles will be marked in accordance with the state law. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-138. - Driver's license required. 
All employees who drive city vehicles must keep on file with the city secretary a copy of a valid Texas driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-139. - Personal use of city vehicles. 
(a)  An individual who is on call or scheduled stand-by and has been assigned a vehicle for home storage, and who is subject to call at a moment's notice, may use the vehicle as personal transportation. 
(b)  An individual who is assigned a city-owned vehicle and does not have a personal car with him at work may use the city vehicle for going to lunch, doctor's appointments, etc., that require leaving and returning to the workplace, provided that the trip is not outside the city. 
(c)  An individual can make short stops in the city vehicle when going to and from work, but reasonable discretion should be used. 
(d)  If a take-home city vehicle is issued to an employee and is being used for personal use because of being subject to an emergency call, his/her immediate family members, who reside with the employee, may be carried as passengers. When the vehicle is being used for city business, only city employees may be in the vehicle. 
(e)  Other personal use of the city-owned vehicle is specifically prohibited. Violation of this policy constitutes just cause for employee discipline and/or termination. 
(Ord. No. 990 (12-93), § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-140. - Chief of police and the two captains in command. 
The chief of police and the two captains in command are exempt from the provisions of this article VI pertaining to the city owned vehicles assigned to them, providing their residences are within twenty (20) miles of South Houston city limits, or within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2006-29, § 2, 10-3-06)  
Sec. 2-141. - Crime control and prevention district. 
Police officers assigned to the crime control and prevention district are exempt from the provisions of this article VI pertaining to the city-owned vehicles assigned to them. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 3, 4-20-04)  
Sec. 2-142. - Public works director. 
The public works director is exempt from the provisions of this article VI pertaining to the city owned vehicle assigned to him. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 1, 3-1-05)  
Chapter 2.5 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 2.5-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
Alarm agent: Any individual employed by an alarm business whose duties including altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to, or monitoring an alarm system. It shall also mean any person employed or otherwise associated with an alarm business who has access to confidential information relating to a customer or subscriber of such alarm business which could be used to compromise or defeat an alarm system. 
Alarm user: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained, except for alarm systems on private residential property, or on motor vehicles, and except for alarm systems maintained by federal, state, county or municipal governments. 
Central station: Any premise, usually maintained by an alarm company, equipped to receive and displace signals from any type alarms. 
Chief of police: The Chief of the South Houston Police Department or his designated representative. 
City: The City of South Houston, Texas. 
Dial alarm: Any alarm or device which automatically selects a telephone line connected to police headquarters and reproduces a prerecorded message to report a criminal intrusion or other emergency requiring police response. 
False alarm: The activation of an alarm system or device through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, inclement weather, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or device or his employees, agents or representatives. Specifically excepted are acts of God, such as false alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and the like. 
Hold-up alarm: Any type alarm system or device designated to be activated by the alarm user or subscriber in the event of a hold-up or robbery. 
Home alarm: Any alarm device or system which is connected to a residence, excluding smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors. 
Person: Any individual, corporation, business, school district or other organization. 
Subscriber: A person that buys, leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system, other than a residential alarm system, and who contracts with an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm system 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(I), 11-26-96; Ord. No. 97-030, § 1, 11-11-97)  
Sec. 2.5-2. - Records. 
(a)  Every subscriber or alarm user of an alarm system or device within the city shall supply the records division or designated agent, with the name of at least two (2) people or an answering service which can reach people having access to and control over the building or area protected by such alarm system or device, who must be capable of disengaging the alarm. The subscriber must update such information with chief of police within three (3) days after any such person in no longer employed, available, or entitled to enter and exercise control over the premises and disengage such alarm. 
(b)  The person designated by the subscriber above shall be present at the scene of an alarm activation within twenty-five (25) minutes of being notified by the alarm agent or the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(II), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-3. - Permits. 
(a)  Before any alarm system is installed in the city, the person performing the installation, whether the alarm system company, user, or subscriber shall obtain a user permit for said installation. Such permit shall be maintained at the police department and shall be obtained from the chief of police or his designee by January 31 of each year. Any unlicensed alarm user, subscriber or person maintaining an alarm system with the city shall, within thirty (30) days of notification by the city police department, obtain a permit for the use of the system. The alarm user shall be responsible for renewal of the user permit, which renewal shall be obtained from the chief of police or his designee by January 31 of each year. Current alarm users or subscribers shall have until January 15, 1997, to come into compliance with this chapter requiring permits. Any system installed or any permit applied for at any time during the calendar year shall require a permit prior to installation, which permit cost shall be for the balance of the calendar year. Such permit shall expire on December thirty-first of the year issued. 
(b)  The permit shall require a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per year in the event the sound or signal produced is not activated at the police station and shall require thirty dollars ($30.00) per year in the event of activation of a sound or signal at the police station. An application for such permit shall be furnished by the police department to the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Telephone number of applicant; 
(3)  Location of the alarm system and detailed description of the alarm system. 
(4)  Name of two (2) people capable of disengaging the system. 
(c)  The purpose of the permit is to provide sufficient information so that the city police department, when necessary, may provide assistance at the scene without undue delay caused by lack of information such as addresses, phone numbers and the like. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(III), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-4. - Power supply. 
Any alarm system which necessitates response by a law enforcement agency or is a public alarm shall be provided with standby power to automatically maintain the system in a normal condition for a period of four (4) hours in the event of the interruption of the primary power source. This does not apply where the central monitoring equipment produces a distinctive signal indicating power failure at the protected premises and a police response is not required. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(IV), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-5. - Maintenance. 
All alarm systems shall be subject to repair of correction no later than the end of the business day following the day on which the user or alarm agent receives notification of the need for such service. Each installation shall be thoroughly inspected once each year. A copy of the inspection shall be sent to the chief of police by the alarm agent on a yearly basis. The police chief of his delegate may require more frequent inspection. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(V), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-6. - Mechanical malfunctions. 
Whenever two (2) false alarms have been received within a one month period by the police department, it shall be the responsibility of the alarm agent to inspect and repair the alarms upon notification by alarm user or subscriber. The alarm agent shall send a copy of the inspection to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(VI), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-7. - Dial alarm receiving equipment. 
After the enactment of this chapter, no automatic protection devices known as dial alarms or dialers will be installed and keyed to any police emergency trunk line. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(VII), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-8. - Testing of equipment. 
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of a police alarm device or system in the city without first obtaining permission from the chief of police or his authorized representative. Permission to conduct such test of a police alarm device or system shall not be necessary when the alarm device is connected to an intermediary receiver and not relayed to police headquarters and precaution has been taken to ensure that such test will not cause police response or alarm to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(VIII), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-9. - Inspection. 
The city shall be entitled to inspect any alarm installation during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(IX), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-10. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the fine established in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston. 
(b)  The knowing failure of an alarm user to inspect or repair an alarm where required herein is an offense hereunder. Each day during which such failure continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The intentional installation or maintenance of an alarm not in accordance with the requirements of this chapter is an offense hereunder. 
(d)  It is an offense to knowingly or recklessly fail to attend upon the scene of an alarm activation within the time period set forth herein after actual notice has been given to the person designated to enter and control any premises. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(X), 11-26-96)  
Sec. 2.5-11. - Cost of response. 
The following fees shall be charged to the alarm user for each response by the city for an alarm which has caused or experienced more than five (5) false alarms in any one calendar year: 
For the 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th alarm response call: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per call. 
For the 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th alarm response call: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per call. 
For the 16th and any more alarm response calls: Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per call. 
These charges or fees shall be due and payable whether or not any of the 6th through the 16th or greater alarm response calls are characterized as false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(XI), 11-26-96; Ord. No. 97-030, § 2, 11-11-97)  
Sec. 2.5-12. - Exemption for charge for cost of response. 
An exemption from the above-delineated charge for response to false alarms may be granted, upon recommendation of the chief of police, for alarms that are activated by telephone circuit problems. 
(Ord. No. 96-030, § 1(XII), 11-26-96)  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
All definitions of words, terms, and phrases, as set forth in the Texas Liquor Control Act, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof by reference for the purpose of enforcing and interpreting this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-9-50, § 1)  
Sec. 3-2. - License to manufacture, sell, distribute, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, brew, distill, sell or distribute any wine, beer, liquor or other alcoholic beverage, or engage in any other activity for which a license or permit is required by the Texas Liquor Control Act, within the city, without first obtaining a license so to do from the city secretary. The annual fee for such license shall be one-half (½) the amount of the permit or license fee charged by the state for a similar activity. Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall run concurrently with the state license or permit held by the licensee. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. of 1-9-50, §§ 2—8) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy and collect fees for alcoholic beverage licenses and permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code 11.38, 61.36.  
Sec. 3-3. - Sale for on-premises consumption restricted to certain locations. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold shall be permitted only in establishments located on the following streets or portions thereof: 
(1)  Galveston Highway, from Winkler Highway to the south city limits. 
(2)  College Avenue, from East Haven Boulevard to Galveston Highway. 
(3)  Shaver Street, from the north city limits south to the north side of Pampa Street. 
(4)  Spencer Highway, from Shaver Street to Galveston Highway or Houston Boulevard. 
(5)  Winkler Highway, from Main Street to Allen Street. 
(6)  Lots 1 through 4, Block 13, City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas, on the south side of Virginia Avenue between Jackson Street and Galveston Street. 
(7)  Lots 1, 2, 3, 10, 11 and 12, Block 327, City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas, otherwise known as 401 Pennsylvania, South Houston, Texas. 
(8)  Allen-Genoa Road, from Kolb Road to South Shaver Street, providing 60% of business comes from sources other than alcoholic drinks. 
(b)  No license shall be issued authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in any establishment not located in accord with this section. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize the sale of any alcoholic beverage in violation of section 3-4. 
(Ord. No. 498, §§ 2—4, 11-14-62; Ord. No. 957 (9-92), § 1, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 2, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 2, 5-16-06)  
Sec. 3-4. - Sale near church, school or hospital. 
The sale of beer, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverages by any dealer whose principal business is the sale of such beverages is hereby prohibited in all cases where the place of business of such dealer is within three hundred (300) feet of any church, hospital, school or other educational institution, the measurements to be along the property lines of the street fronts, from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections where they occur. 
(Ord. of 1-9-50, § 9; Ord. No. 498, § 3, 11-14-62) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33.  
Sec. 3-5. - Consumption in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages in any public place within the limits of the city, except in taverns and other establishments licensed by the state for the sale of such beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 356, 6-20-55)  
Chapter 3.5 - AMBULANCE SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— City-owned vehicles, § 2-131 et seq.; emergency management, Ch. 8.5; police, Ch. 16.5; traffic, Ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 3.5-1. - Ambulance transportation fees. 
Beginning November 1, 1996, the city's emergency medical services (EMS) department shall invoice persons receiving the following services: 
(1)  Ambulance transport ..... $350.00 
(2)  Expenses for other services and drug treatments: 
a.  BLS routine disposable supplies, to be added to all invoices from the EMS department ..... 25.00 
b.  Oxygen ..... 6.00 
c.  Intravenous solutions, each ..... 10.00 
Routine drugs, each ..... 10.00 
Drugs: Adenosine, each ..... 25.00 
Disposable drug delivery system, to be added to invoices involving drug treatments ..... 15.00 
(Ord. No. 96-031, 10-15-96) 
Cross reference— Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle, § 22-23.  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - City designated as bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 599, 5-2-72)  
Sec. 4-2. - Trapping, shooting, molesting, etc., birds or wild fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests within the city. 
(Ord. No. 599, 5-2-72) 
Cross reference— Prohibition against discharge of firearms in city, § 12-4.  
Sec. 4-3. - Destruction of birds constituting nuisance or menace to health. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4-2, if Starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property, in the opinion of the proper health authorities, such authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three (3) days' actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such clubs. If, as a result of such meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 599, 5-2-72) 
State Law reference— Authority to define and abate nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.002.  
Sec. 4-4. - Keeping or exhibiting wild or dangerous animals. 
(a)  The keeping, housing, caging or exhibiting of any wild animals or domestic animals that might be or become dangerous, obnoxious or a public nuisance or disturb or affect the health and peace of the citizens of the city is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to animals exhibited by a circus, animal show or educational exhibit for not more than ten (10) days, when a permit for the exhibition has been issued and proper safety guards are used and such animals are confined in cages such as are used or approved by the public zoo, or the building inspector or the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 530, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-65)  
Sec. 4-5. - Rabies control generally. 
(a)  Every animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or any animal that bites, scratches or otherwise attacks any person within the city, shall be impounded and held for a period of fourteen (14) days in the city dog pound or any veterinary hospital designated by the health officer, and under the supervision of the health officer. 
(b)  Every animal that has been exposed to rabies shall be confined at once in the city dog pound or in some veterinary hospital designated by the health officer and kept there under the supervision of the health officer for such period of time as he may deem necessary. 
(c)  Any animal that has rabies or that is suspected of having rabies shall not be allowed, at any time, on the streets or public ways of the city until such animal is released from observation by the health officer or his deputy. 
(d)  The owner, keeper or person in charge of any animal that has rabies, or that has been exposed to rabies, or that has symptoms thereof, or that has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person within the city, shall, on demand, turn over such animal to the health officer or to his deputy. 
(e)  The body of any animal that has died of rabies shall not be disposed of except as directed by the health officer. 
(f)  The provisions of this section relating to animals which have bitten a person shall not apply to dogs. In the case of a dog having bitten a person, the procedure prescribed by section 4-24 shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 1, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-6. - Veterinarians to report communicable diseases. 
Every veterinarian or other person who is called to examine or professionally attend any animal within the city having glanders or farcy, rabies, tuberculosis or any other communicable disease shall, within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter, report in writing to the health officer the following facts:. 
(1)  A statement of the location of such diseased animal. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner thereof. 
(3)  The type and character of the disease. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-7. - Training animals or fowl for fighting. 
No person shall possess, harbor, or maintain care or custody of any animal or fowl for fighting contests, nor shall any person train, torment, badger, bait, or use any animal for the reason of causing or encouraging the animal to attack human beings or domestic animals. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, § 1, 6-4-02)  
Sec. 4-8. - Advisory board to humane department. 
(a)  There is hereby created an advisory board to the humane department of the city consisting of five (5) members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(b)  The advisory board shall consist of: 
(1)  A duly licensed veterinarian. 
(2)  A municipal official. 
(3)  Two (2) persons whose duties include the daily operation of the animal shelter. 
(4)  A person who is a representative of an animal welfare organization. 
(c)  The first appointments to positions created hereby shall be made immediately after the final passage hereof, and appointments thereafter shall be made on or before January 2nd of each year and take effect on that date. All appointments shall be from the effective date of appointment until January 2, 2005, and on each January 2nd thereafter; but each member of the board shall serve until his/her successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(d)  Members of the advisory board shall serve without pay. 
(e)  Three (3) members of the advisory board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the board and a majority vote of the members present shall prevail. 
(f)  The board shall elect its chairman, vice-chairman and a secretary. Employees of the city shall not serve as officers of the board. The terms of all elected officers shall be concurrent and limited within the term of the officers' board membership. The meeting procedure and order of business shall be prescribed by the board. 
(g)  The advisory board shall prepare a written report to the mayor indicating therein the official actions of the board. 
(h)  The board shall make such investigations regarding the humane department and the animal shelter operated by the city as deemed necessary or advisable by the board and prepare a written report thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2003-21, §§ 1—8, 12-2-03)  
Secs. 4-9—4-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Registration and restraint of dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-17. - License. 
(a)  An initial issuance or renewal of each license must be made by the owner and be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00); provided, however that the fee for an animal that has been spayed or neutered shall be a one-time fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) valid for the life of the animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or have in his possession in the city on the premises owned or occupied by him, or at any other place, a dog for which a license for the current year has not been obtained as provided in this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this section requiring the licensing of dogs shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Dogs under the age of six (6) months, if kept within a sufficient enclosure. 
(2)  Dogs owned by, or in custody or under the control of, persons who are nonresidents of the city, traveling through the city, or temporarily sojourning therein for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
(3)  Dogs brought to the city exclusively for the purpose of entering the same in any dog show or exhibition, and which are actually entered in and kept at such show or exhibition. 
(4)  Dogs duly and properly trained to aid or assist blind persons when any such dogs are actually being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding or assisting such blind persons in going from place to place. 
(5)  Dogs kept in kennels, as defined in section 4-31, but the owner or keeper of such kennel shall pay a kennel license fee as provided in section 4-32. 
(d)  The office of the assessor and collector of taxes and the office of the humane officer of the city shall be the places where persons owning, keeping or having in possession any dog shall pay the license fee provided for in this section. Upon the payment of such fee, it shall be the duty of the issuing authority to furnish the person paying same with a license tag upon which shall be a number and the year for which it is issued, which tag shall be attached to the collar or harness of the dog for which issued, and worn by the dog at all times when upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds of the city; provided, nothing in this section shall be construed as in any way excusing a licensed dog from the restrictions imposed by section 4-19. 
(e)  No dog license shall be issued unless there is exhibited to the licensing authority a certificate by a veterinarian showing that the dog to be licensed has, within twelve (12) months prior to the date of the license to be issued, been inoculated against rabies as required by section 4-18. 
(f)  The license issuing authority shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued under the terms of this section, which record shall show the name and address of all persons being issued a license tag, the number of the license tag issued, the date issued and the amount paid therefor. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, §§ 2—6, 3-30-60; Ord. No. 567, § 4, 3-5-68; Ord. No. 94-026, § 1, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-18. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs in the city over six (6) months of age must be vaccinated for rabies at least one time annually. All dogs in the city, as and when they become six (6) months of age, shall, upon attaining such age, be vaccinated one time for rabies and shall be vaccinated for rabies at least one time annually thereafter. All dogs which are brought into the city and which are more than six (6) months of age and which have not been vaccinated for rabies within twelve (12) months prior thereto shall be vaccinated at least one time for rabies within fifteen (15) days after their arrival in the city and shall likewise be vaccinated for rabies at least one time annually thereafter. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or maintaining a dog in the city who fails or refuses to comply with the vaccination requirements aforesaid shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(b)  A certificate of a duly licensed and qualified veterinarian of the vaccination required by this section, bearing the date thereof and the identification of the dog by breed color and sex and the license tag number and the name and address of the owner, shall be evidence of such vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 13, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-19. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having in possession any dog to allow such dog to be at large upon the streets, sidewalks or public grounds of the city or upon the property of any person other than the owner or keeper of such dog. Any dog on the streets, sidewalks or public grounds of the city or on the property of such other person shall be considered to be at large in violation of this section, except a dog under the control of a person by means of a chain, rope, cord or leash of not more than fifteen (15) feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the action of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 1, 3-3-60) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit dogs running at large, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033.  
Sec. 4-20. - Impoundment generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the humane officer to take up and take charge of all dogs found at large in violation of section 4-19, and to take such dogs to the city animal shelter or other state licensed animal shelter, there to be impounded and detained for a period of three (3) calendar days. The three-day period for impoundment at the city animal shelter may be waived at the discretion of the officer if: (1) the city animal shelter would experience overcrowding as a result of the dog's admittance to the shelter or (2) the dog's admittance would result in a stay of greater than three (3) days due to an extended weekend from a city, state or federal holiday. All dogs that have not been held for the three-day period at the city animal shelter may be transferred to other state licensed animal shelters under contract with the city. Contract shelters shall be properly informed by the humane officer that any dog that has not been held for three (3) days at the city animal shelter shall be detained for the remainder of the three-day period at the contract shelter. Proper records will be kept of all transfers to contract shelters for owners attempting to locate lost pets. 
(b)  As soon as possible after any dog has been delivered to the city animal shelter, it shall be the duty of the officer in charge to post a notice near the entrance of the shelter describing such dog, whether bearing a license tag or not, and giving the number of the tag and the name of the person to whom it was issued, in each case where the dog bears a license tag. In case the dog bears a license tag, then, in addition to posting notice as required herein, it shall be the duty of such officer to notify the person to whom the license tag was issued by letter, postal card or telephone. The mailing of such letter or postal card shall be deemed sufficient notice, whether the person addressed receives the same or not. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, §§ 7, 8, 3-3-60; Ord. No. 2004-09, § 1, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 1, 6-1-04)  
Sec. 4-21. - Redemption or sale after impoundment. 
(a)  The impounding fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the second offense; and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all subsequent offenses for the same owner or person. A daily board fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for every day or fraction thereof that an animal shall be confined in the animal shelter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the animal shelter to offer for sale at public outcry any and all healthy dogs impounded under the terms of this division and not redeemed within three (3) days, and to sell the same for cash; provided, no dog shall be sold for less than two dollars ($2.00). The person entitled to the possession of any dog shall be entitled to redeem the dog upon paying the purchaser double the amount paid by him for the dog and his reasonable expenses for keeping the same. Any dog not so redeemed within thirty (30) days from the date of the sale shall become the absolute property of the purchaser. 
(c)  No dogs which have been taken to the city animal shelter shall be redeemed or sold unless they are vaccinated for rabies, except in such instances where the appropriate official has been furnished with satisfactory proof and evidence that such dog has been vaccinated for rabies within twelve (12) months prior to the time of the entry and acceptance of such dog in the animal shelter. 
(d)  The owners of all dogs in the animal shelter shall be required to redeem same as provided for in subsection (a) and shall not be permitted to purchase such dogs in lieu of paying the redemption fee. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, §§ 9—11, 3-3-60; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 3-5-68; Ord. No. 94-026, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1, 3-2-04; Ord. No. 2004-09, § 2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 4-22. - Disposal of impounded dogs not redeemed or sold. 
(a)  Dogs taken up and impounded under the terms of this article and which are not redeemed or purchased as provided in this article shall be disposed of by the city as follows: 
(1)  All of such dogs as are requested by Baylor Medical College for use in its Houston Medical School shall be delivered to it without cost at the animal shelter or at any other place designated by it in the city at and for a charge of one dollar ($1.00) per dog, to reimburse the city for the cost and expense of such delivery; and 
(2)  All of such dogs which are not requested by Baylor Medical College shall be destroyed by the humane officer, or his duly authorized representative, in the lethal chamber of the health department, or in such other manner as may be designated from time to time by motion or other appropriate action of the city council. 
(b)  The carcasses of such dogs as are destroyed by the city shall be deposited in such place or places as are selected by the humane officer and approved by the city council. 
(c)  It is expressly provided that, in case of diseased dogs impounded under the terms of this article, other than those affected or thought to be affected by rabies, it shall not be necessary to await the expiration of the redemption period before disposing of such dogs. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 12, 3-3-60; Ord. No. 2004-09, § 3, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 4-23. - Killing diseased dogs. 
It is hereby made the duty of the chief of police or other police officer of the city and the humane officer and his deputies to kill and exterminate any and all dogs at large, when such dogs are, or appear to be, affected with hydrophobia, manage or other infectious, contagious or dangerous disease; provided, it shall not be necessary to impound or advertise such dogs by posting notice, or otherwise, but it shall be the duty of such officers to kill and exterminate any and all such dogs instantly, except those affected or appearing to be affected with hydrophobia, which shall be so killed after following the procedure provided in section 4-5. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 3, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-24. - Procedure when dog bites person. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer or his duly authorized representative, when a complaint is received that a dog has bitten a person, to take the dog into custody and notify the owner of the dog, if known, and ascertain if the owner wants the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian of his own choosing and at the owner's expense. If the owner does not want such examination made by a veterinarian of his choosing, such an examination shall be made by the health officer at the owner's expense. If it is found, after such examination, that the dog has no symptoms of rabies, the dog may be released to the owner upon his signing an agreement to have the dog re-examined in seven (7) days. If at such time the dog is found to have rabies, such dog shall be returned to the health officer and disposed of in the manner prescribed by the health officer and approved by city council. It is expressly provided that all such cases are to be checked and recorded by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 2, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-25. - Disposition of money collected under article. 
All money collected under the terms of this article shall be paid to the assessor and collector of taxes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 19, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-26. - Dangerous dog regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Animal control authority means the City of South Houston animal control office with authority over the area where the dog is kept. 
(2)  Dangerous dog means a dog that: 
a.  Makes an unprovoked attack on a domesticated animal or person by biting or mauling that causes serious bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
b.  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack, bite, or maul and cause serious bodily injury to that person. 
(3)  Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family. 
(4)  Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. 
(5)  Secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure that is: 
a.  Locked; 
b.  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
c.  Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog; 
d.  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and 
e.  In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the local animal control authority. 
(6)  Owner means a person who owns or has custody or control of the dog. 
(b)  Requirements for owner of dangerous dogs. 
(1)  Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the new owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall: 
a.  Register the dangerous dog with the city's animal control authority; 
b.  Restrain the dangerous dog at all times or in a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure. 
c.  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by a dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal control authority for the area in which the dog is kept; and 
d.  Comply with an applicable municipal or county regulation, requirement, or restriction on dangerous dogs. 
(2)  The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (b)(1)a. shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the 30th day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(3)  If, on application of any person, a justice court, county court, or municipal court finds, after notice and hearing as provided by subsection (e), that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with subsection (b)(1)a. or b., the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions. 
(4)  The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the municipality or county related to the seizure, impoundment, and destruction of the dog. 
(5)  The court shall order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied with subsection (b)(1)a. before the 11th day after the day on which the dog is seized or delivered to the authority. The court shall order the authority to return the dog to the owner if the owner complies with subsection (b)(1)a. before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized to delivered to the authority. 
(6)  The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before the 15th day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog. 
(7)  For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when: 
a.  The owner knows of an attack described in subsection (a)(2)a. or b.; 
b.  The owner receives notice that a justice court, county court, or municipal court as found that the dog is a dangerous dog under subsection (e); or 
c.  The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog under subsection (c). 
(c)  Determination that a dog is dangerous. 
(1)  If a person reports an incident described by subsection (c)(2), the animal control authority may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority determines the dog is a dangerous dog, it shall notify the owner of that fact. 
(2)  An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that the dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to a justice, county, or municipal court of competent jurisdiction. An owner may appeal the decision of the justice, county, or municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other cases from the justice, county, or municipal court. 
(d)  Reporting of incident in certain counties and municipalities. (Section 822.0422 Texas Health and Safety Code) 
(1)  A person may report an incident described by subsection (a)(2) to a municipal court, a justice court, or a county court. The owner of the dog shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the fifth day after the date on which the owner receives notice that the report has been filed. 
(2)  If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by subsection (d)(1), the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. The owner shall pay any cost incurred in seizing the dog. The court shall determine, after notice and hearing as provided in subsection (e), whether the dog is a dangerous dog. (Section 822.0422, Texas Health and Safety Code) 
(e)  Hearing. 
(1)  The court, on receiving a report of an incident under subsection (d) or on application under subsection (b)(3), shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog or whether the owner of the dog has complied with subsection (b). The hearing must be held not later than the 10th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered. 
(2)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
a.  The owner of the dog of the person from whom the dog was seized; and 
b.  The person who made the complaint. 
(3)  Any interested party, including the county or city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(4)  Evidence offered at the hearing to show that the person attacked in the incident was under ten (10) years old is prima facie proof that the dog is dangerous. Nothing in this section prevents the owner from offering evidence to rebut that presumption. 
(5)  An owner or person filling the action may appeal the decision of the municipal court, justice court, or county court in the manner provided for the appeal of cases from the municipal, justice, or county court. 
(f)  Registration. 
(1)  An animal control authority for the area in which the dog is kept shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner: 
a.  Presents proof of: 
1.  Liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by subsection (b); 
2.  Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and 
3.  The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; and 
b.  Pays an annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)  The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The owner must place the tag on the dog's collar. 
(3)  If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority for the area in which the new address is located on presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and payment of fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the animal control authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar. 
(4)  An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people. 
(g)  Attack by dangerous dog. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(2)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor. 
(3)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog destroyed by: 
a.  A licensed veterinarian; 
b.  Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or 
c.  Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal control who are trained in the humane destruction of animals. 
(4)  In addition to a criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The city attorney will be authorized to file a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the civil penalty on behalf of the city. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the municipality. 
(h)  Violation. 
(1)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with subsection (b) or subsection (d)(1) or another applicable municipal or county regulation relation to dangerous dogs. 
(2)  Except as provided by subsection (h)(3), an offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. 
(3)  An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the defendant has previously been convicted under this section. 
(i)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (g) or subsection (h) that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with that position. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (g) or subsection (h) that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or correction purposes. 
(3)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (h) that person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under the Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act (Article 4412(29bb), Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes). 
(Ord. No. 98-009, § 1, 7-28-98)  
Sec. 4-27. - Nuisances. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his/her animals and the premises where the animals are kept to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. 
(b)  All of the following conditions, situations or occurrences are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a failure of the owner to exercise proper care and control of his/her animal or the premises where the animal is, or has been, kept: 
(1)  Any animal which turns over garbage containers or scatters garbage or which otherwise damages private or public property. 
(2)  Any animal running at large. 
(3)  Any animal which barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion. 
(4)  Any building, room, cage, yard, run or other place or facility where animals are kept or harbored, except a commercial animal establishment, which is not maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as to prevent obnoxious odors, the attraction, breeding or potential breeding of flies, the attraction, harboring or breeding of rodents or the creation of any other public health nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-38, § 1, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 4-28. - Penalty of violation of section 4-27. 
(a)  For a first-time offense, there shall be a written warning issued for any owner who violates section 4-27, nuisance. 
(b)  A second-time offense for any owner who violates section 4-27, nuisance, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  A third-time offense for any owner who violates section 4-27, nuisance, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and a possible impoundment of the owner's animal(s), or both. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 3-6-07)  
Secs. 4-29, 4-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - KENNELS 
 
Sec. 4-31. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this article, a "dog kennel" is defined to be any lot, enclosure, premises, structure or building, which is not used or occupied as a place of human habitation, whereon or wherein four (4) or more dogs over the age of six (6) months are kept or maintained for any purpose whatever, except a cat or dog hospital, where cats and dogs exclusively are treated for disease or injury, operated by a graduate veterinarian duly licensed by the state board of veterinary examiners. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. I, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-32. - License—Required; fee. 
Any person in the city conducting, managing or maintaining a dog kennel shall obtain a license so to do from the tax assessor and collector and pay a fee therefor as follows: 
(1)  For any such kennel of less than fifteen (15) dogs, $10.00 per year or fraction thereof. 
(2)  For any such kennel of fifteen (15) to twenty-five (25) dogs, inclusive, $15.00 per year or fraction thereof. 
(3)  For any such kennel of over twenty-five (25) dogs, $25.00 per year or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Such license fee shall be for the calendar year or any part thereof during which such dog kennel shall be maintained, and shall be due and payable in advance on or before January first of each year. 
(c)  In ascertaining the number of dogs being kept or maintained in any kennel, duly licensed dogs shall be excluded from such number in the event that the person conducting, managing or maintaining such kennel furnishes to the tax assessor and collector, at the time of making application for such kennel license, an affidavit stating therein the number of such licensed dogs and the license number of each such dog; provided, for any kennel containing any such licensed dogs there shall be paid the minimum kennel license fee. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 14, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-33. - Same—Inspection of premises before issuance. 
It shall be required that a sanitary inspection of the premises be made by the sanitation division of the health department before a kennel license required by this division is issued. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 16, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-34. - Same—Issuance and display of certificate. 
A certificate shall be issued by the tax assessor and collector to the person paying for a dog kennel license, which certificate shall contain the data specified in section 4-35 and which certificate shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place in the kennel. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 18, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-35. - Same—Records to be kept. 
The tax assessor and collector shall keep a permanent record of all kennel licenses issued under the terms of this division, which record shall show the name and address of all persons being issued a kennel license, the name and address of the kennel, the number of the kennel license, the date issued and the amount paid therefor. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 18, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-36. - Same—Revocation. 
The health officer may revoke the kennel license of any dog kennel at any time for failure to keep his premises in a sanitary condition, or for failure to abide by the laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 17, 3-3-60)  
Sec. 4-37. - Minimum distance from residence, church, school or hospital. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain in the city a dog kennel within one hundred (100) feet of any actual residence or habitation for human beings, other than that of the keeper, possessor or owner of such kennel, or within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school or hospital. Such distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of any kennel, pen, enclosure or other structure in which such dogs are kept to the nearest point of such actual residence or place of human habitation, church, school or hospital. This section shall not apply to any dog kennel in existence and in operation on March 3, 1960, but in no instance will an existing dog kennel license be reissued or renewed for the existence of a dog kennel within thirty (30) feet of any actual residence or habitation for human beings, or within thirty (30) feet of any church, school or hospital, other than the residence of the keeper, possessor or owner of such dog kennel, the measurement to be taken in the same manner as specified above for the one hundred (100) feet. Should a dog kennel license for a kennel in existence and operating on March 3, 1960, be renewed to the same person or his or her spouse at the same location, the thirty (30) foot rule prescribed herein shall apply, but should the kennel license be renewed by the same person or his or her spouse at another location or a renewal kennel license be sought by different persons, then the one hundred (100) foot minimum spacing rule shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 15, 3-3-60)  
Secs. 4-38—4-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate livestock, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.026. 
 
Sec. 4-48. - Defined. 
As used in this article, the term "livestock" shall mean and include horses, cattle, goats, sheep, mules, donkeys, swine and all similar animals.  
Sec. 4-49. - Compliance with article; keeping of swine prohibited. 
(a)  No livestock shall be kept within the city, except in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any live hog, shoat or pig within the city, and nothing contained in this article shall be construed to authorize the keeping of any such animal. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 2, 5-5-64; Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-4-64)  
Sec. 4-50. - Fenced enclosures required; location and size of enclosure. 
(a)  All livestock must be kept in fenced enclosures, which fence shall in no instance be placed or maintained closer than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, measured in a straight line, to any building used for residential purposes or business purposes. Such fenced enclosure shall have a minimum area of one-half acre for each animal to be kept or maintained therein. 
(b)  The city council may grant a special exception or exemption from the distance and area requirements of subsection (a) to any person who applies therefor and presents to the council the written consent of at least eighty-five (85) per cent of the property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the site where the animals are to be kept. Upon the certification by the city health officer that an unsanitary condition has been permitted to exist on an exempted premises, the city council may cancel and withdraw such special exception or exemption, at its discretion, without notice. 
(Ord. No. 524, §§ 2, 8, 8-4-64)  
Sec. 4-51. - Construction and maintenance of buildings used for housing livestock. 
All buildings used for the housing of livestock must comply with all ordinances of the city and they shall be maintained in a reasonable state of repair. Such buildings shall be thoroughly exposed to a fly repellant at least once every four (4) days. 
(Ord. No. 524, §§ 6, 7, 8-4-64) 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 4-52. - Storage and disposal of manure. 
All droppings or excreta from livestock must be removed from the premises upon which they are kept, and disposed of outside the city limits at least weekly, and all such droppings and excreta must be kept in an enclosed box, barrel or other container, fitted with a tight-fitting lid, and must be hauled away in such container. Every such container must be thoroughly exposed to a fly repellant at least once every four (4) days. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 7, 8-4-64)  
Sec. 4-53. - Running at large; staking out on unfenced vacant property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any livestock owned or kept by him to run at large within the city or to be staked out on any unfenced vacant property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 5, 8-4-64) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit livestock running at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.026.  
Sec. 4-54. - Not to be kept for commercial purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any livestock within the city for any commercial purposes, including the conduct of a riding stable. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 3, 8-4-64)  
Sec. 4-55. - Public breeding prohibited. 
The breeding of livestock in view of the public within the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 4, 8-4-64)  
Secs. 4-56—4-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOWL 
 
Sec. 4-60. - Keeping of fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain, or permit any person to keep, possess or maintain, or permit the presence on any lot or parcel of land within the city, of any chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pea-fowls, guineas, or any other bird or fowl; except parakeets, canaries, parrots, cockatoos, macaws, or similar-size birds. 
Declaration of nuisance; complaint; violation; penalty. It shall be unlawful to keep any poultry or fowl in the city which by loud, frequent, or habitual crowing or any other noise annoyance from such poultry or fowl shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person of ordinary sensitivities. Any such person who believes that there has been a violation of this section shall have the right to file a complaint against the owner or keeper of such poultry or fowl in the code enforcement office of the city; whereupon a hearing within a reasonable time thereafter shall be held and a determination made as to whether such loud, frequent or habitual crowing or other noise annoyed the peace of such person; and, if so, the court may thereupon declare such fowl to be a nuisance and order the owners or keepers thereof to remove such fowl from the city limits. The failure to obey the order of the municipal court under this section shall constitute a class "C" misdemeanor. In addition to such remedy as provided in this section, should there be a conviction for any other violation of this section, the party convicted shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, § 2, 6-4-02)  
Secs. 4-61—4-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADVISORY BOARD TO HUMANE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 4-71. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory board to the humane department of the city consisting of five (5) members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Sec. 4-72. - Member representatives. 
The advisory board shall consist of: 
(a)  A duly licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  A municipal official. 
(c)  Two (2) persons whose duties include the daily operation of the animal shelter. 
(d)  A person who is a representative of an animal welfare organization. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Sec. 4-73. - Member appointments. 
The first appointments to positions created hereby shall be made immediately after the final passage hereof, and appointments thereafter shall be made on or before January 2 of each year and take effect on that date. All appointments shall be from the effective date of appointment until January 2, 2007, and on each January 2 thereafter; but each member of the board shall serve until his/her successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Sec. 4-74. - Serve without pay. 
That members of the advisory board shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Sec. 4-75. - Meetings. 
That three (3) members of the advisory board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the board and a majority vote of the members present shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Sec. 4-76. - Elected officers. 
That the board shall elect its chairman, vice-chairman and a secretary. Employees of the city shall not serve as officers of the board. The terms of all elected officers shall be concurrent and limited within the term of the officers' board membership. The meeting procedure and order of business shall be prescribed by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Sec. 4-77. - Actions. 
The advisory board shall prepare a written report to the mayor indicating therein the official actions of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Sec. 4-78. - Investigations. 
The board shall make such investigations regarding the humane department and the animal shelter operated by the city as deemed necessary or advisable by the board and prepare a written report thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-7-06)  
Chapter 5 - AUTO WRECKERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 659, §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 6, 1979, amended Ch. 5 to read as herein set out in §§ 5-1—5-4, 5-22—5-30 and 5-45—5-63. Former Ch. 5, which was superseded, contained §§ 5-1—5-11, 5-22—5-34 and 5-45—5-62, performed to the same subjects and was derived from Ord. No. 474, §§ 1—16, adopted Jan. 17, 1961; and Ord. of July 6, 1965, § 12; and Ord. No. 556, §§ 1—13, adopted Nov. 15, 1966. 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 22; motor vehicle dealers, Ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Auto wrecker. The term "auto wrecker" shall mean any automobile, truck or other vehicle (which is) used for the purposes of towing, carrying, pushing, or otherwise transporting any motor vehicle for whatever the reason may be. "The term auto wrecker" shall not be construed to include a service car or other vehicle not equipped with mechanical devices for transporting wrecked vehicles and not used for such purpose, such as service cars equipped with compressed air containers and tools for performing minor repairs not involving towage or transportation of vehicles. This exception shall not authorize evasion of this chapter, and if any vehicle, although not equipped with devices primarily used for towing vehicles, is actually used for such purposes through means of ropes, chains or otherwise, the same shall be considered an auto wrecker within the terms of this chapter. No auto wrecker license shall be required for those franchised utility companies who own and operate their own auto wreckers for towing their own equipment. 
Emergency auto wrecker. The term "emergency auto wrecker" shall mean an auto wrecker which is dispatched to the scene of an accident by the chief of police or his representative from the wrecker rotation list, where a vehicle has collided with another vehicle or other object or has been wrecked or disabled in any manner, for the purpose or expectation of towing, removing or hauling away the wrecked vehicle or vehicles from the scene of the accident or to remove a vehicle through the authority of the police department. 
Person. The term "person" shall include both singular and plural and shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
Owner. The term "owner" shall be construed to mean any person engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles for hire or engaged in the business of storing, wrecking or repairing motor vehicles for hire and who owns or is entitled to use any auto wrecker or emergency auto wrecker, and who uses same in the conduct of his business or any part thereof. 
Wrecker driver. The term "wrecker driver" means any individual who actually operates and drives an auto wrecker or emergency auto wrecker on the streets of the city, either on his own account or in the employ of another. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 4-5-05)  
Sec. 5-2. - Revocation or suspension of emergency auto wrecker or auto wrecker permit. 
(a)  Upon complaint being filed by any person with the chief of police of a violation by the holder of an auto wrecker or emergency auto wrecker permit of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter or the violation of any applicable laws of the state, federal government or other ordinances of the city, or upon his own motion, the chief of police shall, after fifteen (15) days' written notice to the permit holder of the grounds of such complaint or his own motion, conduct a hearing to hear evidence with reference to such complaint or motion. Should such hearing reveal a violation of any of the terms of this chapter or the laws of this state or the federal government or other ordinances of the city, the chief of police may suspend, cancel or revoke the permit or permits of such permit holder as the offense may direct. 
(b)  After the chief of police has conducted the hearing and investigation upon the complaint or motion for the suspension, cancellation or revocation of the permit of any owner of an auto wrecker or emergency auto wrecker permit, he shall make his findings and declare the same in writing to the owner or operator of such permit within fifteen (15) days after such hearing. The owner of such auto wrecker or emergency auto wrecker permit shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten (10) days from the receipt of the written decision of the chief of police only in the event of a revocation, cancellation or suspension of more than ten (10) days' duration of the permit. Such appeal shall be perfected by a letter to the mayor and city council, delivered to the city secretary stating that an appeal is desired from such action of the chief of police. Upon receiving such appeal, city council as soon as practicable thereafter shall notify the appellant as to whether or not such an appeal will be heard and if council approves such an appeal, they then may hear such appeal and shall either sustain or reverse the revocation of the chief of police. If no appeal is taken from the chief of police's action within ten (10) days as set out above, then the decision of the chief of police shall be final. In the event the city council refuses to hear the appeal, the action of the chief of police shall be deemed administratively final within one day after the date of refusal. 
(c)  Upon the suspension, cancellation or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, no portion of the fee paid therefor shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-3. - Soliciting business at the scene of an accident. 
All wrecker drivers, owners or agencies are prohibited from soliciting the business of towing, removing or repairing any wrecked or disabled vehicle at the place where the accident has occurred to such vehicle by words, cards, circulars or gestures, until such time as a police officer of the city has arrived at the place of the accident and completed his investigation. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-4. - Removal of vehicle from scene of accident. 
(a)  No auto wrecker driver or emergency auto wrecker driver shall remove any wrecked or disabled vehicle from the place where the accident has occurred or attach his wrecker to the wrecked or disabled vehicle until the driver of the vehicle has given permission and until the police officer of the city investigating the accident has completed his investigation. In the event the driver or owner of the vehicle desires that the vehicle be taken outside the city limits, the auto wrecker driver or emergency auto wrecker driver shall have such vehicle driver indicate such desire in writing, clearly setting forth such intention, and the place to which such vehicle is to be removed and such written request shall be signed by the person making such request. The auto wrecker driver or emergency auto wrecker driver and vehicle owner shall file such written request with the chief of police forthwith. 
(b)  The fact that no police officer of the city is present at the scene of the accident when an emergency auto wrecker or an auto wrecker, which has been summoned to the scene by the vehicle owner, arrives shall not constitute an exception to this section, and it shall be the duty of any owner or driver of a wrecker desiring to tow or haul any wrecked or disabled vehicle from the scene of the accident to cause the police department of the city to be notified of the occurrence of the accident and to wait the arrival of a police officer of the city and the completion of his investigation. 
(c)  In the event that the driver of a wrecked or disabled vehicle has been rendered unable by the accident to give permission to an emergency auto wrecker driver to remove the wrecked or disabled vehicle, or has absented himself from the scene of the accident, the investigating police officer shall notify the dispatcher at the police department of such fact and such officer shall give such orders as may be necessary to remove the wrecked or disabled vehicle from the street, which orders shall direct that such vehicle, upon removal, shall be taken and placed in an appropriate locked enclosure, located within the city limits, for storage. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 11-6-79)  
Secs. 5-5—5-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AUTO WRECKER PERMITS 
 
Sec. 5-22. - Required; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any auto wrecker upon any public street in the city for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled vehicles, either for hire or as incident to obtaining the business of storing, wrecking or repairing such wrecked or disabled vehicles or for any other purpose, without having first obtained an auto wrecker permit from the city, duly issued to such person to operate an auto wrecker on the street of the city under the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The holder of an emergency auto wrecker permit issued under Article III of this chapter shall not be required to obtain the auto wrecker permit required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-23. - Application. 
(a)  Any owner desiring to operate an auto wrecker in the city shall apply to the chief of police, in writing, for a permit, and shall state the following in his application: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, if an individual, the application shall so state. If a partnership, the partnership name and address shall be given together with the names and address of all partners. If a corporation, the corporate name and office address shall be given, together with the names and addresses of the president and secretary. 
(2)  The number of auto wreckers an owner desires to operate, listing the make, model, vehicle identification number and correct state license number of each auto wrecker. 
(3)  The true ownership of each auto wrecker. If not owned outright by the owner, as defined in section 5-1, the name and address of the true owner shall be given. If the auto wrecker is operated under the terms of a contract with some company other than the owner, a copy of the contract shall also be attached. 
(4)  That the owner will obey the provisions of this chapter and of all other city ordinances and state statutes applicable to motor vehicles and agrees that, upon his failure to so obey such laws, his permit may be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the owner. If a partnership, it shall be signed by a member of the firm. If a corporation, it shall be signed by the president and attested by the secretary and the corporate seal affixed, if the corporation has a corporate seal. In all cases, the person signing shall execute an affidavit on the application form that the statements contained in such application are true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-24. - Annual fee. 
The annual fee for an auto wrecker permit required by this article shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each auto wrecker, plus a fifteen dollar ($15.00) processing fee. Such fee shall be paid to the city secretary at the time the permit application is finalized and it shall not be prorated, nor refunded whether or not a permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 706, 8-16-83; Ord. No. 2005-12, § 2, 4-5-05)  
Sec. 5-25. - Expiration and renewal. 
All auto wrecker permits issued under this article shall expire on the fifteenth day of April of each year, and if then renewed shall expire on the next succeeding fifteenth day of April. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-26. - Issuance; contents. 
After the true owner has filed his application for an auto wrecker permit, paid the permit fee, and filed the insurance policy required by this chapter, and the chief of police has examined same and found them to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, the chief of police shall issue to the owner a permit to operate an auto wrecker or wreckers in the city, which permit shall bear upon its face a notice that the same expires on the succeeding April 15. Each permit shall be dated and numbered and shall show on its face the make, model, vehicle identification number and state license number of each auto wrecker permitted to operate and the medallion number given to it by the chief of police. Such permit shall be affixed and clearly visible to each wrecker. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2005-12, § 3, 4-5-05)  
Sec. 5-27. - Display of sign showing issuance of permit. 
The chief of police is empowered to prescribe regulations for the displaying of signs on auto wreckers showing that a permit for same has been issued as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-28. - Additional auto wrecker permit. 
(a)  Where an owner has obtained an auto wrecker permit and thereafter desires to increase the number of auto wreckers to be operated, he shall file an additional application setting forth his permit number and the fact that he desires to operate additional wreckers, giving the make, model, vehicle identification number and state license number of each additional auto wrecker. He shall also file the proper permit fee to cover the additional number of auto wreckers wanted. 
(b)  He shall also file a new insurance policy covering the new auto wreckers with the chief of police. 
(c)  The chief of police shall examine such additional auto wrecker application, fee and policy and if the same are in order, he shall issue a supplemental permit covering each new auto wrecker, at an additional fee as prescribed in section 5-24. of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-29. - Supplemental permit for substitute wrecker. 
Whenever an owner wishes to discontinue the use of an auto wrecker during the period covered by his permit and replaced it with another, he shall file an affidavit stating that he has discontinued using the auto wrecker covered by his permit and desires to use another auto wrecker in its place. He shall also attach a certificate from his surety or insurer that such surety or insurer has been notified thereof and agrees thereto. The chief of police shall then issue the owner an additional permit covering the new auto wrecker and cause the description of the old auto wrecker to be cancelled from the original permit. In the affidavit, certificate from the surety or insurer and additional permit, the old and the new auto wreckers shall be described by make, model, vehicle identification number and state license number. A new fee will be required on the new application and the old fee forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-30. - Liability and property damage insurance requirements. 
(a)  Before any permit shall be issued under this chapter to an auto wrecker owner or before any renewal of such permit shall be granted, such owner shall procure and keep in full force and effect a policy or policies of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a causality insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas and in the standard form approved by the board of insurance commissioners of the State of Texas, with the insured provision of said policy or policies including the city as an insured, and the coverage provision insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a wrecker of such owner and providing that the amount of recovery on each wrecker shall be in limits of not less that the following sums: 
(1)  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident ..... $100,000.00 
(2)  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one accident ..... 300,000.00 
(3)  For injury to or destruction of property in any one accident ..... 25,000.00 
(b)  The chief of police shall suspend, cancel or revoke any auto wrecker permit issued under this chapter without further notice to the owner if satisfactory evidence or proof of financial responsibility is not in full force and effect at all times. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 706, 8-16-83)  
Sec. 5-31. - Wrecker and storage fees for any nonconsent or consent tows. 
Towing fees apply to any tow, whether by the police department, a private establishment or personal request. 
(1)  One hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for towing a vehicle from one location within the city to another location within the city. 
(2)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for performing a service which renders a vehicle operable. The service may include, but is not limited to, removing or straightening a bumper, fender or other similar service on vehicles of not more than one ton capacity. 
(3)  Not more than ten dollars ($10.00) per day to store a vehicle at a garage maintained by or for a permittee under this chapter, excluding the first twenty-four (24) hours after pickup, upon a city policy order pursuant to section 5-56 of this chapter. Written notice shall be given to the last registered owner by letter addressed to the address given on such registration and placed in the United States mail, with first-class postage affixed, such notice to set forth the charges accumulated and the charge per day. All garages thus maintained by or for a permittee under this chapter are hereby declared to be authorized garages, pursuant to section 5-56 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 4, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 2011-44, § 2, 12-27-11)  
Secs. 5-32—5-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY AUTO WRECKER PERMIT 
 
Sec. 5-45. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any emergency auto wrecker upon any public street in the city for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled vehicles, either for hire or as an incident to obtaining the business of storing, wrecking or repairing such wrecked or disabled vehicles, away from the scene of an accident where the wrecked or disabled vehicles have collided with any other vehicle or other object or which have been wrecked or disabled in any manner, without having first obtained an emergency auto wrecker permit from the city duly issued to such person to operate an emergency auto wrecker on the streets of the city. 
(b)  In any prosecution for a violation of this section, proof that an auto wrecker owned by a person without a permit was present at the scene of a collision or accident in which a vehicle was wrecked or disabled shall constitute prima facie evidence that such owner was operating or causing to be operated his auto wrecker as an emergency auto wrecker without the required permit, but the person charged shall have the right to introduce evidence to prove that the owner of the wrecked or disabled vehicle, or such owner's agent, or the police department summoned him to the scene of the accident upon a public street. 
(c)  The owner of an emergency wrecker company shall register with the chief of police the trade name of his wrecker company and shall affix the name to the outside of both doors of each wrecker which is approved for operation under the terms of this article by the use of permanent painted signs. The use of magnetic signs is specifically prohibited. 
(d)  A permit issued hereunder for an emergency wrecker shall be a personal permit issued to the permit owner and shall not entitle any other person or corporation to operate such emergency auto wrecker. The emergency auto wrecker permits issued pursuant to this article are not transferable and upon cancellation of any permit, no portion of the permit fee shall be refunded to the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-46. - Application. 
(a)  Any owner desiring to operate an emergency auto wrecker or emergency auto wreckers in the City of South Houston shall make application to the chief of police of the City of South Houston for an emergency auto wrecker permit. Such application shall be submitted upon forms to be furnished by the chief of police and the applicant shall furnish the following proof and information with his application, which shall be sworn to before a notary public: 
(1)  That the owner making application for an emergency auto wrecker permit shall be a citizen of the United States, more than twenty-one (21) years of age, and able to read and write the English language. 
(2)  An agreement that the applicant will participate in the wrecker rotation list and parking rotation. 
(3)  The name and address of the vehicle owner, and if the emergency auto wrecker is to be operated under the name of some other company than the name of the owner, the name of the company. Accompanying the application shall be signed copy of the agreement and contract between the vehicle owner and the company in whose name the emergency auto wrecker is to operate. The emergency auto wrecker permit shall be issued and no transfer from one company to another company by the vehicle owner shall be permitted until the chief of police has been notified in writing and a signed copy of the new contract and agreement has been submitted to him for approval. If an individual, the application shall so state. If a partnership, the partnership name and address shall be given together with the names and addresses of all partners. If a corporation, the corporate name and office address shall be given, together with the names and addresses of the president and secretary. All of the provisions and requirements applicable to persons in this article shall apply to and be required of each partner and of each of the three (3) principal officers and the failure of any of them to meet such requirements shall be grounds to deny the application of the corporation or partnership. All changes of such officers or partners shall be reported to the chief of police within ten (10) days after the change and said new officers or partners shall individually file applications certifying to their individual qualifications within such time and the failure to certify within said time or to possess the said qualifications required of such persons under this article, shall be cause for the suspension of all permits held by said corporation, or partnership. 
(4)  The number of vehicles an emergency wrecker permit owner desires to operate and have licensed, although only two (2) emergency auto wreckers per owner shall be placed on the rotation system; and the make, model, vehicle identification number and correct state license number of each vehicle to be licensed as an emergency auto wrecker. 
(5)  Each person making application shall submit three (3) passport-size photographs of himself to the chief of police and submit himself to be fingerprinted at the Police Department of South Houston. 
(b)  Upon filing of an initial application for an emergency wrecker permit, the chief of police shall promptly notify the mayor of the filing of the application and the mayor shall notify the city secretary to include an agenda item on the posted agenda at the regularly scheduled city council meeting for council's approval or denial of the application. A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for processing an initial application must be submitted with the application. The city secretary will post the agenda for the regularly held city council meeting to provide notice of the public agenda item to the applicant and all emergency auto wrecker licenses. In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, an initial applicant shall: 
(1)  Show proof of insurability in compliance with section 5-51 of this article; and 
(2)  Provide at least one emergency auto wrecker which meets the requirements of this article. 
(c)  An application under this section must be filed from January 1st and January 31st of each year, unless otherwise deemed necessary by the chief of police. If said application is approved, the permit issued shall become effective on April 15th of that year. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 706, 8-16-83; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-47. - Hearing on application—Notice. 
There shall be no requirement for the city to publish one time in the official newspaper of the city a notice to all holders of emergency auto wrecker permits and all other persons interested. Rather, after the chief of police informs the mayor about the filing of the application, the mayor shall then inform the city secretary to post an agenda item for council's approval or denial of the application on the city's regularly held city council meeting. The posting of the agenda item prior to the regularly held city council meeting is sufficient notice to the applicant and permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 4, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-48. - Same—Determination of public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  At the time and place specified in the notice provided for in section 5-47, the city council shall hold a hearing to determine whether or not the public convenience and necessity shall be served by the issuance of an emergency auto wrecker permit applied for under this article. 
(b)  An initial applicant for an emergency auto wrecker permit has the burden of proving that the public convenience and necessity requires the service proposed in the application. At the hearing the city council shall receive evidence and hear testimony concerning the qualifications of an applicant and the public convenience and necessity of the proposed service. 
(c)  The city council shall consider, but not be limited to, the following factors in determining whether the public convenience and necessity requires the service proposed in the application: 
(1)  The service adequacy of current licensees. 
(2)  Whether the service proposed by the applicant will substantially and adversely affect the financial condition or operational capability of other licensees. 
(3)  The experience in wrecker operation and safety record of the applicant. 
(d)  After the hearing on the application, the city council shall approve or deny the application based upon its findings concerning the applicant's compliance with this article and the public convenience and necessity of the proposed service. 
(e)  An annual license renewal which is applied for at least twenty (20) days prior to the expiration of the license will be granted upon compliance with the provisions of this article and without proof of public convenience and necessity. An applicant who has failed to renew or whose license has been revoked under this article is considered an initial applicant. 
(f)  The city council may, at any time, require additional information of an applicant or licensee to clarify items on the application. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 6, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-49. - Fee for license or permit. 
(a)  The annual fee for an emergency wrecker license is one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each emergency auto wrecker license. The annual fee is ten dollars ($10.00) for each wrecker which is used in the emergency wrecker service. The fee is two dollars ($2.00) for issuance of a duplicate license if a license is lost, destroyed, or mutilated. 
(b)  Fees are payable to the city secretary upon issuance of the license. No refund of fees will be made. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 706, 8-16-83; Ord. No. 2005-12, § 5, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 2, 10-11-11)  
Sec. 5-50. - Issuance, inspection sticker and inspection requirements. 
The city council shall issue a license to provide emergency wrecker service to applicants who comply with the provisions of this article and shall issue an emergency wrecker inspection sticker to applicants upon inspection and approval of each vehicle. The emergency wrecker inspection sticker must be affixed securely to the upper left-hand corner of the windshield of the inspected wrecker. Before issuance of an emergency wrecker service license and inspection sticker, the following requirements must be met: 
(a)  An applicant shall submit each emergency wrecker which will be used in the service for inspection in a manner determined by the chief of police, and each wrecker must comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Each wrecker shall be not less than one ton in size and be equipped with booster brakes. 
(2)  Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power-operated winch, winch line and boom, with a factory-rated lifting capacity of not less than six thousand (6,000) pounds, single-line capacity. 
(3)  Each wrecker shall carry, as standard equipment, a tow bar, debris box, safety chains, a fire extinguisher, wrecker bar, broom, shovel and flares. 
(4)  Each wrecker and all of its equipment shall be in safe and good working condition. 
(5)  Each emergency wrecker shall have a towing dolly available. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain twenty-four-hour wrecker service and shall maintain a twenty-four-hour telephone answering service. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 8, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-51. - Insurance. 
(a)  If issuance of an emergency wrecker company license is approved, an applicant or licensee shall procure and keep in full force and effect and shall keep on file with the city secretary a policy of public liability and property damage insurance, or a certificate of insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company which is authorized to do business in this state and in the standard form approved by the board of insurance commissioners of the state, and the coverage provision insuring the public from loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of an emergency wrecker of the applicant or licensee and providing the amount of recovery on each emergency wrecker shall be in limits of not less than the following sums: 
(1)  For damages arising out of bodily injury or death of one person in any one accident, $100,000.00. 
(2)  For damages arising out of bodily injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any accident, $300,000.00. 
(3)  For injury to or destruction of property in any one accident, $25,000.00. 
(b)  The insurance policy mentioned in subsection (a) above shall contain an endorsement which provides for ten (10) days' notice to the chief of police in the event of any material change or cancellation of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 706, 8-16-83; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 10, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-52. - Refusal to issue or renew license. 
The city council may refuse to issue or renew an emergency wrecker license upon notice and hearing, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The making of any false statement as to a material matter in an application for a license or license renewal or in a hearing concerning the license. 
(2)  Revocation of a license, pursuant to this article, of the applicant or any proprietor, partner or corporation officer of the applicant within eighteen (18) months preceding application. 
(3)  Use by the licensee of a trade name for his emergency wrecker company other than the one registered with the chief of police. 
(4)  Suspension of the licensee's emergency wrecker company license on three (3) occasions within twelve (12) months for more than three (3) days on each occasion. 
(5)  Failure to prove public convenience and necessity, as required in section 5-48(d) of this article, by an initial applicant. 
(6)  Failure to meet the service standards in the rules and regulations established by the city council with the same consistency as other licensees. 
(7)  Licensee has been convicted of a crime involving theft, theft of an automobile or receiving and concealing stolen property, unless five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 12, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-53. - License revocation. 
The city council shall revoke an emergency auto wrecker license upon notice and hearing for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The making of any false statement as to a material matter in an application for a license, license renewal or in a hearing concerning a license. 
(2)  Use by the licensee of a trade name for his emergency auto wrecker other than the one registered with the city secretary. 
(3)  Suspension of a licensee's emergency wrecker license on three (3) occasions within twelve (12) months for more than three (3) days on each occasion. 
(4)  Licensee has been convicted for a crime involving theft, theft of an automobile, burglary of an automobile, or receiving and concealing stolen property unless five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 14, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-54. - License suspension. 
The city council or its designated representative shall suspend an emergency wrecker license for a period not to exceed ten (10) days for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of the licensee to maintain his wrecker or equipment in a good and safe working condition. 
(2)  Violation by the licensee or any employee of the licensee of a provision of this article or of the rules and regulations established for emergency wrecker service by the city council. 
(3)  Failure of the licensee's wrecker to arrive at the location of a wrecked or disabled vehicle or parking violation within the prescribed time after having been notified to do so by the city council. 
(4)  Conviction of an emergency wrecker driver of more than one provision of the motor vehicle or traffic laws of this state or city in the scope of his employment in the emergency wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 16, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-55. - Powers and duties of the chief of police with respect to emergency wrecker service. 
In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere prescribed in this chapter, the chief of police is authorized to: 
(1)  Inform the mayor when an application is filed with the police department. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 18, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-56. - Wrecker rotation list to be established; contents; qualifications; use. 
(a)  The city council shall establish and maintain a list of emergency wrecker license holders which shall be known as the wrecker rotation list. This list shall be certified by city council and kept current at all times. 
(b)  The wrecker rotation list shall contain the names, in alphabetical order, of all qualified license holders requesting to be on such list and such list shall include up to two (2) vehicles of each license holder. 
(c)  An emergency auto wrecker license holder is qualified to be on such list if: 
(1)  He maintains at least one (1) certified wrecker; 
(2)  He maintains twenty-four-hour wrecker service and has no more than two (2) telephone numbers, which numbers are answered twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The use of a telephone answering service shall be permitted, provided that if such a service is used, the failure of a permit holder to communicate with the police communications center or its authorized agent within five (5) minutes following a call requesting a dispatch of a certified wrecker confirming that the permit holder shall immediately dispatch a certified wrecker to the desired location will result in a forfeiture by that permit holder of that call. 
(d)  When the police officer investigating a collision determines that any vehicle involved in a collision is unable to safely proceed under its own power or, when the police officer determines that the driver of any vehicle involved in a collision is physically unable to move the vehicle to a location where it will not create a traffic hazard, such officer shall request the driver to designate the emergency auto wrecker permit holder which he desires to remove the vehicle. 
(1)  When the designation has been properly made, the police officer shall communicate the name of the designated permit holder to the police communications center or the authorized agent of the designated permit holder. 
(2)  The police communications center or such authorized agent shall cause the designated permit holder to be called and directed to send to the scene of the collision a certified wrecker. 
(e)  If the owner of a vehicle involved in a collision is physically unable to designate the permit holder he desires to remove the vehicle, or he fails or refuses to designate one, or he has no preference, then the police officer shall communicate that fact immediately to the police communications center or its authorized agent. The police communications center or its authorized agent shall then call the permit holder next in line on the wrecker rotation list, after the last permit holder so called, and request the permit holder to tow the vehicle from the scene of the collision. After the last permit holder on said list has been called, the next such call shall go to the first permit holder on said list. 
(f)  If the permit holder after arrival at the scene determines, in conjunction with the police officer in charge, that assistance is needed, then the police officer shall communicate that fact immediately to the police communications center, or its authorized agent, which shall proceed under subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  Failure of any permit holder selected under subsections (d) or (e) of this section to deliver a wrecker to the scene within twenty (20) minutes of notification, without justification acceptable to the police communications center, shall cause the permit holder to forfeit that call. If selection of the permit holder occurred under subsection (d) of this section, then the police communications center or its authorized agent shall proceed as it would under subsection (e) of this section, so notifying the requesting police officer. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 20, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 5-57. - Dispatch of rotating wreckers—Through an authorized agent; fee. 
In lieu of dispatching wrecker companies on the wrecker rotation list through the police communications center, the city may enter into a contract with an agent who is properly equipped with two-day radio communications equipment and with twenty-four-hours a day, seven-days a week telephone answering service, which agent shall be responsible for dispatching wrecker companies which are on the wrecker rotation list in compliance with subsections (d), (e) and (f) of section 5-56 of this article. The city or its authorized dispatching agent may charge each permit holder on the wrecker rotation list a monthly fee, not to exceed an amount to be determined by the city council based on the pro rata assessment or the dispatching cost. Failure of any wrecker company to make timely payment of this fee shall constitute cause for removal of the wrecker company from the wrecker rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-58. - Same—Through police communications center; fee. 
If the South Houston Police Communications Center or the city's code enforcement officer performs the service of the dispatching of wrecker companies listed on the wrecker rotation list, the city shall charge each license holder on the wrecker rotation list a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) per tow fee for administrative/documentation costs. At each dispatch, a "City Report of Vehicle Impounded by Police" form shall be generated and signed by the appropriate representatives of the city and the wrecker company and a copy shall be retained by the city and the wrecker company. The wrecker company shall pay to the city on or before ten (10) days after the end of each month the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each tow. The city council hereby reserves the right to periodically adjust the fee described in section 5-58 with a resolution. Failure of any wrecker company to make timely payments of its required tow fees shall constitute cause for removal of the wrecker company from the wrecker rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 4, 10-11-11)  
Sec. 5-59. - Police officer not to influence selection of wrecker service. 
A police officer investigating or present at the scene of any wreck or collision shall not directly or indirectly recommend to any person engaged in the wreck or collision the name of any permit holder or shall not directly or indirectly recommend or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-60. - Driving wreckers to scene of collision prohibited; exceptions. 
No person, agent or representative of a firm shall drive, or cause to be driven, a wrecker to or near the scene of a collision on a street in this city unless such person has been called to the scene by the South Houston Police Communications Center or its authorized agent, or by a party involved in the collision; provided, that in an emergency, when it appears necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in a collision, the prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-61. - Duties of emergency license holder in providing safe and prompt wrecker service. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of all license holders under this article to operate wrecker businesses so as to provide safe and prompt removal of wrecked or disabled vehicles from the public streets of the city when properly called upon to do so in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The duty to provide safe and prompt wrecker service upon call includes, but is not limited to, the following specific duties: 
(1)  Upon receiving a call from the police communications center or its authorized agent, the license holder shall, in accordance with the provisions of this article, dispatch the requested wrecker to the desired location, or if the requested wrecker is not then available for service, the permit holder shall immediately so inform the police communications center or its authorized agent. 
(2)  Upon arriving at the scene of a collision within the incorporated limits of the city, wrecker company personnel shall take directions from the police officer investigating that collision and shall obey all lawful orders given them by any police officer investigating such accident. 
(3)  Wrecker company personnel of a permit holder which hauls any vehicle from the scene of a collision within the incorporated limits of the city shall remove the debris of the collision from the public streets. This duty specifically includes removal of broken glass and metal fragments from the street, and the removal of any load of any vehicle from the traveled portion of the street, so as to eliminate any hazard to vehicular traffic. This does not include the responsibility to unload cargo from the wrecked vehicle in order to permit hauling. Such debris should be disposed of in a manner which will keep it out of gutters, storm sewers, streams, public rights-of-way and property not belonging to the wrecker company, without the consent of the property owner. 
(4)  Any license holder on the wrecker rotation list must tow, or have towed, the damaged vehicle to a repair shop or to a place designated by the owner, unless the owner of the vehicle is disabled by physical injury and is therefore unable to designate a location for the vehicle to be towed; the license holder may then store the vehicle in a depository as described in paragraph (b)(6) of this section. 
(5)  No license holder shall store any vehicles or wreckers on the public streets or rights-of-way. License holders will use reasonable care in the storage of property not belonging to said permit holders so as to minimize the risk of theft or damage. 
(6)  All license holders on the wrecker rotation list shall maintain or have access to vehicle depositories located within 300 yards of the incorporated limits of the city. The vehicle depository, if an open lot, shall be enclosed by a fence of adequate construction which is a minimum of six (6) feet in height, which fence shall be kept well-secured, opaque so as the vehicle may not be observed from the street, and lighted. The vehicle depository may be in an enclosed building which shall be kept well-secured. Failure to meet these conditions will subject a permit holder to administrative penalties as set out in this article. The chief of police or his representative must approve of said storage area or lot. 
(7)  All license holders shall comply with all ordinances of the city. Failure to do so will subject a license holder to administrative penalties as set out in this article, in addition to other civil remedies or penal provisions of the statutes or ordinances in question. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 2-18-86)  
Sec. 5-61.1. - Emergency auto wrecker service owner's records. 
Each owner of an emergency auto wrecker permit issued under this chapter shall keep full and complete books of accounts and other records normally accepted in sound accounting practices, which records shall indicate a complete and accurate record of all expenses and income in connection with the actual operation of the emergency auto wrecker license or licenses and the maintenance of the equipment. The records must be kept so as to accurately reflect the various items of cost of operation, maintenance and all other costs and made available to the chief of police for audit upon request. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-61.2. - Fees for emergency wrecker services and/or any other nonconsent tow. 
A licensee shall charge the following fees for service rendered to automobiles and trucks upon request of the police department: 
(1)  One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for towing a vehicle from one location within the city to another location within the city. 
(2)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for performing a service which renders a vehicle operable. The service may include, but is not limited to, removing or straightening a bumper, fender or other similar services on vehicles of not more than one ton capacity. 
(3)  Not more than twenty dollars ($20.00) per day to store a vehicle at a garage maintained by or for a permitee under this chapter, excluding the first twenty-four (24) hours after pickup, upon a city police order pursuant to section 5-56 of this chapter. Written notice shall be given to the last registered owner by letter addresses to the address given on such registration and placed in the United States mail, with first-class postage affixed, such notice to set forth the charges accumulated and the charge per day. All garages thus maintained by or for a permittee under this chapter are hereby declared to be authorized garages, pursuant to section 5-56 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 695, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 706, 8-16-83; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 2-18-86; Ord. No. 835, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2005-12, § 6, 4-5-06; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 7, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 2, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 5, 10-8-13)  
Sec. 5-61.3. - Parking of wrecker at scene of accident. 
Whenever an emergency auto wrecker arrives at the place where a motor vehicle has been disabled by an accident, the emergency auto wrecker shall park his vehicle as close to the street curb as possible and otherwise dispose of it in such a manner as not to interfere with the traffic. He shall not park his vehicle within a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from a wrecked or disabled vehicle unless otherwise directed by the police. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79) 
Cross reference— General parking regulations, § 22-73 et seq.  
Sec. 5-62. - Removal of vehicles; driver to sign acceptance sheet; right to remove not to be sold. 
The driver of the emergency auto wrecker who tows a disabled vehicle from the scene of an accident shall sign an acceptance sheet furnished by the police officer investigating the accident. The selling of such right to tow any disabled vehicle is prohibited. The person signing for the disabled vehicle must be able to account for the vehicle at all times. A violation of this section shall subject a permit holder to administrative penalties as set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 5-63. - Supplemental permit for substitute emergency auto wrecker. 
Whenever an owner wishes to discontinue the use of an emergency auto wrecker during the period covered by his permit and replace it with another, he shall file an affidavit stating that he has discontinued using the emergency auto wrecker covered by his permit and desires to use another emergency auto wrecker in its place. He shall also attach a certificate from his insurer that such insurer has been notified thereof and agrees thereto. The chief of police shall then issue the owner a supplemental permit covering the new emergency auto wrecker and cause the description of the old emergency auto wrecker to be canceled from the original permit. In the affidavit, certificate from the insurer and supplemental permit, old and new emergency auto wrecker shall be described by make, model, vehicle identification number, and state license number. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 3, 11-6-79)  
ARTICLE IV. - NON-CONSENT TOWING AND REPOSSESSIONS 
 
Sec. 5-64. - Companies report all non-consent tows and repossessions to the city. 
It shall be the requirement of all companies operating within the City of South Houston, conducting non-consent tows and repossessions of vehicles within the City of South Houston, Texas, to report all non-consent tows and repossessions to the City of South Houston, Texas. All repossessions shall be reported before and after the vehicle in question is repossessed. The City of South Houston, Texas, shall maintain a record of all non-consent tows and repossessions reported to the City of South Houston, Texas. All businesses that perform non-consent tows and repossessions shall be required to be registered with and permitted by the City of South Houston, Texas. The City of South Houston, Texas, shall maintain the records of the non-consent tows and repossessions in the interest of the safety of the citizens of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 1, 10-8-13)  
Sec. 5-65. - Fees and fines. 
Each business that performs non-consent tows will be required to pay the City of South Houston, Texas, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per non-consent tow. 
Each business that performs repossessions will be required to pay the City of South Houston, Texas, the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each vehicle repossessed in the city limits of South Houston. 
Failure to report a non-consent tow will result in a Class C Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Failure to report a repossession before a motor vehicle is repossessed will result in a Class C Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Failure to report a repossession after a motor vehicle is repossessed will result in a Class C Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Failure to register with the City of South Houston to perform non-consent tows will result in a Class C Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Failure to obtain a permit with the City of South Houston to perform non-consent tows will result in a Class C Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
The non-consent tow fee and the repossession fee must be paid on or before the first of each calendar month. Failure to pay said fees on or before the first of each calendar month will result in the revocation of the company's towing permit and all towing privileges within the territorial limits of the City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas. 
Failure to pay the non-consent tow fee will result in a Class C Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Failure to pay the repossession fee will result in a Class C Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 2, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 2, 10-8-13; Ord. No. 2014-32, § 2, 12-23-14)  
Sec. 5-66. - Authorized and registered tow trucks. 
All tow trucks conducting business within the City of South Houston, Texas, shall be registered in the City of South Houston, Texas, and shall have available in the vehicle proof of a current permit. All tow trucks must be certified to be a wrecker, verified by the display of an official factory seal of the wrecker/tow-truck manufacturer. Pickup trucks or other trucks not manufactured to be a tow truck, or wreckers that are converted from a vehicle not intended to be a wrecker, by a wrecker or tow-truck manufacturer are strictly prohibited to operate in the City of South Houston, Texas. At a minimum, the authorized tow trucks shall be required to have at least a 12,000 GVWR (gross vehicle weight), a certified registration in the City of South Houston, Texas, an 8,000 pound hydraulic wrench (no electrical rigs), proper safety inspections issued by the City of South Houston, Texas, or other cities in the case of consent tows/repossessions done by tow trucks from outside South Houston, and the State of Texas, an authorized City of South Houston, Texas, permit for tow trucks operating from within the City of South Houston, and have at least one (1) fire extinguisher appropriately sealed or contained within the tow truck at all times. Trucks will be required to have dual wheels. 
In order to maintain the permit, all companies utilizing authorized tow trucks within the City of South Houston, Texas, shall be required to list the City of South Houston, Texas, as an additional insured with an insurance policy limit of no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for tows only, and an insurance policy limit of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) for repossessions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 3, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2013-24, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 3, 10-8-13)  
Sec. 5-67. - Background check of drivers. 
All drivers who intend to perform non-consent tows and repossessions under this article, with the exception of out-of-City tow trucks performing consent tows/repossessions, must register with the City of South Houston, Texas, and shall be required to pass a satisfactory background check. A driver who is denied a license or permit due to an unsatisfactory background check or for other relevant reasons may appeal the decision to the City of South Houston, Texas, Municipal Court by requesting a hearing in writing. The decision of the Municipal Court shall be final as to the driver's eligibility to be issued a license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 4, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 4, 10-8-13)  
Sec. 5-68. - City-approved impound storage facility. 
All non-consent tows shall be stored in the City of South Houston, Texas, in a city-approved impound storage facility. The impounded vehicles must remain at the approved facility until the owner successfully redeems the vehicle in accordance with state law or until the vehicle is sold under this article and under state law. 
Storage facilities approved to do business in the City of South Houston, Texas, as well as repossession companies, are responsible for filing monthly reports with the City of South Houston, Texas, showing how many vehicles were picked up as non-consent tows and how many were picked up as repossessions. Each storage facility and/or repossession company is additionally responsible for making the required payments to the City of South Houston, Texas, for each non-consent tow or repossession. 
All sales of abandoned towed vehicles will be performed at an approved storage facility where vehicles are stored after they are towed. At each sale, the City of South Houston, Texas, shall receive twenty-five (25) percent of the gross sales proceeds of each abandoned vehicle. The authorized storage facility shall retain seventy-five (75) percent of the sale. The authorized storage facility will also solely bear the costs associated with storage, maintenance, auction, title work, proper written notifications and all other necessary functions related to the towing, storage and sale of each vehicle in compliance with state law. 
The authorized storage facility conducting the auctions of the abandoned vehicles shall conduct the auction every two (2) months. The City of South Houston, Texas' twenty-five (25) percent portion of all gross proceeds of each sale shall be tendered by the authorized storage facility to the City Secretary of the City of South Houston, Texas, within two (2) working days after each sale. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 5, 7-9-13)  
Sec. 5-69. - Required criteria of authorized storage facility. 
An authorized storage facility within the City of South Houston, Texas, shall be required to have the following criteria: 
a.  All authorized storage facilities shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA); 
b.  All authorized storage facilities shall be on a tract of land within the City of South Houston, containing a hard surface with approved drainage; 
c.  All authorized storage facilities shall require at least one (1) functioning 750 watt light with a minimum of two (2) functioning 750 watt lights per acre thereafter; 
d.  All authorized storage facilities shall maintain an office facility in the front of the storage facility, sufficient to allow customers adequate cover to stay dry during inclement weather; 
e.  All authorized storage facilities shall maintain an impervious fence of stone, masonry or wrought iron at least six (6) feet tall enclosing the entire storage facility; and 
f.  Shall not be permitted to be within 2,000 feet from any other storage facility. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 6, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 2014-12, § 2, 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2014-14, § 2, 8-12-14)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Construction and maintenance of buildings used for housing livestock, § 4-51; electrical code, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 13; parking of mobile homes at construction sites, § 13-35; construction standards for mobile home parks, § 13-36; oil and gas wells, Ch. 14; plumbing and gas fitting, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 18; buildings not to encroach on public property, § 19-2; obstruction of streets by construction work, § 19-12; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 24; zoning ordinance, App. A 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate buildings and construction to aid in fire prevention, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.002. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Fire limits or districts. 
The fire limits or districts of the city shall be as established, from time to time, by ordinance of the city council and nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any such ordinance and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
State Law reference— Frame buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.002.  
Sec. 6-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2004-13, adopted May 4, 2004, repealed § 6-2 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to buildings prohibited on certain land used by interurban railway and derived from Ord. No. 563, §§ 3, 4, 7-18-67.  
Sec. 6-3. - Buildings with exposed corrugated metal or galvanized iron prohibited in residential districts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, move in, alter, remodel, rebuild or add on to any resident or garage building within any residential district of the city, as established by the zoning ordinance, which building will have any exposed corrugated metal or galvanized iron when the building is completed. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 10-16-56)  
Sec. 6-4. - Fences—Prohibited on city rights-of-way, easements, streets, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect a fence which, in any way, obstructs, closes, or is placed upon any rights-of-way, easements, alleys or public streets which are either dedicated, owned, owned-in-fee or leased by the city. 
(Ord. No. 465, §§ 1, 3, 4, 9-6-60; Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 8-21-01) 
Cross reference— Fences prohibited in parkways, § 19-16.  
Sec. 6-5. - Same—Permit to construct. 
(a)  No fence or pipe obstruction shall be erected, moved, repaired, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the building official. 
(b)  All applications for a building permit for a fence shall be accompanied by a survey, in duplicate, of the property on which the fence is, or is to be, located; plans for the fence, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the location of the improvements thereon; and the location, height and type of each wall, fence, and all other types of screening. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for the construction, reconstruction, modification, enlargement, extension, or alteration of a fence, the applicant shall stake and mark on the ground the location of the fence. If such marking, the survey, and the plans and specifications submitted show that such fence shall not be in violation of this code, a permit to construct and erect the fence will be issued by the building inspector upon payment of a fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) minimum, plus six cents ($0.06) per linear foot over twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Upon completion of the construction, the fence shall be inspected by the building inspector to ensure compliance with the building permit and the following provisions of this section: 
(1)  Fences may be made of wood, chain link, wrought iron, or masonry construction. 
(2)  No barbed wire shall be allowed in Districts R1A, R1B, R2, R3 or R4. 
(3)  In a residential area of the City, no fence that is more than three (3) feet in height from grade if constructed of wood, brick, shrubbery or masonry; five (5) feet in height from grade if constructed of chain link; or six (6) feet in height from grade if constructed of wrought iron, shall be erected (i) along the property line of any lot, (ii) along the side lines of any lot within the required building setback area from the front property line, or (iii) between the front building line of the lot and a public street (or private street providing the primary access to the property). 
(4)  In any commercial area of the City of South Houston, no fence that is more than three (3) feet in height from grade if constructed of wood, brick, shrubbery, or masonry; or eight (8) feet in height from grade if constructed of chain link or wrought iron, shall be installed. Commercial property owners in a C1, C2, R5C, or M district may use barbed wire on the top of a security fence, but in no event shall the total height of structure and the barbed wire exceed ten (10) feet from grade. 
(5)  No fence or other structure that obstructs a motorist's view of the intersecting street shall be built on a corner lot within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection corner. 
(6)  No fence that exceeds six feet, six inches, (6'6") in height, including the horizontal board along the bottom, if used, shall be constructed along the side-lines of any lot in a residential area between the front building setback line and the rear property line of the lot, or along the rear property line of said lot. 
(7)  Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be completely enclosed within a fence no greater than six feet, six inches, (6'6") in height from grade, and no less than four (4) feet in height from grade. All gates must be equipped with a self-closing spring and safety latch. 
(8)  No fence or pipe obstruction shall be constructed within five (5) feet of the property line on the street side on the following streets: Spencer, Allen-Genoa, South Shaver, College, Winkler, South Richey, or Houston Boulevard. 
(9)  No fence over six (6) feet with one foot of barbed wire can exceed seven (7) feet from grade in a commercial area within one block of College Avenue, Houston Boulevard, Winkler Drive, Spencer Highway and South Shaver. 
(Ord. No. 465, § 2, 9-6-60; Ord. No. 784, § 1, 3-1-88; Ord. No. 97-009, 4-8-97; Ord. No. 2001-15, § 2, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2011-35, § 1, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 6-6. - Temporary building permits. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect Ordinance No. 419, adopted March 4, 1958, relating to temporary building permits, and such ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 6-7. - Non-conforming fences. 
There may exist fences which were lawful before this chapter was adopted, enacted, amended, or otherwise made applicable to such fences, but which do not conform to this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter to permit such non-conforming uses to continue under regulations herein contained until the same are removed, but not to encourage their survival. No non-conforming fence shall be enlarged, changed, altered, or repaired except in conformity with the regulations contained in this Chapter. No non-conforming fence which requires repairs exceeding fifty (50) percent of its value shall be permitted for repairs unless it is re-constructed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, § 3, 8-21-01) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2001-15, § 3, adopted August 21, 2001, added a new section 6-6. However, since such section exists, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been redesignated as a new section 6-7.  
Sec. 6-8. - Fees for engineering on building projects. 
(a)  The City of South Houston city engineer will review the scope of professional services required for obtaining a permit and then estimate the type of professional services, time, and costs by the City of South Houston for a particular City of South Houston permit. Exhibit "A," attached to this document [A copy of Ordinance No. 2002-09 can be found filed in the office of the city secretary], will detail the City of South Houston designated engineer's estimated time, costs, and the type of professional services required, in a budget format, for either a special permit fee or a permit impact fee. The budget, either unit price or lump sum, provided by the engineer will be considered as a "not to exceed" amount. If the scope of the engineer's services change due to unknown conditions, the applicant must agree to bear the cost of such change prior to the engineer's proceeding with these professional services. 
(b)  For small and minor project permits that require engineering, surveying, and/or engineering construction inspection, professional services of fewer than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), the cost of such necessary and required professional services shall be added to the normal City of South Houston building permit's cost as a special permit fee and paid by the applicant as part of his/her normal construction permit costs. 
(c)  For large and major project permits that require engineering, surveying, and/or engineering construction inspection, professional services greater than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), the cost of such necessary and required professional services shall first be agreed to by the applicant and then added to the normal City of South Houston building permit's cost as a permit impact fee and paid by the applicant as part of his/her normal construction permit costs. 
(d)  The engineer will be required to furnish insurance and/or be bonded for every project. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, §§ 1—4, 4-25-02) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-09, §§ 4, adopted April 25, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 6-8 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 6-9. - Carports. 
(a)  Generally—Carport defined. A carport is defined as an open-sided structure which may or may not be attached to an existing structure on one end and supported by poles or decorative posts. A carport is to be used only for temporary parking of motor vehicles, trailers or boats. No carport is allowed to substitute for a garage as defined, or required by any existing ordinances. A carport, although considered a permanent structure, cannot be used for any purpose other than motor vehicle or trailer or boat parking. 
(b)  Setback requirements. No carport shall be erected closer than five feet to the front property line when measured from the longest projection of the roof line, eave, or decorative overhang; except when there is a 20-foot setback line, the five-foot requirement shall not apply. In such case, the carport shall not be extended closer than one foot from the property line. 
(c)  Building requirements. Carports may be constructed of metal and wood only and may be attached to the main structure at the innermost end with either a flat roof or a roof with a pitch. All wood carports' soffit and wood posts must be covered with non-combustible material such as Hardiplank, brick, or stucco. The carport shall not have any ceiling openings accessible for any storage area. The carport shall be supported at its outermost end by not more than two (2) metal or wood stanchions (poles) with braces anchored in a manner approved by the building official, and such poles shall not be placed closer than five (5) feet on both sides of the property; except the front of the carport roof's edge shall not be placed closer than one (1) foot from the property line. The horizontal portion of the carport framework shall not be less than eight (8) feet nor more than twelve (12) feet above grade (natural ground) elevation. The stanchions supporting the carport shall be separated by not more than twenty (20) feet and the roof overhang shall not exceed two (2) feet from the supporting stanchions on any side. No wall shall be erected or attached to any carport permitted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, § 1, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 2-27-18)  
Sec. 6-10. - Contractors—Damage to water or sewer lines. 
As a condition to the permit issued to a contractor for work to be performed in the City of South Houston, Texas, Contractor shall agree in writing to repair any water or sewer line damage caused by contractor in the course of contractor's performing services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-24, 7-18-06)  
Secs. 6-11—6-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 6-17. - Adopted. 
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the inspection department and the City of South Houston are marked and designated as the 2015 International Building Code, including Appendix Chapters A—L, as published by the International Code Council, and are hereby adopted as the code of the City of South Houston for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of all structures in the City of South Houston, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Building Code, on file in the office of the City of South Houston, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance. Ordinance No. 2010-17 adopting an earlier version is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 453, Art. I, § 1, 5-3-60; Ord. No. 906 (7-91), § 2, 7-19-91; Ord. No. 97-034, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 2002-05, §§ 1, 2, 5, 4-2-02; Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2017-32 , § 1, 7-25-17)  
Sec. 6-18. - Definitions. 
As used in the building code adopted by this article, the term "governing body" shall mean the city council of this city and the term "building official" shall mean the duly appointed building inspector of this city. 
Cross reference— Appointment and removal of building inspector, §§ 2-3, 2-5.  
Sec. 6-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-05, § 1, adopted April 2, 2002, repealed § 6-19 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to amendments, modifications, additions, deletions to the Building Code and derived from Ord. No. 453, Art. II, § 2, 5-3-60; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 3-3-64; Ord. No. 615, 12-3-74; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 776, § 1, 12-15-87; Ord. No. 887, § 1, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 906 (7-91), § 3, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 97-010, § 1, 4-8-97.  
Sec. 6-20. - Fees. 
Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, or alterations requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the City of South Houston (Exhibit A), as amended. 
EXHIBIT A
Building Permit
(International Building Code) 
Type of Construction 	Price 
Approach 	$30.00 + sq. ft. 
Sidewalk 	$30.00 + sq. ft. 
Driveway 	$35.00 + sq. ft. 
Culverts 	$50.00 each lot 
Fence 	$40.00 min. (.15 cents per ln. ft.) 
Carport 	$50.00 + sq. ft. 
Garage 	$100.00 + sq. ft. 
Roof 	$30.00 + .15 cents per sq. ft. 
Demolition 	$60.00 + sq. ft. 
Parking lots 	$50.00 + sq. ft. 
Concrete 	$20.00 + sq. ft. 
Repair/remodel 	$20.00 + sq. ft. 
Miscellaneous - general 	$50.00 
New construction - residential 	$150.00 + sq. ft. 
New construction - commercial 	$250.00 + sq. ft. 
Certificate of Occupancy 	$400.00 
Reprint of Certificate of Occupancy 	$50.00 
Reprint of an Occupancy Load 	$75.00 
Operating a Business without a Certificate of Occupancy 	$500.00 + Normal Certificate of Occupancy Fee 
Annual Life Safety Fire Inspection Fee 	0—1 hr. = $100.00; 
1—2 hrs. = $200.00; 
2—3 hrs. = $300.00; 
3—4 hrs. = $400.00; 
4+ hrs. = $500.00 
Siding 	$35.00 
Platting Fee 	$200.00 
Re-inspection fee 	$45.00 residential; 
$50.00 commercial 
Application fee 	$15.00 
Minimum fee 	$50.00 
Plan checking fee 	Min. $45.00, 
Max. $500.00 or 
50% of Bldg. fee 
City Engineer plan checking fee 	$75.00 per hour 
Mobile home, pre-fab, modular 	$25.00 + sq. ft. 
Re-examination of plans 	$35.00 
Site inspection 	$45.00 
Piers/House 
Leveling/ 
Foundation/ 
Viewing fee 	$50.00 + sq. ft. 
Utility Verification Report 	$150.00 per lot 
Expiration/Renewal Fee 	Half (½) of Original Permit Fee (Minimum $50.00) 
Working without a Permit 	$250.00 
Residential sq. ft. fee 	$0.15 cents per sq. ft. 
Commercial sq. ft. fee 	$0.20 cents per sq. ft. 
 
*0.06 cents per sq. ft. 
(Ord. No. 96-017, 10-1-96; Ord. No. 99-006, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 2003-10, § 1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2004-16, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 2, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2010-17, § 2, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2013-33, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-13; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1(Exh. A), 1-14-14; Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1(Exh. A), 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2014-20, § 1(Exh. A), 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2015-08, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2017-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17; Ord. No. 2017-32 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-18; Ord. No. 2018-16 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-9-18; Ord. No. 2018-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 11-27-18)  
Sec. 6-21. - Addresses. 
Reference is here made to Section 505 entitled "Premises Identification" of the 2000 International Fire Code adopted by the city. It is incorporated herein by reference and shall be complied with by all building owners in the city (new or existing). Furthermore, and not in replacement of said Section 505, approved numbers or addresses shall be installed and maintained by the owner or occupant on all new or existing buildings. For a number or address so installed to be approved, the address or number must be plainly visible and legible from the street or roadway next to the building and shall be no fewer than four (4) inches in height and no fewer than five (5) feet from the front door of a building or dwelling unit. Furthermore, the address or numbers shall be on the street side of the building or dwelling unit. Also, on all trailer houses where the door faces away from the street side of the trailer, the address or numbers shall be on the trailer end at the end that faces the street. Where trailers are in a trailer park, each individual trailer shall have its own address or numbers posted and maintained on the side or end of the trailer that faces the driveway of the trailer park. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, 4-13-10)  
Secs. 6-22—6-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 6-30. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this article, all buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous buildings;" 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three (33) percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or fifty (50) percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those which are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living, that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those occupying such building. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those which have inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
(10)  Those existing in violation of any provisions of this article, the building code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 630A, § 1A, 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-31. - Declaration of nuisance. 
All dangerous buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1C, 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-32. - Creation, composition, etc., of building committee. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, there is hereby created a building committee composed of five (5) members, three (3) of whom shall constitute a quorum. The building committee shall be appointed by the mayor, and in the event of the absence or unavailability of a member of such committee, or should the office of any member become vacant, the mayor may complete the committee by appointment of a new member or members. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1E, 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-33. - Standards to be followed in issuing orders under article. 
The following standards shall be followed, in substance, by the building inspector, or city fire marshal, or city health officer, and the building committee in ordering repair or vacation or demolition of a dangerous building under this article: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired, so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is fifty (50) percent damaged, decayed or deteriorated, it shall be repaired or demolished. 
(4)  In all cases where a dangerous building cannot be repaired, so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be demolished. 
(5)  In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article, the building code or any other ordinance of the city, or any other requirement of law of the state, it shall be repaired or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1B, 4-5-77; Ord. No. 770, § 1(A), 10-27-87)  
Sec. 6-34. - City officers and employees not personally liable for acts under article. 
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to the person or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1J, 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-35. - Duty of city employees to report dangerous buildings. 
It shall be the duty of all city employees to make a report, in writing, to the building committee or to the building inspector of all buildings or structures which they believe are, may be or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. Such reports are to be made within a reasonable time after the discovery of such buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1K, 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-36. - Inspections to enforce article. 
(a)  The building inspector shall inspect any building or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that the same is a dangerous building. The building inspector shall also inspect any building or structure which is the subject of a report made by any city officer or employee pursuant to this article. 
(b)  In addition to the inspections provided for above, the building inspector shall, of his own violation, inspect buildings in the city to determine whether they are dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. 
(c)  The building committee shall supervise all inspections required by this article and cause the building inspector to make inspections and perform all the duties required of him by this article. Upon receiving a complaint or report from any source that a dangerous building exists in the city, the committee shall cause an inspection to be made forthwith. If the committee deems it necessary to the performance of its duties and responsibilities imposed by this article, it may request that an inspection and report be made to it by the fire department, the police department, the health department or any other city department. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1D(1—3), 1E(1), 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-37. - Notice to vacate, repair or demolish—Generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector, or city fire marshal, or city health officer as shown by the Deed Records of Harris County, Texas, that: 
(1)  The owner must vacate, vacate and repair or vacate and demolish such building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article. 
(2)  The occupant or lessee must vacate such building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession. 
(3)  The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in such building may, at his own risk, repair, vacate or demolish or have such work done; provided that 
(b)  Any person notified under this section to repair, vacate and repair or vacate and demolish any building shall be given a reasonable time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, to do so, unless in the judgment of the building committee, after inspection thereof, it is determined to be necessary to extend such time to do or have done the work or act required by the notice provided for herein. The building committee shall specify, in writing and an additional notice, the date to which such extension is made. 
(c)  The notice provided for in subsection (a) above shall set forth a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a "dangerous building" and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1D(4, 5), 4-5-77; Ord. No. 770, § 1(B), 10-27-87)  
Sec. 6-38. - Same—Report of noncompliance with notice. 
The building inspector shall report to the building committee any noncompliance with the notice provided for in section 6-37. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1D(6), 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-39. - Placarding of building. 
(a)  If the building inspector, or city fire marshal, or city health officer completes inspection of a building and finds it to be inherently dangerous and, in the opinion of such inspector, or fire marshal, or health officer, it constitutes a nuisance per se, upon approval of such finding, ex parte, by the building committee, or inspector, or fire marshal, or health officer shall place a notice on such building forthwith reading as follows: 
"THIS BUILDING HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE A DANGEROUS BUILDING BY THE BUILDING COMMITTEE OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON. THIS NOTICE IS TO REMAIN ON THIS BUILDING UNTIL IT IS REPAIRED OR VACATED AND DEMOLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE NOTICE WHICH HAS BEEN GIVEN TO THE OWNER, OCCUPANT, LESSEE, MORTGAGEE, OR AGENT OF THIS BUILDING, AND ALL OTHER PERSONS HAVING AN INTEREST IN SAID BUILDING AS HAS BEEN SHOWN BY THE DEED RECORDS OF HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS. IT IS UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE THIS NOTICE UNTIL SUCH NOTICE IS COMPLIED WITH." 
(b)  The approval of the building committee and the posting of the notice under this section shall not be construed to deprive any person entitled thereto to the notice and hearing prescribed in this article. 
(c)  Any person removing the notice provided for in subsection (a) hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1D(8), 1F, 4-5-77; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 10-27-87)  
Sec. 6-40. - Notice and conduct of committee hearing upon failure to repair, vacate or demolish. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a report of the building inspector, or city fire marshal, or city health officer, as provided for in section 6-38, the building committee shall give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building involved, as shown by the Deed Records of Harris County, Texas, to appear before the committee, on the date specified in the notice, to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired or vacated and demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building inspector's notice provided for in section 6-37. 
(b)  On the date specified in the notice provided for in subsection (a) above, the building committee shall hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building inspector, or city fire marshall, or city health officer and the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an interest in the building, as shown by the deed records of Harris County, Texas, shall offer relative to the dangerous building. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector, or city fire marshal, or city health officer to appear at all hearings conducted by the building committee and testify as to the conditions existing in the dangerous building. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1D(7), 1E(2, 3), 4-5-77; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 10-27-87)  
Sec. 6-41. - Findings of fact and orders of committee. 
(a)  The building committee shall make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to section 6-40 as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of article. If the committee finds that such building is a dangerous building, it shall issue an order, based on its findings of fact, commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent or any other person having an interest in the building, as shown by the deed records of Harris County, Texas, to repair, vacate and repair or vacate and demolish the building. 
(b)  Any person receiving an order pursuant to this section shall have the privilege of either repairing or vacating, or repairing such building, if such repair will comply with the building code and other applicable ordinances of the city, or the owner or any person having an interest in the building, as shown by the deed records of Harris County, Texas, may vacate and demolish the building, at his own risk, to prevent the acquiring by the city of a lien against the land where the building stands, as provided in section 6-42. 
(c)  The building committee shall report to the city attorney the names of all persons not complying with an order provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1E(4, 5, 7), 4-5-77; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 10-27-87)  
Sec. 6-42. - Repair or demolition by city—Generally. 
If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or agent fails to comply with an order, or extension thereof, issued under section 6-41 within ten (10) days, the building committee shall cause such building or structure to be vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished, as the facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in this article. The building committee shall certify the charge for such repair, vacation or demolition to the tax-assessor collector of the city, as a charge, which shall constitute a lien on the real property affected. Any such charge by the city for demolition shall be five dollars ($5.00) per square foot. Such charge shall be a lien upon such property and shall be enforced in the same manner as tax assessments and shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum until paid. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1E(6), 4-5-77; Ord. No. 95-010, § 1, 8-1-95)  
Sec. 6-43. - Same—In emergency situations. 
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the building committee and the building committee shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The cost of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided for in section 6-42. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1H, 4-5-77)  
Sec. 6-44. - Service of notices and orders under article when owner, occupant, etc., is absent from city. 
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee of a building is absent from the city, all notices or orders provided for in this article shall be sent by registered mail or certified mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in the building, as shown by the deed of records, Harris County, Texas, to the last known address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such posting and mailing shall be deemed adequate service. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1I, 4-5-77; Ord. No. 770, § 1(F), 10-27-87)  
Sec. 6-45. - Penalty for disregarding notices or orders given under article. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such building, given by any person authorized by this article to give such notice or order, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Each day's failure to so comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession, who fails to comply with any notice to vacate, and anyone having an interest in the building, as shown by the deed of records of Harris County, Texas, and under a legal duty to repair, who fails to repair a building in accordance with any notice or order given as provided for in this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Each day's failure to so comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1F, 4-5-77; Ord. No. 770, § 1(G), 10-27-87)  
Sec. 6-46. - Appeals from orders or actions under article. 
It is not the intent of this article to declare, and it does not so declare, anything to be a nuisance which is not such in fact. Any person to whom any order is directed or against whose property any action is taken or proposed to be taken under the terms and provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal such order or action to any court of competent jurisdiction, after having first exhausted the remedies provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 630A, 1G, 4-5-77)  
Secs. 6-47—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 1, § A, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 1, § A, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 1, § A, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 1, § A, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-72. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of South Houston are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from damage. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 1, § B, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 1, § B, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 1, § B, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 1, § B, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-73. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 1, § C, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 1, § C, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 1, § C, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 1, § C, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-74. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, the ordinance codified in this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 1, § D, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 1, § D, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 1, § D, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 1, § D, 5-8-18)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 6-75. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its more reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After a detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, evacuation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS): See Flood elevation study. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodway: See Regulatory flooding. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and shop manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the Nationally Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to quality as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or fewer when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area: See Area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued; provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 2, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 2, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 2, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 2, 5-8-18)  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 6-76. - Lands to which this article applies. 
The ordinance codified herein shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 3, § A, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 3, § A, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 3, § A, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 3, § A, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-77. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report, entitled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Berry Bayou," dated May 2, 2019, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map and/or flood boundary-floodway map, dated May 2, 2019, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 3, § B, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 3, § B, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 3, § B, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 3, § B, 5-8-18; Ord. No. 2019-04 , § 1, 2-12-19)  
Sec. 6-78. - Establishment of development permit. 
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 3, § C, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 3, § C, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 3, § C, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 3, § C, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-79. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 3, § D, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 3, § D, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 3, § D, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 3, § D, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-80. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 3, § E, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 3, § E, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 3, § E, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 3, § E, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-81. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of the ordinance codified in this article, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 3, § F, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 3, § F, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 3, § F, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 3, § F, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-82. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 3, § G, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 3, § G, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 3, § G, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 3, § G, 5-8-18)  
Secs. 6-83—6-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 6-91. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The South Houston Emergency Management Coordinator is hereby appointed floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of the ordinance codified herein and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 4, § A, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 4, § A, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 4, § A, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 4, § A, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-92. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of the ordinance codified herein. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation date has not been provided in accordance with section 6-77, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 5. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 4, § B, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 4, § B, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 4, § B, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 4, § B, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-93. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 6-102(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  A record maintained of all such information in accordance with subsection 6-92(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 4, § C, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 4, § C, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 4, § C, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 4, § C, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-94. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 6-93(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 6-73). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: (i) the criteria outlined in subsections (a)—(i) of this section are met; and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 4, § D, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 4, § D, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 4, § D, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 4, § D, 5-8-18)  
Secs. 6-95—6-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 6-101. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the compartments during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 5, § A, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 5, § A, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 5, § A, 12-13-15; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 5, § A, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-102. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: (i) section 6-77; (ii) subsection 6-92(8); or (iii) subsection 6-103(c), the following provisions are required. 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 6-93(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottoms of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no fewer than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 6-93(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 5, § B, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 5, § B, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 5, § B, 12-13-15; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 5, § B, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-103. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 6-72, 6-73, and 6-74 of this article. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 6-78; section 6-93; and the provisions of division 5 of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 6-77 or subsection 6-92(8) of this article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 5, § C, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 5, § C, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 5, § C, 12-13-15; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 5, § C, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-104. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 6-77, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 6-93, are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 5, § D, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 5, § D, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 5, § D, 12-13-15; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 5, § D, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-105. - Floodways. 
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazards established in section 6-77, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division 5. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 747, Art. 5, § E, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 96-020, Art. 5, § E, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 5, § E, 12-13-15; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 5, § E, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-106. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of the ordinance codified in this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 5, § F, 12-13-15; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 5, § F, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 6-107. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of South Houston from taking other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-29, Art. 5, § G, 12-13-15; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Art. 5, § G, 5-8-18)  
Secs. 6-108—6-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-002, adopted Feb. 7, 1995, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. V, § 6-131. 
Cross reference— Plumbing, Ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 6-131. - Adoption of provisions. 
The city council hereby adopts the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 757 and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.101 et seq. and declares the implementation of those provisions as they may now exist or are hereafter amended, as shown in Exhibit A, Article I through Article IV, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference for all purposes (Exhibit A is not set out herein but is on file in the office of the city secretary). 
The city council hereby adopts and approves new provisions for all other swimming pool enclosures, construction, operations and maintenance as set out in Exhibit A. 
All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under this article and amendments thereto shall be and are preserved for the benefit of the city. 
All ordinances in force when this ordinance becomes effective and which are inconsistent or in conflict herewith are hereby repealed insofar as such ordinances are inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-002, §§ 1—4, 2-7-95)  
Secs. 6-132—6-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-033, adopted March 25, 1997, provided that its provisions be included as a new § 6-131. Since Ord. No. 95-002, adopted Feb. 7, 1995, has already been included as § 6-131, the editor has redesignated these provisions as § 6-141 to a new Art. VI to Ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 6-141. - Adoption by reference. 
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the permit department and the City of South Houston, marked and designated as the "2015 International Mechanical Code," as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the City of South Houston for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the City of South Houston and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the permit department are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-033, § 1, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 2004-16, §§ 1, 3, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 1, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2017-30 , § 1, 7-25-17)  
Sec. 6-142. - Fees. 
Section 106.5.2. Fees. The following fees are established: 
1.  106.5.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, or alterations requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the City of South Houston (Exhibit A), as amended. 
Mechanical Permit Fees 
Sec. 106.5.2 Fee Schedule 
Type of Construction 	Price 
Air Conditioning/Heating 	$40.00 per unit, plus $5.00 per ton 
Duct Extension or Addition 	$25.00 each plus $4.00 each run outlet 
Duct System only, residential 	$40.00 per unit 
Duct System only, commercial 	$40.00 per unit plus $2.00 per outlet 
Refrigeration 	$30.00 per unit plus $4.00 per hp 
Boilers 	$30.00 per unit (minimum 5 hp), plus $3.00 per added hp 
Annual boiler operating permit 	$30.00 
New Cooling Tower Installation 	$40.00 each plus $2.00 per ton 
Cooling Tower Replacement 	$40.00 each 
Chiller Replacement 	$40.00 each plus $2.00 per ton 
Heating unit only 	$40.00 per unit 
Commercial Vent Hood 	$30.00 per vent hood 
Ventilating Equipment or fans over 2,000 cfm 	$20.00 each 
Miscellaneous 	$35.00 
Minimum Permit Fee 	$35.00 + application fee 
Re-Inspection Fee 	$35.00 
Application fee 	$10.00 
Working without a permit 	$250.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater 
 
2.  Fee refunds. Fee refunds, if any, shall be made in accordance with Sec. 106.5.3. 
(Ord. No. 2010-13, § 2, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-14-14; Ord. No. 2014-19, § 1(Exh. A), 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2017-30 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17)  
Sec. 6-143. - Fee refunds. 
Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected 
2.  Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
3.  Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17)  
Sec. 6-144. - Violation penalties. 
Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17)  
Sec. 6-145. - Stop work orders. 
Section 108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $500.00 dollars or more than $2,000.00 dollars. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17)  
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-13, § 2, adopted June 4, 2002, added a new article VIII, §§ 6-143.1—6-143.3. For purposes of preserving style and numerical order, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as a new article VII, §§ 6-146—6-148. 
 
Sec. 6-146. - Minimum construction standards for off-street parking areas. 
(a)  The builder shall submit to the building official a geometric design in the form of a scaled drawing for any proposed off-street parking area, along with a survey plat showing the location and the size of the area for the proposed parking site and topography showing the drainage plan. The building official shall approve the geometric drawing before a permit shall be issued under this article for either permanent or temporary placement. 
(b)  All off-street parking areas shall be constructed by one of the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Commercial ordinary passenger-car areas: Five and one-half (5½) inches of 2500 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 6 wire mesh poured on a sub-base compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density; or 
One and one-half (1½) inches of hot-mix asphalt laid on a six-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a sub-base compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density; or 
Six (6) inches of crushed concrete of a one-half-inch minimum aggregate size laid on a sub-base compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density when used in conjunction with the operation of boat stalls. 
(2)  Commercial heavy truck lanes: Each commercial business which provides a separate loading/docking area shall designate all delivery routes designed to facilitate delivery and/or transportation of products and such areas shall be clearly defined on the parking lot drawings. Five and one-half (5½) inches of 3,000 PSI concrete, reinforced with #4 rebar at twenty-four (24) inches O.C.E.W., or three (3) inches of hot-mix asphalt laid on an eight-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a sub-base compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density shall be required in these locations. 
(3)  Equipment and storage yards: All areas that are required to comply with parking requirements shall be constructed from concrete or asphalt with a compacted base and/or sub-base as described above. The balance may be constructed of six (6) inches of crushed concrete or crushed limestone with a one-inch minimum aggregate size. 
(4)  Multi-family residential: Five and one-half (5½) inches of 2500 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 6 wire mesh poured on a sub-base compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density. All pad sites constructed for commercial solid waste receptacles and solid waste truck-loading operations shall be five and one-half (5½) inches of 3000 PSI concrete reinforced with #4 rebar at twenty-four (24) inches O.C.E.W. poured on a sub-base. 
(5)  One- and two-family residential: Three and one-half (3½) inches of 2500 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 6 wire mesh poured on a sub-base compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density and with one-inch × four-inch redwood or treated pine expansion joints installed, not to exceed twelve and one-half (12½) feet in any direction; or 
One and one-half (1½) inches of hot-mix asphalt laid on a six-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a sub-base compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density. 
(c)  In commercial and residential off-street parking areas, fiber-mesh concrete may be used to reduce the required reinforcement in paving; providing an engineer certifies on the drawings that the strength of the concrete is not reduced. However, fiber-mesh shall not be used to substitute reinforcing in sidewalks or driveway approaches within the public right-of-way. 
(d)  All commercial off-street parking areas and equipment/storage yards not constructed of poured concrete shall be permanently held true to square by a two-inch × eight-inch treated wood form with treated stakes or by a concrete curb six (6) inches in width and having a depth that extends to the bottom of the base material. Such concrete form shall have one (1) #3 rebar placed at mid-depth. 
(e)  A six-inch curb or wheel stop (pin or epoxy to pavement) shall be required at all parking spaces that abut a public right-of-way, property line, or building in accordance with section 6-148. A wheel stop may serve two (2) parking spaces. 
(f)  All parking spaces shall be striped using four-inch wide painted lines and all handicapped markings shall comply with American Disabilities Act requirements. 
(g)  Construction of an off-street parking area on a public utility easement shall be allowed. Off-street parking constructed on a public utility easement shall provide an expansion joint placed along the easement line and such parking area shall be constructed with a compacted flexible base with appropriate asphalt, complying with minimum paving standards. Should any utility work become necessary within the easement, the owner of such property shall repair all damages, and all costs associated with such repairs shall be totally borne by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2002-13, § 2(Exh. A), 6-4-02)  
Sec. 6-147. - Off-street parking requirements. 
Type of occupancy 	Parking requirements 
Professional/office 	Minimum three (3) spaces regardless of size. 
	Minimum three (3) spaces per the first one thousand (1,000) square feet G.F.A. and one (1) additional space per each additional two hundred (200) square feet G.F.A., up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
	Above twenty thousand (20,000) square feet—Two (2) spaces per each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of G.F.A. or fraction thereof. 
Office/warehouse 	Office area + warehouse = total parking (oa+w=tp). 
	Minimum area + warehouse = total parking. 
	Minimum of three (3) spaces, regardless of size. 
	Office area—One (1) space per each two hundred (200) square feet up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of office space, plus one (1) space for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet or fraction thereof over twenty thousand (20,000). 
	Warehouse—In addition to the office area, parking for the warehouse area will have one (1) space per each two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
Financial/bank 	Minimum three (3) spaces regardless of size. 
	Minimum three (3) spaces per the first one thousand (1,000) square feet and one (1) additional space per each additional two hundred (200) square feet up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
	Two (2) spaces per additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of G.F.A., or fraction thereof, plus five (5) spaces in-line for each drive-through window—Each twenty (20) feet long. 
Hotel/motel 	Office area + guestroom + special activity room = oa+gr+sa=tp total parking. 
	Office area, minimum three (3) spaces regardless of size. Three (3) spaces per first one thousand (1,000) square feet plus one (1) additional space for each additional two hundred (200) square feet or portion thereof. 
	Guest Rooms—One (1) space each. 
	Special-activity buildings—Such as eating facilities, assembly rooms, clubs, and others are determined by use or activity. 
Apartment 	Parking per units + activity building = total u+sa=tp parking requirement. 
	1.8 spaces per unit, plus one (1) per ten (10) units for guest parking. 
	Special activity buildings (club, assembly, etc.), will be determined by use or activity. 
Mobile-home park 	Two (2) spaces per mobile home space plus one (1) space for guest parking for each twenty (20) mobile homes or fraction thereof. 
	Twenty-four (24) feet wide private street—no on-street parking. On-street parking permissible on one (1) side if street width is a minimum of twenty-eight (28) feet. 
Single-family residence 	Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit (not counting garage). 
Two-family residence 	Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit (not counting garage). 
Multi-family/residence 	Two (2) spaces per dwelling—1.8 if balance is a landscape area. 
Mobile home on private lot 	Two (2) spaces per dwelling (not counting garage). 
Group residence rooming house 	Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit, plus one (1) space per two (2) beds. 
Patio home 	Two (2) spaces per dwelling (not counting garage). 
Townhouse/condominium 	Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit (including garage, common parking area or both). 
Hospital 	2.5 spaces for each bed. 
Clinic/medical/dental (out-patient) 	Five (5) spaces per every one thousand (1,000) square feet G.F.A. 
Funeral home 	One (1) space per every four (4) seats. 
Veterinary clinic 	Minimum of four (4) spaces, regardless of size. Four (4) spaces per every one thousand (1,000) square feet of G.F.A. 
Truck terminal 	Dock spaces + office = total, one (1) per loading (d+o=tp) dock space plus office parking regulations. 
Mini-warehouse/storage 	Minimum of three (3) spaces. 
Church 	One (1) space per five (5) seats in sanctuary. 
Day-care center 	Minimum of eight (8) spaces plus two (2) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet G.F.A. 
Theater (motion picture or live) 	One (1) space per three (3) seats. 
Bowling alley 	Four (4) spaces per lane. 
Washateria/laundromat 	.5 (one-half) space per washing machine space. 
Schools (public, denominational, or private) 	Classroom + auditorium = total parking 
	Elementary—Three (3) spaces per thirty-person (c+a=tp) classroom. 
	Junior high—Five (5) spaces per thirty-person classroom. 
	Senior high—Twelve (12) spaces per thirty-person classroom. 
	Auditorium—One (1) space per every ten (10) seats. Note: Rooms capable of being divided by folding partitions will be counted as separate classrooms. 
Lodge/fraternal order 	One (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of G.F.A. 
Restaurants 	One (1) space per three (3) seats (including outside seating). 
Drive-in restaurants 	One (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of G.F.A. + five (5) twenty (20) foot long in-line parking per drive-through window. Minimum of twelve (12) spaces for traditional drive-in. 
Service station 	One (1) space per one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet G.F.A. Minimum of four (4) spaces, regardless of size. 
Shopping center and mall (over three (3) acres) 	One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of G.F.A. 
Nightclub/dancehall/assembly or exhibit 	One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet G.F.A. 
Automobile sales dealer 	5.5 spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet G.F.A. 
Auto repair establishments 	Five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet G.F.A. 
Mercantile/retail 	Sales area + storage = total parking (sa+s=tp) 
	Sales area—One space (1) per two hundred (200) square feet. 
	Storage—One space (1) per two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
Barber/beauty shop 	One (1) space per fifty (50) square feet G.F.A. 
 
Calculations—Any fractional spaces shall require an additional space.  
Off Street Parking 
 
Off Street Parking Requirements 
(Ord. No. 2002-13, § 2(Exh. A), 6-4-02)  
Sec. 6-148. - Driveway detail for residential and commercial driveways. 
 
Driveway Detail 
 
Asphalt Streets with Open Ditch 
 
Standard Driveway Approach A Sidewalk 
 
Typical Driveways Detail 
 
Typical Entire Lot Front Paving and Storm Sewer Details 
 
Typical Driveway Detail—Profile View 
 
Typical Driveway Detail—Plan View 
 
Typical Building Elevation—Elevation or Profile View 
 
  
(Ord. No. 2002-13, § 2(Exh. B), 6-4-02)  
Secs. 6-149—6-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-16, § 1, adopted September 14, 2010, repealed the former Art. VIII, §§ 6-156—6-173, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to 2000 International Property Maintenance Code and derived from Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 2000-17, § 6.2, 11-6-00. 
 
Sec. 6-156. - Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. 
A certain document three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of South Houston being marked and designated as the 2015 Edition International Property Maintenance Code as published by the Building Officials Conference of America, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Housing Code of the City of South Houston, State of Texas; for the protection of the public, health, safety, and welfare in all structures and properties as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of the SBCCI, International Property Maintenance Code 2015 or the latest edition are hereby referred to adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes if any prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16, § 1, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2017-09; Ord. No. 2017-29 , § 1, 7-25-17)  
Sec. 6-157. - Fees. 
a.  Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, or alterations requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the City of South Houston (Exhibit A), as amended, for the annual inspection or re-inspection of certain multi-family complexes. 
Exhibit A
Annual License Fee Schedule 
Housing type 	Price 
Duplex occupancy; 2 dwelling units 	$200.00 
Multiple occupancy: 3 plus dwelling units up to 19 	$400.00 
Multiple occupancy - 20 dwelling units and more 	$1,200.00 
Re-inspection fee 	$100.00 
Replacement license 	$50.00 
 
*** All licenses shall expire on December 31 st of each year 
(Ord. No. 2010-16, § 2, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1(Exh. A), 8-11-15; Ord. No. 2017-29 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17)  
Sec. 6-158. - Chemical fire extinguisher and smoke detector. 
In addition to all code provisions, the owner shall equip each multi-family dwelling with a smoke detector and a dry chemical fire extinguisher that the owner shall continuously maintain both in good working order and the owner shall certify that all multi-family dwelling units are equipped with a smoke detector and a dry chemical fire extinguisher, both of which are in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16, § 3, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2017-29 , § 3, 7-25-17)  
Secs. 6-159—6-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 6-186. - Adopted. 
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the inspection department and the City of South Houston are marked and designated as the 2015 International Residential Code, including Appendices, as published by the International Code Council, and are hereby adopted as the code of the City of South Houston for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three (3) stories in height in the City of South Houston, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the City of South Houston, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, § 1, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2017-31 , § 1, 7-25-17)  
Chapter 6.1 - DISCRIMINATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6.1-1. - Grievance procedure relative to discrimination against the handicapped. 
(a)  Purpose. There is hereby created a discrimination against the handicapped grievance procedure to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging actions prohibited by Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1983 as incorporated into 31 U.S.C. 6701 through 6724, the "Revenue Sharing Act" and regulated by 31 C.F.R., Sec. 51.55. 
(b)  Grievance procedure. Complaints alleging discrimination against a qualified handicapped individual cognizable under the acts or regulations set out in Section 504. 
Step 1. The person allegedly discriminated against shall submit the complaint or grievance with the Section 504 Coordinator, John Booher, P.O. Box 238, S. Houston, Texas, 77587. 
Step 2. The complaint shall contain a concise statement of the nature of the complaint, the requested action, and shall be in writing unless the handicap of the person dictates the use of alternate means of communication. All complaints shall be answered in writing within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 719, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-84) 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 719, adopted Sept. 18, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein of said provisions as § 6.1-1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 6.1-2—6.1-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Article II, §§ 6.1-11—6.1-23, is derived from Ord. No. 643, §§ 1—13, enacted Dec. 5, 1978, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this Code. 
 
Sec. 6.1-11. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words so used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural. 
(a)  Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 6.1-12, 6.1-13, or 6.1-14 of this article. 
(b)  Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
(c)  Family includes a single individual. 
(d)  Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
(e)  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-12. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted by section 6.1-15, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Discrimination against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin; 
(b)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(c)  Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(d)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to include any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion or national origin; 
(e)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any word, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 2, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-13. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration; or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of: 
(a)  The race, color, sex, religion or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(b)  The race, color, sex, religion or national origin of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 3, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-14. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, sex, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 4, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-15. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 6.1-12 hereof all transactions involving: 
(1)  The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such units as his residence. 
(2)  The rental of a single room is a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four (4) such rooms are offered. 
(3)  The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
a.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of an employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
b.  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (c) of this section (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title); and 
c.  The owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at the time of the sale; and 
d.  The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time. 
e.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex or national origin. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning or operating a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 5, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-16. - Fair housing administrator. 
The mayor shall appoint and council shall confirm a fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as "administrator"), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this article. The administrator may delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 6, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-17. - Complaints. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall therefore be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the secretary of housing and urban development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90 284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. 
(d)  All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(e)  All complaints and answer shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 7, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-18. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(c)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violation be prosecuted in the municipal court of the City of South Houston. With such recommendation, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within thirty (30) days after such referral make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within thirty (30) days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practical. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 8, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-19. - Cumulative legal effect. 
This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 9, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-20. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this article, because he or they have exercised his or their rights under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because he or they have made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or have made any report to the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 10, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-21. - Cooperation with secretary of housing and urban development. 
The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the secretary of housing and urban development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 11, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-22. - Education and public information. 
In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 12, 12-5-78)  
Sec. 6.1-23. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation. Each day a violation continues after passage of seventy-five (75) days from date of the filing of the initial complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article may be enjoined by a suit filed by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 13, 12-5-78)  
Chapter 7 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.001 et seq.; candidate for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 143. 
 
Sec. 7-1. - State law governs. 
All elections pertaining to municipal affairs shall be governed by the election laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-2. - General duties of mayor, city secretary and city council. 
In all city elections, the mayor, city secretary or the city council shall do and perform each act in other elections required to be done and performed respectively by the county judge, the county clerk or the commissioners' court. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-3. - Order and notice of election. 
In all city elections the mayor, or if he fails to do so, the city council, shall order the election and give notice thereof. In general elections for officers, the notice or proclamation shall be issued and posted at the polling places not later than twenty (20) days before the first Saturday in April of the year in which the election is to be held. The chief of police shall post a properly executed copy of the election proclamation and notice at the place where the election is to be held and two (2) other public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 455, §§ 1, 9, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-4. - Elective officers. 
All municipal elections shall be conducted by one presiding officer or judge, one assistant judge and additional clerks, if the need arises and as set forth in the election order. Such judges and clerks shall be appointed by the mayor and shall receive such compensation as is prescribed by the city council. Such compensation shall be paid from the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 7, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-5. - Numbering of aldermanic positions. 
The city council shall number the positions of aldermen in the order in which the terms of office of those serving in 1960 expire, the expiring terms which are to be filled at the first election to be numbered Position No. 2, Position No. 3 and so on, and the next succeeding terms expiring to take the next two (2) larger numbers and the one lower number (Position No. 1) until all five (5) positions have been numbered. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 2, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-6. - Candidates' application generally. 
(a)  Any eligible and qualified person may have his name printed upon the official ballot as an independent candidate for the office of mayor or alderman or other city office by filing his sworn application with the mayor at least thirty (30) days prior to the election day. The application shall state the specific office or place being sought by the applicant and that the applicant is eligible and qualified under the laws of the state to become a candidate for and hold the office being sought, if elected. In the case of a person seeking the office of alderman, his application shall disclose the position number for which he is a candidate or the name of the incumbent holding the position. 
(b)  The form of the sworn application required by this section shall be substantially as follows: 
"To the Mayor of the City of South Houston, Texas, Greetings: 
"I, _______, hereby make application to have my name printed on the official ballot as an independent candidate for the office of _______ (state position number, if alderman) to be voted upon at the city election to be held on the _______ day of April, 19_______; and I hereby certify that I am qualified to make this application and that I am legally qualified to hold such office, if elected. 
"STATE OF TEXAS COUNTY OF HARRIS 
_______, being duly sworn, deposes and says that the statements contained in the foregoing application are true. 
(Signed) _______ 
"Subscribed and sworn to before me this the _______ day of ________, 19___. 
(SEAL) 
	      Notary Public in and for 
 	 
Harris County, Texas" 
(c)  The sworn application provided for in this section may be accompanied with a petition signed by qualified electors, although such petition is not required. 
(Ord. No. 455, §§ 2, 3, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-7. - Candidate's loyalty affidavit. 
The sworn application provided for by section 7-6 shall be accompanied by an executed copy of the loyalty affidavit as required by article 6.02 of the state election code, in substantially the following form: 
"I, _______, of the City of South Houston, County of Harris, State of Texas, being a candidate for the office of _______, do solemnly swear that I believe in and approve of our present representative form of government, and if elected, I will support and defend our present representative form of government and will resist any effort or movement from any source which seeks to subvert or destroy the same or any part thereof, and I will support and defend the Constitution and Laws of the United States and of the State of Texas. 
	      (Candidate's signature) 
 	 
"Sworn to and subscribed before me at South Houston, Texas, this the _______ day of _______, A.D. 19_______. 
(SEAL) 
	      Notary Public in and for Harris County, Texas" 
 	 
(Ord. No. 455, § 3, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-8. - Posting list of candidates. 
The names of all those persons who have filed their sworn applications to have their names printed on the official ballot as candidates shall be posted by the city secretary in a conspicuous place at his office for the inspection of the public for at least ten (10) days before he orders the ballots to be printed. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 4, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-9. - Objections to candidates. 
(a)  All objections to the regularity or validity of the application of any person as a candidate shall be made within five (5) days after posting the list of candidates by written notice filed with the city secretary setting forth the grounds of objections. Such objections will not be accepted, unless the person making them is a resident of the city qualified to vote in an election of the city. 
(b)  In case no such objection is filed within the time prescribed, the regularity or validity of the application of no person whose name is so posted shall be thereafter contested. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 4, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-10. - Printing of ballots; withdrawal of candidates. 
(a)  Any person eligible to the office of mayor, alderman or other office who has filed his sworn application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have his name printed on the official ballots. The names shall be arranged on the ballot in the order of being drawn by lot by the election judge prior to the printing of the ballots. 
(b)  Any candidate may cause his name to be withdrawn at any time before the official ballots are actually printed, by filing in writing with the city secretary a request to that effect over his own signature, duly attested by a notary public. No name so withdrawn shall be printed on the ballots. Not later than twenty (20) days before the city general election, the city secretary shall have the official ballots printed. 
(Ord. No. 455, §§ 2, 5, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-11. - Voting place and time. 
All elections for the selection of city officials shall be held at the City Office or City Hall between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 8, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-12. - Absentee voting. 
Each qualified voter who desires to cast an absentee vote and who expects to be absent on the day of the city general election shall be entitled to an official ballot and the right to cast such ballot in accordance with the provisions of article 5.05 of the State Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 6, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-13. - Notice to persons elected; failure to qualify. 
It shall be the duty of the city secretary to notify all persons elected, and all newly elected officers may enter upon their duties on the fifth day thereafter, Sundays excepted. If any such officer fails to qualify within thirty (30) days after his election, his office shall be deemed vacant, and a new election shall be held to fill the same. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 10, 5-17-60)  
Sec. 7-14. - Records to be kept. 
The city secretary shall preserve in his office, for a period of two (2) years, all applications, notice of objections and other related papers pertaining to elections. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 4, 5-17-60)  
Chapter 8 - ELECTRICAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-004, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 28, 1998, repealed chapter 8 in its entirety and adopted a new Electrical Code. Formerly, such chapter pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 97-035, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 97-011, 4-8-97; Ord. No. 96-017, 10-1-96; Ord. No. 874, 7-17-90; Ord. No. 774, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 537, 12-21-65. 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; applicability of electrical code to mobile homes permanently located outside mobile home park, § 13-45; plumbing and gas fitting, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is the practical safeguarding of person and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity, and shall be known and cited as the "City of South Houston Electrical Code." 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-2. - Scope. 
(a)  Covered. This chapter covers: 
(1)  Electric conductors and equipment installed within or on public and private buildings or other structures, including mobile homes and recreational vehicles, and other premises such as yards, carnival, parking and other lots, and industrial substations. 
(2)  Conductors that connect the installations to supply of electricity, 
(3)  Other outside conductors on the premises. 
(b)  Not covered. This chapter does not cover: 
(1)  Installation in ships, watercraft, railway rolling stock, aircraft or automotive vehicles other than mobile homes and recreation vehicles. 
(2)  Installations underground in mines. 
(3)  Installations of railways for generation, transformation, transmission or distribution of power used exclusively for operation of rolling stock or installations used exclusively for signaling and communications purposes. 
(4)  Installations of communications equipment under the exclusive control of communications utilities, located outdoors or in building spaces used exclusively for such installations. 
(5)  Installations under the exclusive control of electric utilities for the purpose of communication, or metering, or for the generation, control, transformation, transmission and distribution of electric energy located in buildings used exclusively by utilities for such purposes or located outdoors on property owned or leased by the utility or on public highways streets, roads, etc., or outdoors by established rights on private property. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-3. - Definitions. 
Board member. Where used herein, "board member" shall be understood to mean any member of the electrical board of the City of South Houston. 
Building official. When the terms "building official is used, it shall be understood to mean the officer of the City of South Houston charged with the administration and enforcement of the building codes of the City of South Houston or their duly authorized deputy. 
City. The word "city" shall be construed to mean the municipal corporation, the City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas. 
Code. The word, "code" as used singular herein, shall be interpreted to mean the City of South Houston Electrical Code. 
Electrical inspector. When the term electrical inspectors is used, it shall be understood to mean the Electrical Inspector of the City of South Houston. 
Electrical maintenance work. "Electrical maintenance work" shall mean to keep in safe repair all electrical installations, apparatus, and equipment, to move or relocate existing electrical equipment within a building or the premises where the "maintenance electrician" is employed on a permanent basis for which a work permit is required. This does not include the installation of new electrical equipment or apparatus for which additional electrical work is required. 
Electrical work. When the term "electrical work" is used herein, it shall be interpreted to mean the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair or erection of any electrical wiring system, apparatus, device, appliance, fixture or equipment for which a permit is required under the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
N.E.C. The "N.E.C" shall mean the latest edition of the "National Electrical Code" as sponsored by the National Fire Protection Association through its National Electrical Code Committee and approved by the American National Standards Institute. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-4. - Franchise to install equipment on, under or over streets, ductline, etc. 
No person, firm or corporation that does not operate under a franchise granted by the city shall have the right to install any electrical conduit, wire, pole or equipment for the transmission, distribution or utilization of electrical energy, or for the operation of signals or the transmission of, intelligence on, over, or under the streets or public utility easements in the City of South Houston, without first obtaining from city council a franchise right or grant for the particular installation to be made. The installation so made under such franchise or grant shall be in strict conformance with all rules, regulations and ordinances of the city. 
Any installation of duct line, conduit, or wires under the public streets shall be in accordance with this Code and the city ordinances covering the use of public places and street. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-5. - Installation to conform with law. 
No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the installation is in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-6. - Adoption of National Electrical Standards. 
The 2017 edition of the National Electrical Code is hereby adopted as part of this chapter, and shall govern and be followed in all electrical work, except in event of conflict with this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(1)  The National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 70, "National Electrical Code". 
(2)  When the electrical board deems it necessary to add, suspend or revoke the use of certain materials or wiring techniques, the addition suspension or revocation shall not become effective until thirty (30) days after date of such addition suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 2, 7-25-17)  
Sec. 8-7. - Suspension of approved material or wiring techniques. 
(a)  When the electrical board deems it necessary, it may suspend or revoke the use of certain materials or wiring techniques after written or public notification. 
(b)  No electrical material, apparatus, device, appliance, fixture or equipment shall be installed in the city unless it is listed. 
The maker's name, trademark or other identification symbol shall be placed on all electrical material, apparatus, device, appliance, fixture and equipment used or installed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-8. - General notes. 
(a)  Liability for damages. This chapter shall not be interpreted to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating or controlling any electric wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held responsible for any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized or the certificates of approval issued. 
(b)  Penalty for violation of ordinance provisions. Any person, firm, corporation or the agent violating any of the provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and in case of willful and continuous violation of the provisions of this chapter, the electrical inspector shall revoke and repeal all permits and privileges granted to person, firm or corporation 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-9. - Savings clause. 
All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under this chapter and amendments thereto shall be and are preserved for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-10. - Penalty clause. 
(a)  That any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter or of the National Electric Code of latest issue, hereby adopted, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in the sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and each and every day's continuance of any violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  That in case of any such violation of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter by a corporation or company, the officers, agents and person or persons responsible for directing, authorizing or permitting the violation shall be subject to the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-11. - Severability clause. 
The City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this chapter is declared invalid or unconstitutional by final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, that in such event, it would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this chapter without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be invalid or unconstitutional and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this chapter dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall remain and continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-12—8-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL BOARD 
 
Sec. 8-26. - Electrical board created. 
There is hereby created an electrical board consisting of five (5) members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-27. - Members of electrical board. 
(a)  Each member shall be a qualified person, and shall have at least a journeyman's electrical experience. 
(b)  If possible, members shall be residents of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  Members of the electrical board shall receive a South Houston Master Electrician's License upon acceptance of the office after being appointed. 
(d)  At the time of passage of this chapter, a prior ordinance has been in place. The electrical board as of the date of passage of this chapter consists of the following persons: 
(1)  _______ who serves until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(2)  _______ who serves until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(3)  _______ who serves until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(4)  _______ who serves until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(5)  _______ who serves until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
For purposes of continuity, the initial board under the new ordinance shall be the above described incumbent members of the previous board, who shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. If there is a vacancy in the prior board at the time of passage of this chapter, there shall be a vacancy in the new board to be filled as in any other vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-28. - Appointments, terms, removal. 
Each member of the board shall serve until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. Any member of the board may be removed by majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-29. - Compensation. 
Fees or salaries for members of the electrical board shall be decided upon, as amount and time of payment, by the mayor and city council and any and all such payments shall be made directly to such member by the city. Electrical board members are to receive licenses free of charge as long as they serve on the board. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-30. - Quorum. 
Three (3) members of the electrical board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the board, and a majority vote of the members present shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-31. - Officers, procedure, order of business. 
The officers of the board shall consist of a chairman, vice-chairman, and a secretary. The chairman, vice-chairman, and the secretary shall be nominated by the members of the board each year in its first meeting after January 2nd. Each officer shall be a broad member and shall be elected by a majority vote of the then qualified and serving members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-32. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  The electrical board shall be responsible for making interpretations of the rules for deciding upon the approval of equipment, material installation techniques, and granting special permission for the condition, material and installations not covered herein. Permission for such deviation shall be obtained in writing from the electrical board. 
(b)  The electrical board shall select reputable agencies to give examinations for master electricians, electrical sign contractors, maintenance electricians, and journeyman electrician's licenses. All questions and disagreements with the examinations shall be directed to the agency giving the examination. 
(c)  No member of the electrical board shall be given an electrical examination. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98; Ord. No. 99-001, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 8-33. - Reports. 
It shall be the duty of the electrical board at such times as it may deem proper, to submit to the mayor and city council, written suggestions and recommendations for the improvement of the electrical board's methods and procedures and the electrical inspector's practices. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-34. - Investigations. 
The electrical inspector shall make such investigations regarding electrical work as deemed necessary or as requested by the mayor, building official, or fire marshal of the city, and prepare a written report thereon. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-35. - Right to appeal electrical board decisions. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or organization that questions a decision of the electrical board shall have the right to appeal. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the city secretary within ten (10) days after the decision of the board. After receipt of such appeal, the city council shall set the date for a hearing, and the city secretary shall notify the appellant and the chairman of the electrical board. The electrical board, as well as the appellant, shall have the right to be heard. The city council shall affirm, modify or reverse the action and/or decision of the electrical board. The action of the city council shall be final. If no appeal be taken within the time and manner herein provided, the ruling of the electrical board shall be final. The action of the electrical board shall in all things be effective until reversed or modified by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-36—8-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTORS 
 
Sec. 8-46. - Electrical inspector. 
The electrical inspector shall have direct supervision of such clerical employees as may be assigned to the electrical inspection department. The person chosen to fill the office of electrical inspector shall possess such executive ability as is requisite for the performance of such duties, and shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and installation methods used for electrical work. The electrical inspector shall be well versed in the electrical ordinances of the City of South Houston, and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof. The electrical inspector shall have had at least five (5) years practical electrical experience as a electrician, and be licensed as a master electrician in the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-47. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the electrical inspector to engage in electrical wiring apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any engaged in such business in the city at any time while holding the office of Electrical Inspector of the City of South Houston. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the Electrical Inspection Department of the City of South Houston in any way whatsoever to solicit business of any kind for any master electrician. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the Electrical Inspection Department of the City of South Houston to prevent or assist in preventing any person from doing business with any master electrician whose license has not been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-48. - Duties of electrical inspectors. 
Electrical inspector shall be responsible for the inspection and re-inspections of all electrical installations. He shall keep a complete record of all permits issued, inspections and re-inspections made, and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-49. - Authority granted electrical inspectors. 
(a)  The electrical inspectors or authorized deputies shall have the right to enter any building or premises in the City of South Houston, Texas, at any reasonable time, in the discharge of their official duties. The electrical inspectors shall have the authority in cases of emergency to cut or disconnect any electric wire which may present a hazard to life or property or which may interfere with the work of the fire department. 
(b)  The electrical inspector are hereby authorized to disconnect or to order the termination of electrical service to any apparatus, device, appliance, fixture or equipment found to be dangerous to life or property until such wiring, apparatus, device, appliance, fixture or equipment has been made safe. 
(c)  The electrical inspector shall be issued an identification card by the City of South Houston, and upon display of this card by an electrical inspector, any person performing "electrical work" or "electrical maintenance work" as defined in section 8-3, "electrical work" and "electrical maintenance" of this chapter, shall immediately furnish and display their City of South Houston Electrical License, authorizing him to engage in electrical work or electrical maintenance work within the City of South Houston when requested to do so by an electrical inspector. Failure to display such license shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-50. - Right to appeal electrical inspectors decisions. 
Any person, firm, corporation or organization dissatisfied with a decision of an electrical inspector shall have the right to appeal such decision. The appeal shall be in writing for review to the electrical board within four (4) working days after such decision thereupon, the electrical board within fifteen (15) working days, shall determine said appeal. The board shall have the right to affirm, modify or reverse the action of the electrical inspector, provided, that until such time as the inspector's action is reversed or modified, such action shall in all things be effective. The decision of the electrical board shall be subject to review by the city council as provided for in section 8-35. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-51—8-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSE AND REGISTRATION OF ELECTRICIANS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8-61. - Who may do electrical work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do electrical work or electrical maintenance work within the City of South Houston without a license issued under the provisions of this chapter. All such electrical work shall be done under the control, supervision, direction and responsibility of a master electrician. A journeyman or apprentice electrician who perform electrical work shall be an employee of the master electrician who owns their business, or an employee of the person, firm or corporation for whom the master electrician is employed as provided in section 8-65 at least one master or journeyman electrician shall be on each jobsite, and not more than two (2) apprentice electricians shall work under the supervision of a journeyman. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-62. - Electrical work by homeowner. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall ever be construed or operated to prevent any homeowner from actually doing the electrical work in or on his own property, provided he must first obtain and pay for a regular permit at the established rates before the work is started, and he must use such materials and equipment as will bring the work into strict accord with the Fire Underwriter's Code and the City Ordinances. In doing the work on his own property, such person shall not be permitted to use any hired assistant unless such assistant is duly licensed under the terms of this ordinance by the City of South Houston, and it is further provided that approval of the city electrical inspector must be obtained for the work done by the owner on his own property by the terms of this section, otherwise the Inspector may refuse to permit the current or power to be turned on or if turned on, may require it to be discontinued until the inspection may be made and the work found to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
Any person owning and improving a residential subdivision for sale or rent, or engaged in the business of purchasing and improving property for sale or rent, shall be excluded from the provisions of this section of this chapter, and shall not be entitled to do his own electrical work on such property unless he is a duly licensed electrician under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-63. - Master electrician as employee of person, firm or corporation. 
A person (not licensed as a master electrician), firm or corporation engaged in electrical contracting shall employ a master electrician on a full-time permanent basis, and the master electrician shall supervise, direct and control the electrical work for the person, firm or corporation (and be responsible for the competency of all persons performing electrical work) this master electrician shall register the person, firm or corporation with the electrical permit department as their employer. Upon termination of such employment, notice shall be given to the electrical permit department within five (5) days from the date of termination by the master electrician. In the event of termination by the employer, the services of the master electrician shall not terminate responsibility of the master electrician and/or the employer for the completion of the electrical work for which the permit was obtained by the master electrician. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-64. - Registration of more than one firm by a master electrician. 
No master electrician shall be permitted to register a person, firm or corporation as their employer as provided in section 8-64 of this chapter while registered or employed by another person, firm or corporation as a master electrician. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-65. - Death of master electrician. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged as an electrical contractor shall have the privilege of completing electrical permits started for a period of sixty (60) days or completion after the death of the master electrician who had been securing electrical permits for the person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-66. - Change of status. 
A master electrician or electrical sign contractor may change their license status from active to inactive by application. An inactive license places the master electrician or electrical sign contractor in the position that they may renew their license to active status by complying with section 8-68 and payment of fee as required for active license. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-67. - License non-assignable. 
No license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable or transferable. No master electrician shall assign or in any other way convey their licenses, the use thereof, or any rights thereunder, to anyone by power of attorney or any other process or become involved in any type of agreement, assignment or use whereby the master electrician will not have supervision, direction and control of the electrical work for which the permit was obtained. Should any master electrician violate this provision or any of the provisions specifying that they supervise and control the work for which they obtained a permit, their master electrician's license shall be revoked by the electrical board as provided by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-68. - Examination and fees. 
(a)  Examination for master electricians, electrical sign contractors and maintenance electricians shall be given as provided in subsections 8-32(b) and (c) of this chapter. Any applicant who shall have failed a master electrician's, electrical sign contractor's or maintenance electrician's examination the first time shall be allowed to take a second examination. After the second failure, the applicant must wait at least one year for each additional examination. 
(b)  Licenses shall be renewed by the electrical inspector upon application and payment of the required fee, provided no license shall have expired for more than six (6) months, license expired for more than six (6) months shall not be renewed except upon re-examination as provided for herein. If person is using an outside testing agent, the person applying for reinstatement of their license must have taken required tests from the outside agency within the past ninety (90) days of application. It shall also be required that all master electricians, electrical sign contractors, maintenance electricians, and journeymen electricians renewing their license shall show proof of eight (8) hours of continuing education on the latest edition of the National Electrical Code, except for inactive status and those whose examination was based on the latest NEC. 
After the effective date of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code, the eight-hour continuing education course requirement on the latest edition of the N.E.C. shall be waived during the first license renewal period for new licenses, and for new license renewals. 
(c)  Before a master electrician, electrical sign contractor's license or maintenance electrician is issued or renewed the applicant shall pay a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). Before a journeyman electricians license is issued or renewed the applicant shall pay a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(d)  Fee for renewal of an inactive master electrician or electrical sign contractor's license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year. 
(e)  A duplicate license may be issued upon request after payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.00). 
(f)  All fees for licenses shall be paid to the clerk of the permit department, city hall, City of South Houston, Texas. All licenses shall expire on December 31st each year. 
(g)  Contractor registration fee: 
Annual fee: January through December 31: 
(1)  Electrical contractor ..... $100.00 
(2)  Electrical maintenance contractor ..... $100.00 
(3)  Electrical sign contractor ..... $100.00 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98; Ord. No. 99-001, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 2004-37, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 8-69. - Suspension, withholding or revocation of license or certificate. 
When given a ten-day notice by registered mail, and after a hearing before the electrical board, the person notified may have their license or certificate revoked, suspended or placed on probation for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Habitual drunkenness or the use of narcotics; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Adjudication of insanity; 
(4)  Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a license or permit; 
(5)  Violating either willfully or maliciously or by reason of incompetence, any provision of this electrical code or amendment thereto; 
(6)  Conviction of defrauding any person for whom he has rendered or contracted to render service; 
(7)  To secure a permit for electrical work not actually controlled by the master electrician or performed by licensed employees under their control, supervision and direction; 
(8)  Securing permits under any pretext for which applicant has no valid contract. (This is intended to prevent a master electrician from securing a permit for the purpose of evading the spirit and intent of this chapter by any simulated scheme, transaction or device or performing electrical work without a valid permit). 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-70—8-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MASTER ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 8-81. - Master electrician defined. 
The holders of the license provided for in section 8-82(a) shall be known as master electricians. All master electricians shall be assigned a permanent identification number. This assigned number will appear on the master electricians license, and shall be displayed in their current place of business. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-82. - Procedure to obtain a master electrician license. 
(a)  Qualifications. All electrician's licenses previously issued by the South Houston Electrical Board shall be valid and in good standing, so long as the holder of said license has performed all requirements of the city for maintaining said license. All applicants for a master electrician's examination shall have either of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Five (5) years active and practical experience in electrical work as defined herein as a journeyman electrician under the control, supervision, direction and responsibility of a licensed master electrician. 
(2)  Five (5) years experience as a journeyman electrician as defined herein or the equivalent thereof as specifically approved by the electrical board. The completion of each year of study of an electrical engineering curriculum at an accredited college of engineering shall count as one year of experience, but not more than three (3) years shall be credited. 
(b)  Application. Application for licensing as a master electrician shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city permit department. All applications shall be notarized by a Public Notary in and for the State of Texas under their seal and shall be accompanied by documents verifying their qualifications as specified in section 8-82(a) of this chapter. All applications shall be submitted to the electrical board for approval. 
(c)  Examination. Applicants for master electrician license shall be given a reasonable examination in writing in two parts as follows: 
(1)  Part I and part II shall consist of questions and problems on code and theory as it pertains to electrical work. 
(d)  License issued. The electrical inspector shall issue a license to each applicant who makes a grade of seventy (70) percent or better on each of the two parts of the examination, based on the latest NEC, or if test is based on earlier NEC, an eight-hour course of continuing education on the latest NEC is required. No license shall be issued until after payment of the fee provided for in subsections 8-68(a) and (c). For review of the examination, see subsection 8-32(b). 
After the effective date of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code, the eight-hour continuing education course requirement on the latest edition of the N.E.C. shall be waived during the first license renewal period for new licenses, and for new license renewals. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98; Ord. No. 99-001, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 8-83. - Insurance required. 
No permit shall be issued under any master electrician or electrical sign contractor's license until he has complied with the following insurance requirements. 
(a)  Workman's compensation insurance on each of their employees, and this insurance shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Workman's Compensation Act of the State of Texas. 
(b)  Public liability insurance to the extent of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any one accident and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one person. 
(c)  Property damage insurance to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one accident and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any one piece of property. Such insurance shall be written by an accredited company under the supervision of the Board of Insurance Commissioners of the State of Texas. Evidence of compliance with these requirements shall be met when the policy, or a certificate of insurance has been filed with and approved by the City of South Houston. The policy shall include an endorsement thereon that the City of South Houston will be notified at least ten (10) days in advance in the event of cancellation or expiration of the policy or policies. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-84—8-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MAINTENANCE ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 8-91. - Maintenance electrician defined. 
The electrician who performs work only in the confines of a building or on the premises thereof, and who is regularly employed on a permanent basis to do electrical maintenance defined in section 8-3, "electrical maintenance work", shall be known as a maintenance electrician. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-92. - Procedure to obtain a maintenance electrician's license. 
(a)  Qualifications. All electrician's licenses previously issued by the South Houston Electrical Board shall be valid and in good standing, so long as the holder of said license has performed all requirements of the city for maintaining said license. All applicants for a maintenance electrician's examination shall have one of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Four (4) years experience as an apprentice electrician verified by letters from previous employers; 
(2)  Certificate of completion of a four (4) year minimum federally approved apprenticeship program. 
(b)  Application. An application for license as a maintenance electrician shall be in writing on the form provided by the city permit department. All applications shall be notarized by such Notary Public in and for the State of Texas under their seal of office. The application for license shall be submitted to the electrical board for approval. 
(c)  Examination. Applicants for maintenance electrician license shall be given a written examination to verify their qualifications to perform electrical maintenance work as defined in section 8-3, "electrical maintenance work." For review of examination, see subsection 8-32(b) 
(d)  License issued. The electrical inspector shall issue a license to each applicant who makes a grade of seventy (70) percent or better on the examination, based on the latest NEC, or if test is based on earlier NEC, an eight-hour course of continuing education on the latest NEC is required. No license shall be issued until after payment of the fee provided for in subsection 8-68(c) and approved by electrical board. 
After the effective date of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code, the eight-hour continuing education course requirement on the latest edition of the N.E.C. shall be waived during the first license renewal period for new licenses, and for new license renewals. 
(e)  Change of employer. The maintenance electrician shall notify the electrical inspector immediately of any change in their employment, giving the name of their new employer and the location at which they will perform electrical maintenance work. 
(f)  Display of license. The maintenance electrician shall have their license in their possession while performing electrical maintenance work. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § IV(G), 4-28-98; Ord. No. 99-001, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 8-93. - Performance of electrical maintenance work. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to do electrical maintenance work as defined in subsection 8-3, "electrical maintenance work" unless such person is a licensed maintenance electrician, provided that this shall not prohibit a journeyman electrician (employed, not on a permanent basis) from doing electrical maintenance work under the supervision, direction and control of a licensed maintenance electrician. If the journeyman electrician at any time brings themselves within the definition of a maintenance electrician by becoming employed on a permanent basis, such journeyman electrician shall be required to obtain a license as a maintenance electrician, in addition to their journeyman electrician's license. An apprentice electrician may perform electrical maintenance work under the constant supervision, direction and control of a maintenance electrician. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a master electrician to perform electrical maintenance work or limit electrical maintenance work from being performed by an apprentice or journeyman electrician under the supervision, direction or control of a master electrician. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-94—8-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 8-101. - Journeyman electrician defined. 
Except as otherwise provided, those undertaking electrical work as defined in section 8-3, "electrical work" under the supervision, direction and control of a master electrician, shall be known as a journeyman electrician. The term journeyman electrician, however, shall not include an apprentice electrician. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-102. - Procedure to obtain a journeyman electrician license. 
(a)  Qualifications. All electrician's licenses previously issued by the South Houston Electrical Board shall be valid and in good standing, so long as the holder of said license has performed all requirements of the city for maintaining said license. All applicants for a journeyman electrician's examination shall have one of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Four (4) years active and practical experience in electrical work as defined herein under the control, supervisions direction and responsibility of a licensed master electrician. 
(2)  Certificate of completion of a four-year minimum federally approved apprenticeship program. 
(3)  Hold a current journeyman's license in Houston or Pasadena, Texas. 
(b)  Application. Application for licensing a journeyman electrician shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city permit department. All applications shall be accompanied by documents verifying their qualifications as specified in subsection 8-102(a) of this chapter. All applications shall be submitted to the electrical inspector for approval and no applicant shall be issued a license until their application has been approved by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  Display of certificate. Every holder of an journeyman electrician license shall have the license in their possession while performing electrical work. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-103—8-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - APPRENTICE ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 8-111. - Apprentice electrician defined. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, those who perform electrical work or defined in section 8-3, "electrical work" under the direct constant, personal supervision and control of either a master or journeyman electrician shall be known as apprentice electricians. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-112. - Registration of apprentice electricians. 
Application for registration as an apprentice electrician shall be on the form provided by the city permit department. The applicant shall furnish with their application a letter from a master electrician licensed by the City of South Houston recommending the applicant for registration and stating that the master electrician will employ the applicant as an apprentice electrician. The application shall be notarized by a Public Notary in and for the State of Texas under this seal of office. The application shall be submitted to the electrical inspector for approval. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-113. - Registration fee. 
Before registration certificate is granted or renewed by the electrical board, the applicant for apprentice electrician shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-114. - Display of certificate. 
Every holder of an apprentice electrician's certificate shall have certificate in their possession while performing electrical work. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-115—8-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ELECTRICAL SIGN CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 8-121. - Application; definition; assignment of identification number. 
This chapter shall apply to those who undertake the business to manufacture and/or install electrical sign, conductors and equipment for signs and outline lighting as defined in the National Electrical Code, and for inside lighting with high-voltage gas tubes. Those qualifying under this chapter shall be known as an electrical sign contractor. All electrical sign contractors shall be assigned a permanent identification number; this number shall appear on the license and shall be displayed at their place of business. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-122. - To obtain electrical sign contractor's license. 
(a)  Qualifications. The qualifications and terms of license shall be the same as that for a master electrician in subsection 8-82(a) in all respects. 
(b)  Application. Application for licensing as an electrical sign contractor shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city permit department. All applications shall be notarized by a Public Notary in and for the State of Texas under their seal and shall be accompanied by documents verifying their qualifications as specified in subsection 8-82(a) of this chapter. All applications shall be submitted to the electrical board for approval. 
(c)  Examination. The written examination given the applicant for an electrical sign contractor's license shall cover only electrical sign work. For examination review, see subsection 8-32(b). 
(d  License issued. The electrical inspector shall issue a license to each applicant who makes a grade of seventy (70) percent or better on the examination, based on the latest NEC, or if test is based on earlier NEC, an eight-hour course of continuing education on the latest NEC is required. No license shall be issued until after payment of fee as provided for in subsection 8-68(c). 
After the effective date of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code, the eight-hour continuing education course requirement on the latest edition of the N.E.C. shall be waived during the first license renewal period for new licenses, and for new license renewals. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98; Ord. No. 99-001, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 8-123. - Electrical work. 
(a)  Scope of work. An electrical sign contractor shall be permitted to manufacture, install and to connect the sign, outline lighting or inside lighting to an existing circuit or circuits that have been approved by the building official for connection of the specific load covered by the permit issued. Should the available circuit or circuits not be adequate for the specific sign or outline lighting load, then a master electrician shall be employed to install the necessary wiring required. 
(b)  The electrical sign contractor shall be permitted to install the necessary circuits for an isolated sign and/or outline lighting installation. 
(c)  The electrical sign contractor shall employ only properly registered journeyman electricians and apprentice electricians to perform any electrical work requiring a permit. 
(d)  Isolated sign and/or outline lighting. An isolated sign and/or outline lighting installation shall be defined as an installation in which neither the meter nor service supplying the sign, signs or outline lighting are mounted on or in any building or structure not a part of a sign, signs or outline lighting. As applied in this chapter, signs or outline lighting on the exterior of a building must have a disconnect available on the exterior of the building. Nothing herein is intended to limit or repeal the effect of the City of South Houston Building Code covering Chapter 18, "Outdoor signs and Display Structures", but shall be cumulative thereof. 
(e)  All work performed, materials, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixture or equipment used shall conform with the full requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Any electric sign built within the City of South Houston and to be installed within the city shall have a shop inspection by the Electrical Inspector before the sign is shipped. The shop inspection fee shall be separate from and double that required for signs as specified in section 8-141 of this chapter signs constructed outside the city but erected within the city shall be subject to the same rules and regulations as apply to signs constructed within the city after approval, the inspector shall attach an approval label or stamp to the sign. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a licensed master electrician from engaging in the business of electrical sign contractor, but the master electrician shall comply with the requirements of this chapter for sign work. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-124—8-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 8-131. - Who may apply for electrical permits. 
(a)  Only those hereinafter specified shall have the privilege to apply for electrical work, electrical maintenance work, or electrical sign contractor work permits. 
(b)  The master electrician, or their duly authorized agent, licensed by the City of South Houston, who is engaged in electrical contracting by himself, shall apply for only electrical permits for their own business, and no electrical permit shall be obtained by any master electrician who does not supervise, direct and control the electrical work for which the permit was obtained. 
(c)  The master electrician, or their duly authorized agent, licensed by the City of South Houston, who is employed by a person, firm or corporation as a master electrician, shall take out permits only for their employer, and shall supervise, direct and control the electrical work for which that permit was obtained. 
(d)  The electrical sign contractor, or their duly authorized agent, licensed by the City of South Houston, shall obtain permits for electrical signs only and shall also comply with subsections 8-131(b) and (c). 
(e)  The maintenance electrician who is employed by a person, firm or corporation shall take out maintenance work permits only for their employer, and shall perform or supervise, direct and control the electrical maintenance work for which the permit was obtained. 
(f)  A homeowner may apply for a permit for electrical work in and/or on their residence when the electrical work is to be performed by himself (see section 8-62.) 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-132. - Application for electrical permit. 
To obtain an electrical permit, the licensed master electrician, electrical sign contractor, or their duly authorized agent, shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the scope of work to be covered by the permit. 
(2)  Describe the location where the proposed work will take place by street address or similar description that will readily identify and locate the jobsite. 
(3)  Show the use, function or occupant of the building and or project. 
(4)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in section 8-133. 
(5)  Be signed by the licensed electrician, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(6)  State that the applicant requesting the issuance of a permit has read this ordinance entirety and will supervise, direct and control all electrical work performed under it or supervise, direct and control the electrical maintenance work for which the permit was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-133. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  With each application for an electrical permit, when required by the electrical inspector, one set of plans and specifications shall be submitted. The electrical inspector may require that such plans and specifications bear the seal of a registered professional electrical engineer licensed by the State of Texas if for commercial or industrial. 
(b)  All public buildings shall be required to submit plans and specifications before securing any permit, except minor additions or alterations to existing facilities when specifically exempted by the electrical inspector. Plans and specifications shall be submitted for all buildings and places of assembly where emergency electric systems are required, except minor additions or alterations to the existing facilities when specifically exempted by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  Secure and submit a service outlet and data statement issued by the local electric utility for modifications or new construction of an electrical service entrance. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-134. - Approval of plans and specifications. 
(a)  The applications, plans and specifications submitted shall be reviewed by the electrical inspector such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city for compliance with laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the electrical inspector concurs that the work described in the specifications and plans confers to the requirements of the city, he shall authorize a permit to be issued. 
(b)  When the electrical inspector authorizes a permit, he shall stamp the set of plans and specifications, "approved", and affix their signature thereto. 
(c)  No work permit shall be transferred or assigned to any person by the original applicant. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-135. - Validity. 
(a)  To issue or grant a permit with approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter, except to authorize the work or use as lawful. 
(b)  To issue a permit based on plans and specifications shall not prevent the electrical inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing building operations from being carried out when in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-136. - Display of permit at jobsite. 
(a)  The permit on all new construction for electrical work shall be displayed on the jobsite in a readily accessible location throughout the period of such installation. 
(b)  A permit for an existing installation which approved or where additional electrical work is required on a job in progress, the permit for such installation or alteration shall be delivered to the person or firm for whom the installation is to be made and posted at the jobsite as directed by the electrical inspector before the addition or alteration is started. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-137. - Expiration of permit. 
Each permit issued by the electrical inspector shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the project authorized has not started within sixty (60) days from the date of such permit, or if the project is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work has started for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be again started, a new permit shall be obtained. The fee shall be one-half (½) the amount required for a new permit, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications, and provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year, in which case a new, full fee permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-138. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The electrical inspector may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit issued is in error based on incorrect information supplied, or when in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Failure of any registered master electrician or electrical sign contractor to correct any defect, error or deficiency in any work installed under an Electrical permit issued to him within fifteen (15) days after written notification thereof from the electrical inspector shall, without further notice, cause the issuance of permits to the master electrician or electrical sign contractor to stop until such corrections have been made, inspected and approved. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-139. - Emergency permits. 
The electrical inspector may issue and enforce the rules and regulations to cover emergency permits where real emergencies exist. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-140. - Temporary permits. 
No temporary permits shall be for a period longer than three (3) months, and after three (3) months the electrical inspector shall issue written instructions to the electric public service company or others having control of the supply of energy to disconnect the service, unless a permanent approval or an additional temporary approval has been obtained. To expedite the removal of electrical service, the electrical inspector shall notify the electric service company or others who have control, ten (10) days prior to the date of termination of the permit, and shall notify the owner of the installation. A letter addressed to the "occupant" at the temporary jobsite location shall be sufficient notification. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-141. - Fees 
(a)  Schedule of fees. Electrical permit fees shall be assessed and collected as follows: as set forth in "Exhibit A," as amended. 
Exhibit A 
Eletric type 	Price 
Meter loop & Service + (2 outlets) 	$35.00 
Outlets 	$0.50 
Lighting fixtures 	$0.50 
Range receptacle 	$6.00 
Clothes dryer 	$6.00 
Cook tops 	$6.00 
Ovens 	$6.00 
Window A/C receptacle 	$6.00 
Garbage disposal 	$2.50 
Dishwasher 	$2.50 
Washing machine 	$2.50 
Hot water heater 	$5.00 
Mobile home pole*** 	$35.00 
Temporary saw pole*** 	$35.00 
Temporary cut in*** 	$35.00 
Reconnection fee*** 	$35.00 
Miscellaneous 	$35.00 
Working without a Permit**** 	
Motor up to but not including ¼ HP 	$2.00 
 ¼ HP and less than 2 HP 	$4.00 
 2 HP and less than 10 HP 	$7.50 
 10 HP and less than 25 HP 	$10.00 
 25 HP and less than 100 HP 	$15.00 
 100 HP and over 	$25.00 
X-Ray machine 	$25.00 
Electric heat per KW 	$1.00 
Solar system - Residential 	$50.00 
Solar system - Commercial 	$250.00 
	
SIGNS: 	
	
Shop inspection per KW 	$5.00 
Incandescent and vacuum tube signs per KVA 	$35.00 
Sign installation inspection, per KVA 	$7.00 
Festoon lighting and streamers per circuit 	$7.50 
Minimum permit fee 	$35.00 
Re-inspect fee 	$35.00 
Application fee 	$10.00 
 
*** Separate electrical permit required 
**** $250.00 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater 
(b)  The minimum fee shall apply to move and relocate electrical equipment authorized to be done by a licensed electrician or an electrical sign contractor for which a permit inspection fee is not otherwise provided. 
(c)  South Houston Electrical Code Ordinance shall require a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2010-18, § 1(Exh. A), 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-14-14; Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1(Exh. A), 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-25-17)  
Sec. 8-142. - Re-inspection fee. 
When it becomes necessary to make a re-inspection prior to final approval, and at final inspection if found to be unsafe, the master electrician or the electrical sign contractor shall pay for each re-inspection a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). This provision is to apply only to that work covered by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-143. - Double fees. 
All electrical fixture and appliance inspection permit fees shall apply except that when application is made for a permit after the work has been started, or after the work partially completed or concealed, then the fee or fees will be doubled. These double fees shall be paid by the electrical contractor to whom the permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-144. - Failure to pay permit inspection fees. 
The failure of a master electrician or an electrical sign contractor to pay the city in full the fees provided within ten (10) days after the final certificate of approval is granted for electrical work, the license of such master electrician or electrical sign contractor shall be automatically suspended without action on the part of the electrical board, and the licenses shall be of no force and effect, until such fees are paid in full. No license which has been suspended under the terms and provisions of this chapter longer than six (6) months shall be renewed, except upon re-examination on the same terms and conditions as provided for in the case of original examination. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-145. - When a permit is required. 
No wire, pole, duct line, guy anchor, apparatus, device, appliance, fixture or equipment for the transmission, distribution or utilization of electrical energy for any purpose shall be installed within the City of South Houston, nor shall any alteration or additions be made to any of the aforementioned without first securing a permit from the electrical inspector, except as exempted herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-146. - Permit for maintenance electrician's employer. 
(a)  An annual permit is required for any person or firm employing a maintenance electrician licensed by the City of South Houston to perform electrical maintenance work within the confines of a building in or on the premises where he is employed. The application for the annual permit shall be made on the form provided by the city permit department and shall contain a description of the location and the maintenance work anticipated. 
(b)  The fee of the annual permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall expire on December 31st each year. 
(c)  The maintenance electrician shall be required to obtain a permit to move and relocate electrical equipment authorized to be done under the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-147. - When a permit is not required. 
(a)  No permit shall be required for replacing fuses or lamps or the connection of portable equipment to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed or for repair to portable appliance. 
(b)  No permit shall be required for minor repair work such as repairing or replacing flush and snap switches, receptacles and lamp-sockets, or minor repairs on permanently connected electrical apparatus, appliances, fixtures or equipment, or the installation of light globes. 
(c)  No permit shall be required for any official electrical work performed in the city by employees of the State of Texas or County of Harris or city employees. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-148. - Companies exempted. 
(a)  Electric public service company. No permit shall be required for the electrical work by an electric public service company franchised by the City of South Houston for the use of such company in the generation, transmission, distribution or sale of energy. However, the company shall not do any wiring on a customer's premises other than wiring which is a part of the company's distribution system, including metering equipment and transformer vaults in which the company's transformers are located, nor shall any of its employees do any work other than that done for said company as herein before provided for, by virtue of this exception. 
(b)  Railroad company. No permit shall be required for the installation and maintenance of railway crossing signal devices when such is performed by due authority of the railroad and in accordance with the standards of the American Railroad Association and in collaboration with and approval of the Director of Traffic of the City of South Houston 
(c)  Others. No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance, or alteration of material or equipment for telegraph or telephone signal service. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-149—8-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - INSPECTION REVIEW OF DECISIONS ETC. 
 
Sec. 8-161. - Notification of cover-up work. 
(a)  When any part of an electrical installation is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of a structure, the licensed electrician or electrical sign contractor shall notify the electrical permit department and the electrical inspector, who must concur that the work necessarily proceed continuously. The licensed electrician or electrical sign contractor shall give the electrical inspector due notice and inspection shall be made periodically during the progress of work, and where, at the discretion of the electrical inspector, a notice shall be posted on the premises stating that work is approved and be covered, or is not approved and shall not be covered pending further inspection. Any person removing, destroying, altering or defacing the notice shall be stayed pending further necessary inspection. Upon the completion of the work which has been authorized, it shall be the duty of the licensed electrician or electrical sign contractor, to immediately notify the electrical inspector, who shall inspect such installation within forty-eight (48) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(b)  Where it is necessary to have a cover-up inspection and the inspector is notified between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., it shall be their duty to make this inspection within forty-eight (48) hours. In the event such work is turned down, he shall so notify the person requesting the inspection within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  After the final inspection is made, and the electrical work is approved, the electrical inspector, subject to the other applicable provisions of this ordinances shall issue a final certificate of approval to the public utility company, which shall authorize connection of such approved work and the use of the installation. No connection shall be made until such authorization and final certificate is issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-162. - Re-inspection; correction of unsafe conditions. 
(a)  The electrical inspector or authorized deputies shall have the authority to make at any reasonable time, if he has knowledge or belief that faulty conditions exist, a thorough re-inspection of any electrical workmanship, material or equipment now installed or that may hereafter be installed within the city. 
(b)  When the electrical work is found to be at variance with the original permit issued, or to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, or that the electrical measuring device has been tampered with to create an unsafe condition, the owner, using or operating the unsafe condition shall be notified in writing. After notification, the owner shall have the necessary repairs or changes made to place such equipment in safe condition and shall have such work commence within fifteen (15) days and completed in thirty (30) days or a reasonably longer period specified by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-163. - Connections to installations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliance fixtures or equipment for the installation of which a permit is required until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing such connection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a source of electrical energy to any electric wiring, apparatus devices, appliances fixtures and equipment which have been disconnected by the electrical inspector or the use of which has been ordered by the electrical inspector to be discontinued until a certificate of approval has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-164. - Interference with or change of installation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with any electrical wiring installed or being installed in, or on within or without, any structure or building. If, in the course of erection of a building or structure, the wiring is in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the building or structure as called for by plans, notice shall immediately be given the person installing the wiring and the needed change shall be made by such person 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Secs. 8-165—8-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 8-176. - General. 
In general, any type of wiring system may be used in this city limits of South Houston as approved in the National Electrical Code, except where specifically prohibited herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-177. - Service and interior feeders. 
All service and interior feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, approved metal sheath cable, or approved busways, except that underground services, feeders and branch circuits may be installed in approved ducts or rigid nonmetallic conduit. Overhead services or feeders between two (2) buildings less than six (6) feet apart shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, approved busways or duct. Where wiring is installed in approved non-metallic duct or conduit, a continuous ground wire shall be installed within the duct to insure continuity of ground and the entire wiring system must be installed in a manner approved by the electrical board. Where conduit fittings are used ahead of meter cabinets, same shall be of sealable type and shall be plainly visible. 
(1)  Exception: Interior feeder for residential properties may be of non-metallic cable as long as a bond wire is part of the cable. 
(2)  All single family residences shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) amp service. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-178. - Flexible metallic conduit. 
Flexible metallic conduit may be used only for: temporary work, for connection to store fixtures, for connection to light fixtures installed within buildings, for electric range connection, and for motor connection. Connection to individual light fixtures may not exceed six (6) feet in length, and connections to motors or ranges may not exceed four (4) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-179. - Non-metallic sheathed cable. 
Non-metallic sheathed cable shall be used only for temporary work or within apartment houses and residential dwellings. Conductors in or on all tile and masonry walls of such buildings shall be encased in rigid conduit, electrical metallic tubing or type AC cable. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-180. - Type UF cable. 
Type UF cable may be used only for branch circuit wiring on residential properties. Where installed underground, the cable shall be buried eighteen (18) inches. The cable shall be protected by rigid conduit on exterior walls and at the points where it enters and leaves the ground. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-181. - Open wiring. 
Open wiring is approved only for temporary work and in central stations, transformer vaults, substations and switchboards. Elsewhere than in central stations and substations, all circuits operating at more than six hundred (600) volts shall enter buildings or structures in conduit run underground or extended overhead from another structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-182. - Location of disconnecting means. 
Service disconnecting means shall be located so that the height to the center of the operating handle shall be not less than four (4) feet and not more than six (6) feet above the floor or finished grade, except as installed in free standing or building type switchgear built to N.E.M.A. specifications. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-183. - Temporary saw poles. 
Temporary saw poles shall be constructed of four-inch by four-inch timbers or equivalent wood structure. All electrical materials shall be weather proof. All one hundred twenty-five-volt, single-phase, fifteen (15) and twenty (20) ampere receptacles, shall have ground-fault protection, service conductors shall be No. 8 AWG or larger installed in conduit with No. 8 or larger armored ground wire connected to driven electrode. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-184. - Conductors. 
In general, all conductors, wire, and circuits referred to in the ordinance shall be understood to be copper conductors. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-185. - Test required on emergency systems. 
The owner or management of each building or place of assembly where an emergency electric system is required and installed shall have periodic maintenance check and test of the emergency equipment. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-186. - Circuits and receptacles for specific equipment in residence. 
(a)  Small appliances in kitchen laundry etc. For the appliance loads in the kitchen, breakfast and dining area, two (2) or more twenty-ampere branch circuit with not more than five (5) duplex receptacles per circuit shall be provided and shall have no other outlets (clock outlets excepted). 
(b)  Window A/C units and space heaters branch circuit wiring for window air conditioning or resistance-type space heaters shall be wired for the nameplate amperes plus twenty-five (25) percent and shall not be smaller than #12 AWG copper wire. Not more than one unit or receptacle shall be installed on any single or multi-wire branch circuit. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-187. - System neutral. 
Shall be grounded to a driven electrode, in addition to any other approved method. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-188. - Circuits for unsupported signs or decorative lighting. 
All circuits extending from buildings to signs or decorative lighting, which are not supported by the building from which the circuit originates, shall be place in rigid conduit and underground. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-189. - Branch circuits and outlets for small appliances in kitchens, laundry rooms, etc. 
(a)  Laundry equipment in dwelling occupancies shall be supplied by one twenty-ampere branch circuit for that use only. Not more that two (2) duplex receptacles may be connected to this circuit and such receptacles must be of the grounding type. 
(b)  Dishwashers in dwelling occupancies shall be supplied by one twenty-ampere branch circuit for that use only and such circuit shall have no other outlets. 
(c)  Garbage disposal units in dwelling occupancies shall be supplied by one twenty-ampere branch circuit. Additional connections to such circuits shall be limited to one kitchen vent fan and one light outlet. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-190. - Splicing or jointing of conductors. 
Conductors shall be spliced or joined by soldering or by the use of an approved solderless connector of the positive pressure type or of the "screw on" type. All joints must be twisted. All conductors feeding a duplex receptacle shall be pigtail to feed each outlet or device in the outlet box. This is to be done in all residential and commercial location. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-191. - Romex to be clear of pipes. 
Nonmetallic sheath cable (Romex) shall be installed clear of all pipes. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-192. - Supporting branch-circuit wiring. 
Branch-circuit wiring associated with equipment that is located within, supported by, or secured to a non-fire-rated floor or roof/ceiling assembly shall be permitted to supported by the ceiling support wires. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Sec. 8-193. - Maximum number of conductors in conduit. 
In lieu of the requirements of Appendix C of the 1996 National Electrical Code, The enclosed tables will be used, Tables A, B, C. 
TABLE A—MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CONDUCTORS IN TRADE SIZES OF CONDUIT OR TUBING 
CONDUIT OR TUBING TRADE SIZE (inches) 	½ 	¾ 	1 	1¼ 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3½ 	4 	5 	6 
Type Letters 	Conductor Size AWG/kcmil 												
TW, XHHW 	14 	9 	15 	25 	44 	60 	99 	142 					
 (14 through 18) 	12 	7 	12 	19 	35 	47 	78 	111 	171 				
 RH (14+12) 	10 	5 	9 	15 	26 	36 	60 	85 	131 	176 			
	8 	2 	4 	7 	12 	17 	28 	40 	62 	84 	108 		
RHW and RHH 	14 	6 	10 	16 	29 	40 	65 	93 	143 	192 			
 (without outer covering), 	12 	4 	8 	13 	24 	32 	53 	76 	117 	157 	163 		
 RH (10+8) 	10 	4 	6 	11 	19 	26 	43 	61 	95 	127 	85 	133 	
 THW, THHW 	8 	1 	3 	5 	10 	13 	22 	32 	49 	66 			
TW, 	6 	1 	2 	4 	7 	10 	16 	23 	36 	48 	62 	97 	141 
	4 	1 	1 	3 	5 	7 	12 	17 	27 	36 	47 	73 	106 
THW, 	3 	1 	1 	2 	4 	6 	10 	15 	23 	31 	40 	63 	91 
	2 	1 	1 	2 	4 	5 	9 	13 	20 	27 	34 	54 	78 
	1 		1 	1 	3 	4 	6 	9 	14 	19 	25 	39 	57 
FEPB (6 through 2), 	1/0 		1 	1 	2 	3 	5 	8 	12 	16 	21 	33 	49 
 RHW and RHH (without 	2/0 		1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	7 	10 	14 	18 	29 	41 
 outer covering) 	3/0 		1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	6 	9 	12 	15 	24 	35 
	4/0 			1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	7 	10 	13 	20 	29 
	250 			1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	6 	8 	10 	16 	23 
	300 			1 	1 	1 	2 	3 	5 	7 	9 	14 	20 
	350 				1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	6 	8 	12 	18 
	400 				1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	5 	7 	11 	16 
RH, THHW 	500 				1 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	6 	9 	14 
	600 				1 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	5 	7 	11 
	700 				1 	1 	1 	1 	2 	3 	4 	7 	10 
	750 				1 	1 	1 	1 	2 	3 	4 	6 	9 
 
Note 1. This table is for concentric stranded conductors only. For cables with compact conductors, the dimensions in Table D shall be used. 
Note 2. Conduit fill for conductors with a -2 suffix is the same as for those types without the suffix. 
TABLE B—MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CONDUCTORS IN TRADE SIZES OF CONDUIT OR TUBING 
CONDUIT OR TUBING TRADE SIZE (inches) 	½ 	¾ 	1 	1¼ 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3½ 	4 	5 	6 
Type Letters 	Conductor Size AWG/kcmil 												
THWN, 	14 	13 	24 	39 	69 	94 	154 						
	12 	10 	18 	29 	51 	70 	114 	164 					
	10 	6 	11 	18 	32 	44 	73 	104 	160 				
	8 	3 	5 	9 	16 	22 	36 	51 	79 	106 	136 		
THHN, 	6 	1 	4 	6 	11 	15 	26 	37 	57 	76 	98 	154 	
FEP (14 through 2), 	4 	1 	2 	4 	7 	9 	16 	22 	35 	47 	60 	94 	137 
FEPB (14 through 8), 	3 	1 	1 	3 	6 	8 	13 	19 	29 	39 	51 	80 	116 
PFA (14 through 4/0) 	2 	1 	1 	3 	5 	7 	11 	16 	25 	33 	43 	67 	97 
PFAH (14 through 4/0) 	1 		1 	1 	3 	5 	8 	12 	18 	25 	32 	50 	72 
Z (14 through 4/0) 	1/0 		1 	1 	3 	4 	7 	10 	15 	21 	27 	42 	61 
X HHW (4 through 500 	2/0 		1 	1 	2 	3 	6 	8 	13 	17 	22 	35 	51 
 kcmil) 	3/0 		1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	7 	11 	14 	18 	29 	42 
	4/0 		1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	6 	9 	12 	15 	24 	35 
	250 			1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	7 	10 	12 	20 	28 
	300 			1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	6 	8 	11 	17 	24 
	350 			1 	1 	1 	2 	3 	5 	7 	9 	15 	21 
	400 				1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	6 	8 	13 	19 
	500 				1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	5 	7 	11 	16 
	600 				1 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	5 	9 	13 
	700 					1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	5 	8 	11 
	750 					1 	1 	1 	2 	3 	4 	7 	11 
XHHW 	6 	1 	3 	5 	9 	13 	21 	30 	47 	63 	81 	128 	185 
	600 				1 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	5 	9 	13 
	700 					1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	5 	7 	11 
	750 					1 	1 	1 	2 	3 	4 	7 	10 
 
Note 1. This table is for concentric stranded conductors only. For cables with compact conductors, the dimensions in Table D shall be used. 
Note 2. Conduit fill for conductors with a -2 suffix is the same as for those types without the suffix. 
TABLE C—MAXIMUM NUMBER OF CONDUCTORS IN TRADE SIZES OF CONDUIT OR TUBING 
CONDUIT OR TUBING TRADE SIZE (inches) 	½ 	¾ 	1 	1¼ 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3½ 	4 	5 	6 
Type Letters 	Conductor Size AWG/kcmil 												
	14 	3 	6 	10 	18 	25 	41 	58 	90 	121 	155 		
RHW, 	12 	3 	5 	9 	15 	21 	35 	50 	77 	103 	132 		
	10 	2 	4 	7 	13 	18 	29 	41 	64 	86 	110 		
8 	1 	2 	4 	7 	9 	16 	22 	35 	47 	60 	94 	137 	
RHH 	6 	1 	1 	2 	5 	6 	11 	15 	24 	32 	41 	64 	93 
	4 	1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	8 	12 	18 	24 	31 	50 	72 
 (with outer 	3 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	7 	10 	16 	22 	28 	44 	63 
 covering) 	2 		1 	1 	3 	4 	6 	9 	14 	19 	24 	38 	56 
	1 		1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	7 	11 	14 	18 	29 	42 
	1/0 		1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	6 	9 	12 	16 	25 	37 
	2/0 			1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	8 	11 	14 	22 	32 
	3/0 			1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	7 	9 	12 	19 	28 
	4/0 			1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	6 	8 	10 	16 	24 
	250 				1 	1 	1 	3 	5 	6 	8 	13 	19 
	300 				1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	5 	7 	11 	17 
	350 				1 	1 	1 	2 	4 	5 	6 	10 	15 
	400 				1 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	6 	9 	14 
	500 				1 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	5 	8 	11 
	600 					1 	1 	1 	2 	3 	4 	6 	9 
	700 					1 	1 	1 	1 	3 	3 	6 	8 
	750 						1 	1 	1 	3 	3 	5 	8 
 
Note 1. This table is for concentric stranded conductors only. For cables with compact conductors, the dimensions in Table D shall be used. 
Note 2. Conduit fill for conductors with a -2 suffix is the same as for those types without the suffix. 
TABLE D—COMPACT ALUMINUM BUILDING WIRE NOMINAL DIMENSIONS* AND AREAS 
BARE CONDUCTOR 	TYPES THW AND THHW 	TYPE THHN 	TYPE XHHW 	SIZE AWG OR KCMIL 
Size AWG or kcmil 	Number of Strands 	Diam. inches 	Approx. Diam. inches 	Approx. Area Sq. inches 	Approx. Diam. inches 	Approx. Area Sq. inches 	Approx. Diam. inches 	Approx. Area Sq. inches 	
8 	7 	.134 	.255 	.0510 	— 	— 	.224 	.0394 	8 
6 	7 	.169 	.290 	.0660 	.240 	.0452 	.260 	.0530 	6 
4 	7 	.213 	.335 	.0881 	.305 	.0730 	.305 	.0730 	4 
2 	7 	.268 	.390 	.1194 	.360 	.1017 	.360 	.1017 	2 
1 	19 	.299 	.465 	.1698 	.415 	.1352 	.415 	.1352 	1 
1/0 	19 	.336 	.500 	.1963 	.450 	.1590 	.450 	.1590 	1/0 
2/0 	19 	.376 	.545 	.2332 	.495 	.1924 	.490 	.1885 	2/0 
3/0 	19 	.423 	.590 	.2733 	.540 	.2290 	.540 	.2290 	3/0 
4/0 	19 	.475 	.645 	.3267 	.595 	.2780 	.590 	.2733 	4/0 
250 	37 	.520 	.725 	.4128 	.670 	.3525 	.660 	.3421 	250 
300 	37 	.570 	.775 	.4717 	.720 	.4071 	.715 	.4015 	300 
350 	37 	.616 	.820 	.5281 	.770 	.4656 	.760 	.4536 	350 
400 	37 	.659 	.865 	.5876 	.815 	.5216 	.800 	.5026 	400 
500 	37 	.736 	.940 	.6939 	.885 	.6151 	.880 	.6082 	500 
600 	61 	.813 	1.050 	.8659 	.985 	.7620 	.980 	.7542 	600 
700 	61 	.877 	1.110 	.9676 	1.050 	.8659 	1.050 	.8659 	700 
750 	61 	.908 	1.150 	1.0386 	1.075 	.9076 	1.090 	.9331 	750 
1000 	61 	1.060 	1.285 	1.2968 	1.255 	1.2370 	1.230 	1.1882 	1000 
 
*Dimensions are from industry sources. 
(Ord. No. 98-004, § 2(Exh. A), 4-28-98)  
Chapter 8.5 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2009-29, §§ 1—8, adopted October 27, 2009, did not specifically amend the code. Therefore, such ordinance has amended chapter 8.5 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 701, §§ 1—12, 2-1-83. 
 
Sec. 8.5-1. - Organization. 
There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the City of South Houston, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(a)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(b)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate authority for execution, but responsibility shall remain with the director. 
(c)  The operational emergency management organization of the City of South Houston shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 1, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 8.5-2. - Emergency management director—Powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(a)  Surveying actual or potential hazards that threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures that would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(b)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of South Houston, and recommendation for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(c)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(d)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives that are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(e)  Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(f)  Determination of all questions or authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(g)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(h)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(i)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(j)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(k)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(l)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(m)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (V.T.C.A. Government Code, Ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 8.5-3. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 3, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 8.5-4. - Inter-jurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge of the County of Harris and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Harris, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 4, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 8.5-5. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 5, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 8.5-6. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and the City of South Houston, the agents and representatives of said city, any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, and any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, to the extent permitted by Texas and federal law as amended, be protected from liability for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 6, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 8.5-7. - Expenditure of public funds. 
(a)  Use of disaster recovery funds. All infrastructure programs funded with disaster recovery funds will be designed so that any publicly accessible infrastructure projects and associated facilities are fully accessible to persons with disabilities. 
(b)  No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this ordinance without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 7, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 2011-31, § 1, 10-11-11)  
Sec. 8.5-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of South Houston, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), or such maximum amount as is set by V.T.C.A. Government Code, § 418.173(b), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, § 8, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 8.5-9. - Certificate pay for state-mandated certification. 
(a)  Emergency management employees shall receive the following monthly certificate pay structure for each respective certificate earned by the employee: 
FEMA - Emergency Management ..... $50.00 
(b)  EMS employees shall receive the following monthly certificate pay structure for each respective certificate earned by the employee: 
EMT - Intermediate ..... $25.00 
Paramedic ..... $50.00 
These payments shall be based on the number of certificates held by the employees as of October 27, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 3-3-09)  
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Election and approval of fire chief, §§ 2-3, 2-9; volunteer fire department, § 2-9.1; city exempt from Volunteer Fire Fighters Relief and Retirement Fund Act, § 2-9.2; buildings and general building regulations, § Ch. 6; electrical code, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection requirements for oil and gas wells, §§ 14-4, 14-5; plumbing, Ch. 17; signs not to obstruct fire escapes or exits, § 18-8; signs not be erected on or anchored to fire walls, § 18-9; burning of leaves, paper, etc., on streets and sidewalks, § 19-22. 
State Law reference— Fire protection in cities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Piling or storing flammable material near buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pile, stack or store trash or other flammable material next to the walls of any building within the limits of the city or so near to any such building that a fire within such material might be dangerous to such building or to any adjacent building. 
(Ord. No. 351, 6-20-55)  
Sec. 9-2. - Sale, storage or discharge of fireworks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, sell, offer or expose for sale or have in possession with intent to sell or to use, discharge, or cause to be discharged, ignited, fired or otherwise set in action, within the limits of the city, any fireworks, firecrackers, rockets, sparklers, torpedoes, Roman candles, fire balloons or other fireworks or substances of any combination whatsoever designed or intended for pyrotechnic display. 
(Ord. of 12-5-50) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004.  
Sec. 9-3. - Sellers of gasoline and kerosene not to place same in glass or plastic receptacles. 
It shall be unlawful for any seller of gasoline or kerosene or any by-products thereof to place the same, upon the purchase thereof, in any type of receptacle made of glass, glass products or plastic unless approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 1, 11-19-60; Ord. No. 854, § 1, 12-27-89)  
Sec. 9-4. - Handling and use of flammable liquids at retail service stations. 
The city council hereby adopts article 9201, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, and the rules and regulations adopted by the state board of insurance, to insure uniform force and effect throughout the state in enforcing the rules and regulations for the safe storage, handling and use of flammable liquids at retail service stations. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 1, 8-4-70)  
Sec. 9-5. - Fire code adopted; amendments. 
(a)  The International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, including Appendix Chapters as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the City of South Houston for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of South Houston and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of South Houston are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as is fully set out in this section. 
(b)  The following sections of the International Fire Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section F101.1. Insert: City of South Houston. 
Section F109.3. Insert: misdemeanor, $2,000, -0- 
Section F111.4. Insert: $200, $2,000 
The limits referred to in certain sections of the 2006 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
Section F3204.3.1.1. (limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): 10 feet. 
Section F3404.2.9.5.2. (limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): 10 feet. 
Section F3406.2.4.4. (limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): 10 feet. 
Section F3804.2. (limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas): 300 feet. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 1, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 854, § 2, 12-27-89; Ord. No. 94-032, § I, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2002-16, §§ 1, 4—6, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 2010-22, § 4—6, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 9-6. - Fire regulations for childcare facilities adopted. 
The "Minimum Fire Safety Regulations for Child Care Facilities in Texas," promulgated by the Texas Board of Insurance, effective February 24, 1972, on file in the city secretary's office, is hereby adopted as the fire code regulating childcare facilities in South Houston, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 2, 4-1-80)  
Sec. 9-7. - Penalty for violation of sections 9-5 and 9-6; applicability to building owner and agents. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of section 9-5 or section 9-6, including the referenced code and regulations, or failing to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereon shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not exceeding that fine set out in Section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation thereof is committed or continued. The owner or owners of any building or structure failing to comply with any of the provisions of those sections, and the owner or owners of any premises where in a violation thereof occurs, and any architect, engineer, designer, builder, contractor, agent, person, firm or corporation employed therewith and who has assisted in the separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 854, § 3, 12-27-89)  
Secs. 9-8—9-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 9-15. - Office created; members, supervision, etc. 
The office of the fire marshal is hereby created, with duties, powers and responsibilities as set forth herein. Such office shall consist of one fire marshal, one assistant fire marshal and two (2) fire inspectors, with the fire marshal and the other three (3) members of his department functioning through and reporting directly to the mayor and the city council. Such office(s) shall be filled pursuant to the directives of the personnel policy of South Houston, as amended. The fire marshal and all subordinate officers within the division of the fire department shall possess all qualifications required by law, local, state or federal, for such personnel and shall only be removed if unqualified or for cause, or both. The fire marshal and the assistant fire marshal shall receive reimbursement for expenditures. The supervision of the fire marshal division itself shall be the responsibility of the fire marshal, who shall report to and be supervised by the fire chief. The budget of the fire marshal division shall be combined and consolidated with the budget of the fire department. The fire chief shall enforce and be responsible for and in charge of the combined budget. 
(Ord. of 2-5-29, § 1; Ord. No. 97-003, § 1, 1-28-97; Ord. No. 97-005, § 1, 2-11-97; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2012-15, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 9-16. - Appointment; qualifications; removal. 
The fire marshal and the assistant fire marshal shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. The fire marshal and the assistant fire marshal shall be properly qualified for their duties, and shall be removed only for cause. 
(Ord. of 2-5-29, § 1; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-17. - Duty to investigate fires. 
The fire marshal shall investigate or cause to be investigated, the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation or cause investigation to be made as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of the fire. 
(Ord. of 2-5-29, § 2; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-18. - Taking of testimony; administration of oaths. 
(a)  The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(b)  The fire marshal or his designee is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-19. - Authority to summon witnesses and require production of documents. 
The fire marshal or his authorized designee shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, § 4; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-20. - Investigations may be private; sequestering witnesses. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Ord. of 2-5-29, § 6)  
Sec. 9-21. - Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire. 
If the fire marshal or his authorized designee is of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offenses or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, § 3; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-22. - Misconduct of witnesses summoned by fire marshal or his authorized designee. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal or his authorized designee, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal or his designee in the matter under investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal or his designee to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, § 5; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-23. - Inspection of premises; removal or repair of dangerous conditions. 
The fire marshal or his designee, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, yearly or more often to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devises or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or premises. If such owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. Any owner or occupant who fails or refuses to comply with such order shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions covered by such order shall be a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, §§ 8—13; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-24. - Right of entry in case of fire. 
The fire marshal or his designee shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, § 7; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-25. - Records to be kept. 
The fire marshal shall keep or cause to be kept in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, § 2; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-26. - Reports to state fire marshal. 
The fire marshal shall report or cause to be reported to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a report on each fire occurring in the city as often as required by the state fire marshal. The information shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the state fire marshal. 
(Ord. Of 2-5-29, § 8; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
Sec. 9-27. - Assistant fire marshal. 
The assistant fire marshal's position is hereby created. He shall have the same duties and responsibilities as the fire marshal, whether or not the fire marshal is absent, except that he shall report to the fire marshal. In the case of the fire marshal's absence or inability to perform the duties of his office, the assistant fire marshal shall maintain control of the fire marshal's office until the fire marshal's return, or a replacement is installed in accordance with section 9-16 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 708, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 98-011, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 98-012, 9-8-98)  
ARTICLE III. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 9-28. - Definitions. 
(a)  Hazardous materials. A substance classified as a hazardous material under state or federal law or under a rule adopted pursuant to state or federal law. 
(b)  Person. The word "person" shall extend to be applied to any associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic in corporate as well as to any individuals. 
(c)  Fire official. The term "fire official" herein shall mean the fire marshal/and or fire chief of the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89)  
Sec. 9-29. - Reporting required. 
It shall be the responsibility of an owner, and/or person acting for or in concert with the owner, to report any hazardous material as set out in this article to the city fire official in the following manner: 
(1)  Identification of the hazardous material by trade name and or chemical content or both in accordance with the latest addition of D.O.T. P-5800 entitled Emergency Response Guidebook. 
(2)  Quantity of hazardous material. 
(3)  Location for the hazardous material, (i.e., N.W. corner of the building, center, second floor, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89)  
Sec. 9-30. - Persons required to report. 
Any and all persons who may handle or store the quantities of hazardous material listed in section 9-32 of this article, in or on property under their care and control and custody, shall be required to report in the same manner as a business. The responsible party shall be the owner or lessee who is the occupant of the location. 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89)  
Sec. 9-31. - Method of reporting. 
[The method of reporting shall be] by certified mail, return receipt requested or in person to a fire official as designated herein. In the event that there is personal delivery, such delivery shall be acknowledged by a receipt. 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89)  
Sec. 9-32. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful to store and fail to report the following: 
Any hazardous substance, solid, liquid or gas which is subject to be stored or handled, in quantities of or in excess of fifty (50) pounds of solid or powder or more than fifty (50) gallons of liquid or gas, shall be reported to a South Houston Fire Official. This report shall be made in writing and shall be made within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the materials in the city limits of the City of South Houston. It shall contain the description, content, amount, emergency response guide book number from the latest edition of D.O.T. P-5800, location, quantity, and type container in which the material is stored. It shall also include the name of the person or persons who can be contacted in case of fire or other emergency and the phone number or numbers where this person can be located after business hours. The report shall also include a comprehensive floor plan of the business or residence with the location of the hazardous material shown. 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89; Ord. No. 841, § 1, 7-5-89)  
Sec. 9-33. - Unlawful quantities. 
It shall be unlawful to fail to report the following items in any quantity: Explosives, poisonous gases, or radio active materials, by their generic name, common usage or known harmful qualities. 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89)  
Sec. 9-34. - Change of amounts or locations. 
In the event that there is any significant change in the amounts or locations of materials covered under this article or any change in the responsible person or the emergency number to contact, it shall be reported in writing to the South Houston Fire Department/Fire Marshal within seventy-two (72) hours of the change. A significant change is construed as that which would required added or diminished precautions on behalf of those emergency personnel in the event of their being summoned. 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89)  
Sec. 9-35. - Authority to inspect. 
The South Houston Fire Department or the South Houston Marshal's office shall have the authority to inspect any business or residence for the presence of materials covered by this article upon request. It shall be the duty of the fire official or his designated agent to issue citations regarding any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 5-16-89)  
Sec. 9-36. - Vehicle transporting flammable or hazardous materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to cause any vehicle transporting hazardous or flammable materials to be parked, unattended for a period of more than one (1) hour, within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any residential areas, including but not limited to apartment buildings, condominiums, etc.; hospitals, medical facilities, nursing homes, schools, institutions, hotels, motels, day care centers, wholesale and retail general business establishments accessible to the public. 
(b)  All vehicles transporting hazardous or flammable materials shall display content identification placards as required by federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 873, § 1, 7-17-90)  
Secs. 9-37—9-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING IN FIRE LANES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No 866, adopted May 15, 1990, amended Ch. 9 of the Code by the addition of Art. III, §§ 9-28—9-38, and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been redesignated and included herein as Art. IV, §§ 9-51—9-61 in order to avoid duplicative article and section numbering. 
Cross reference— Traffic, C. 22; stopping, standing and parking, § 22-73 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-51. - Definitions. 
(a)  Fire lane is defined for the purpose of this article to mean an area appurtenant to entrances or exits of an assembly building, shopping center, hospital, apartment house, hotel/motel, school, or other commercial buildings which are deemed necessary by the fire official to remain free and clear of parked vehicles and other obstructions in order to provide access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by the fire official. Such land shall be of a width of not less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to such exits and entrances and shall extend for the minimum length necessary to provide access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by the fire official. It is further provided that the fire official shall not designate a lane of more than fifteen (15) feet perpendicular to exits or entrances of buildings if the designation of a lane of more than fifteen (15) feet would necessitate structural changes to existing buildings. 
(b)  Shopping center is defined for the purpose of this article to mean a group of commercial business establishments, planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in location, size, and types of shops to the trade area that the unit serves. 
(c)  Hospital is defined for the purposes of this article to mean any public or private hospital, convalescent home or nursing home. 
(d)  Apartment house is any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in such building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
(e)  Assembly building is a building, or portion of a building used for the gathering together of fifty (50) or more persons for such purposes as deliberation, education, instruction, worship, entertainment, amusement or awaiting transportation, or of one hundred (100) or more persons in drinking or dining establishments. 
(f)  School is a building, public or private, used for educational purposes, and having an attendance of fifty (50) or more persons. 
(g)  Fire official is the fire marshal. 
(h)  Proper officer, for the purposes of this article, shall include the fire marshal, fire chief, chief of police, inspectors of the fire prevention department, and officers of the police department. 
(i)  Fire protection device shall mean a device such as sprinkler connection, stand pipe connections, and fire hydrants, public or private. 
(j)  Commercial building shall mean a structure which is used for the carrying on of business or trade. 
(k)  Hotel/motel shall mean any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration but shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 1, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-52. - Fire official's authority. 
The Fire Official of the City of South Houston is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on the property of shopping centers, hospitals, apartment houses, assembly buildings, hotel/motel, schools, and other commercial buildings as defined herein, appurtenant to buildings or the entrances or exits to stores, groups of stores or buildings, where, in his opinion, such areas must be kept free of parked vehicles and other obstructions to provide ready access in case of fire or other emergency, provided that the establishment of said fire lanes have the approval of city council. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 2, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-53. - Notice of parking. 
Every owner of premises subject to this article shall, within thirty (30) days after designation of fire lanes, erect signs and/or paint the fire lane in compliance with this article. Failure to erect signs and/or paint the fire lanes is a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided herein. The designation by the fire official of such fire lanes shall never be held to make the City of South Houston responsible for the maintenance of such fire lanes on private property, but the owner of such property shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-54. - Notification of fire lane. 
Every designation, determination, or location of a fire lane by the fire official pursuant to the authority granted in this article shall be described in writing and filed with the city secretary. Such writing shall constitute a public record, and all persons shall be charged with notice of the contents of the same and unless otherwise designated therein by the fire official it shall be deemed permanent. In the event of a change of location, cancellation, or temporary suspension of a fire lane by the fire official, such change, cancellation or temporary suspension shall be described in writing and filed with the city secretary as aforesaid, provided that such change of location, cancellation or temporary suspension has the approval of city council. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 4, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-55. - Notice to owners; posting. 
Upon designation of a fire lane pursuant to this article, the fire official shall give notice of such designation to the owner of such shopping center, hospital, apartment houses, assembly building, or school, directing the owner to cause signs to be posted at the expense of the owner. Posting shall be at the extremities of such fire lane, and shall be lettered, "Fire Lane - City Ordinance," and such sign shall have the lettering and size as attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A". Such signs shall be of a standard size, color, lettering, and mounting so as to conform to samples and instructions for same to be obtained from the Street and Bridge Department of the City of South Houston. 
Fire lanes shall be marked with a red painted line at least five (5) inches wide around the perimeter thereof with the words "FIRE LANE" and "NO PARKING" in white letters of at least four (4) inches high painted on the surface. The words "FIRE LANE" and "NO PARKING" shall be repeated every fifteen (15) feet, or in the event fire lanes are designated on surfaces which are not amenable to paint, the area will be conspicuously designated by signs not fewer than four (4) feet tall. 
 
Exhibit "A" 
(Ord. No. 866, § 5, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 944 (4-92), § 1, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 2018-19 , § 2, 10-23-18)  
Sec. 9-56. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Vehicles or other obstructions found in or interfering with fire lanes shall be in violation of this article. Such vehicles or obstructions are subject to citation and being removed from such fire lanes. 
(b)  Proper officers are hereby authorized to provide for the removal of vehicles in violation of this section when, in the opinion of such officers, the vehicles could constitute a hazard in regard to fire prevention and protection. Vehicles so removed shall be delivered to the nearest authorized garage or other place of impoundment designated by the city council. No vehicle impounded as herein provided shall be released until the charges for towing such vehicle and any accumulated storage charges have been paid. 
(c)  Citations for violation of this section may be issued by a proper officer. Such citation shall specify the location of the fire lane in which such violation occurred and the date and time of such violation. Any citation for violation shall be issued on the official form theretofore prescribed by the city. Such citation shall require the appearance of the violator before the municipal court, and all fines paid by the violator shall be paid to the municipal court clerk. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 6, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-57. - Presumption of violation. 
In any prosecution charging a vehicle violation of this article, there shall be a rebuttal presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle in the proscribed area. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 7, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-58. - Unlawful parking. 
It is hereby declared unlawful to park any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle on an emergency at a location in any fire lane where the signs provided for herein have been erected. Provided, however, if the signs are not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, it shall be a defense to any alleged violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 8, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-59. - Alteration or removal of signs. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, or knock down, or remove any sign designating a fire lane which has been erected under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 9, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-60. - Abandonment of fire lane. 
No owner, manager, or person in charge of any premises served by a required fire lane shall abandon or close any such fire lane without the permission of the fire official; and, such person shall keep the fire lanes clear of parked vehicles and/or objects that would impede escape from or access to said premises. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 10, 5-15-90)  
Sec. 9-61. - Penalty. 
Any person found in violation of this article shall guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 11, 5-15-90)  
Chapter 9.8 - GARAGE SALES AND OCCASIONAL SALES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 772, adopted Sept. 24, 1987, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor §§ 1—5 have been included herein as Ch. 9.8, §§ 9.8-1—9.8-5. 
 
Sec. 9.8-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Garage sale: Any sale entitled "garage sale," "yard sale," "patio sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale," or any similar casual, occasional sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale. 
Goods: Any commodity, ware, merchandise, or any other property capable of being the object of sale. 
Occasional sale: For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions of garage sale and occasional sale shall be synonymous. Such sales are by persons not in the general business of selling, leasing, or renting. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 1, 9-24-87)  
Sec. 9.8-2. - Permits. 
It shall hereinafter be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct a garage sale in the city without first filing with the city's inspection department the information hereinafter specified and obtaining a permit and sign stickers to do so, herein to be called a garage sale permit. The fee for a garage sale permit and stickers shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Said permit shall be issued to any one person at a specific address and no such permit shall be issued for more than two (2) consecutive calendar days. Each permit shall be prominently and conspicuously displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted so as to be readily seen from the street during the entire period of the permitted sale. There shall be issued five (5) sign stickers for each garage sale permit. One sticker shall be placed on the lower left corner of each garage sale sign, which is displayed on the city right-of-way by permit holder. Each permit holder shall be allowed to conduct a maximum of two (2) garage sales within any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 2, 9-24-87; Ord. No. 810, § 1, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 95-007, § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 95-008, § 1, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 2009-18, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 2011-32, § 2, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 2013-15, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Sec. 9.8-3. - Permit application. 
Information to be filed with the city inspection department by an applicant for a garage sale shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association, or organization conducting said sale. 
(2)  Specific address at which sale is to be conducted. 
(3)  Number of days and dates of the sale. 
(4)  Dates of any past sales at the specific address. 
(5)  Relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any person, firm, group, organization, association, or corporation conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sale. 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's, resale or peddler's license by any local, state, or federal agency. 
A statement shall be given by the person signing the garage sale permit application that the information contained therein is full, true and correct, and known to the applicant to be so. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 3, 9-24-87; Ord. No. 95-008, § 1, 7-20-95)  
Sec. 9.8-4. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
The provisions of this chapter requiring a garage sale permit shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with the powers and duties of public officials. 
(3)  Any person selling or advertising for sale a good or goods of personal property which are specifically named and described in an advertisement and which separate goods do not exceed five (5) in total number. 
(4)  The permit fee shall not apply to any nonprofit church, civic club, fraternal, or charitable organization. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 4, 9-24-87; Ord. No. 810, § 2, 8-2-88)  
Sec. 9.8-5. - Enforcement. 
Provisions and terms of this chapter shall be enforced by the South Houston Police Department. Further, any person violating any part of this chapter shall be required to pay a fine which is double the amount of the permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 5, 9-24-87; Ord. No. 2013-15, § 4, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 2017-34 , § 2, 8-8-17)  
Chapter 10 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-27, §§ 1, 2, adopted November 19, 2002, repealed specific ordinances affecting chapter 10, §§ 10-1—10-6 and enacted a new chapter 10 as set out herein. However, such ordinance did not specifically repeal previous Ord. No. 2002-14, adopted June 4, 2002, and Ord. No. 2002-23, adopted Oct. 1, 2002, therefore these ordinances were treated as being added along with Ord. No. 2002-27, at the discretion of the editor. The former chapter 10 pertained to garbage and trash and derived from Ord. No. 350, 6-20-55; Ord. No. 562, § 11, 8-1-67; Ord. No. 582, §§ 1, 2, 6, 7, 8-4-70; Ord. No. 595, § 7, 11-16-71; Ord. No. 634, § 6, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 651, § 1, 8-7-79; Ord. No. 705, § 1, 7-1-83; Ord. No. 974 (3-93), § 1, 3-2-93. 
Cross reference— Storage and disposal of manure, § 4-52; authority of fire marshal with respect to dangerous accumulations of refuse material, § 9-23; junk, Ch. 11; burning of rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 19-22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Garbage means all putrescent wastes, including vegetables, animal and poultry offal, carcasses of small animals and dead fowl, and includes all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences. 
Rubbish means solid and ordinary waste, other than garbage, accumulated by family residents, including glass and ashes, broken ware, discarded clothing, trash, tin cans, bottles, papers, and tree limbs, grass and weed cuttings properly contained or bundled as described in this chapter. 
Rubble means dirt, rocks and debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction or repair of buildings and other earthen, wooden or metal waste materials longer, larger or heavier than rubbish, including abandoned or waste home appliances, lumber and timber. 
Trash means rubbish such as feathers, coffee grounds, ashes, tin cans, paper, boxes, glass, grass, shrubs, yard cleanings, grass clippings, leaves and tree trimmings and any other matter commonly understood to be trash. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-2. - Purpose. 
The accumulation of garbage, rubble, trash and rubbish on the premises of private residences, businesses, public and private institutions, vacant lots and in the streets and alleys of the city constitutes a public menace and nuisance and greatly increases the danger of the spread of infectious, contagious and epidemic diseases, and this chapter is adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare by requiring property owners, tenants, occupants and lessees to secure and maintain containers and receptacles of sufficient size and material for the deposit of garbage, trash and rubbish for collection and removal at regular intervals. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-3. - Enforcement inspections. 
During reasonable hours, the city is authorized to inspect any premises within the city for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-4. - Unlawful deposits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, unload, discharge or in any manner place thereon, or cause to be placed thereon, any garbage, trash or other waste materials on any lot, tract or parcel of land located within the city limits, except garbage dumps or dumping grounds which are owned, maintained or operated by the city or at such places as are designated for garbage disposal by the director of public works. 
(b)  No garbage, ashes, rubbish, old automobile parts or junk of any nature whatsoever shall be thrown or disposed of in any street or alley or upon any sidewalk or between any curb and sidewalk or on any other public property in the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw or allow in any manner to be blown, carried or placed on any lot, street, sidewalk, tract or parcel of land any paper, trash, garbage, junk, rubbish or any matter or material commonly known as trash. It is not the intent of this subsection to prevent the normal and orderly handling and disposition of trash and rubbish within the confines of private property occupied by the owners or lessees, provided there does not exist a condition that is unsightly or an eyesore. 
(d)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or highway any destructive or injurious material or other material such as dirt, shell, oil, etc., which would be detrimental to the use or appearance of the street or highway shall immediately remove such or cause it to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-5. - Unlawful accumulation. 
Rubbish shall be removed by the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is located, at his/her own expense and in a neat and sanitary manner, and shall not be permitted to accumulate on any premises beyond a reasonable length of time. No violation shall be charged under this section unless ten (10) days' notice of such unlawful accumulation shall have been given by the sanitation department and the unlawful accumulation is not corrected within such time. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-6. - Unlawful hauling for business. 
In order for the city to provide general sanitation and health of the city and in order to provide garbage collection for the city, it shall be unlawful for any person not under contract with the city to haul any garbage any time or to commercially haul any rubbish or rubble on any established route or regular basis over the city streets. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-7. - Contracts with private collectors. 
The city shall enter into a contract with a private contractor for the collection of all garbage throughout the city. Such contract shall provide for a complete collection once weekly, shall provide for the type of vehicles to be used and shall provide for the type of garbage containers and their placement for collection purposes. The contract shall provide for a unit price to be paid to the contractor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from engaging in garbage collection if determined necessary and appropriate by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-8. - Covering vehicles hauling refuse. 
In order to protect the health and welfare of the citizens of the city and to provide against any undue health hazards, all persons hauling garbage and rubbish of any type within the city limits shall provide such vehicle with a full top or cover so that no garbage or rubbish may escape therefrom and no flies or other insects can get into or out of the unit. Such cover shall be securely fastened so that the cover shall not come loose or the contents be exposed in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-9. - Illegally dumping trash. 
That the city hereby offers a reward of fifty dollars ($50.00) for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of illegally dumping trash or refuse within the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-4-02) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-14, § 1, adopted June 4, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code, therefore § 10-9 was added at the discretion of the editor. See editors' note for chapter 10.  
Secs. 10-10—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Use of city collection service, or designated collection agency, mandatory. 
(a)  To assist in maintaining the general sanitation and health of the city, it shall be the duty of every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises located on a regularly established garbage and rubbish route to notify the city at the beginning of such occupancy and to request, accept and use the garbage and rubbish pickup and collection service. Failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to make such request shall not prevent or any way impair or impede the city from adding the address of such premises to the proper garbage and rubbish collection route records and providing such service and otherwise enforcing, by appropriate action, the regulatory measures prescribed in this subsection and causing the fees or charges therefor to be paid. 
(b)  The city, or the designated collection agency, shall regularly collect and remove properly prepared garbage, trash and rubbish from the premises of residences and commercial establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-27. - Fees. 
The rates for garbage pickups for the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential rates shall be as specified by city council, the amounts of which are on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(2)  Commercial rates shall apply to all apartments and commercial establishments. The rates shall be as specified in a contract with a private collector. The commercial establishment may designate the size container needed and the number of weekly pickups. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-28. - Disposal of heavy accumulations. 
(a)  Heavy accumulations, such as brick, broken concrete, rock, stones, ashes, lumber, clinkers, cinders, dirt, plaster, sand, gravel, automobile frames, dead trees, tree limbs and other bulky, heavy material shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling such. The fee shall be as specified by the city council, the amount of which is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  If trash and rubbish is of such nature that it cannot be placed in a receptacle, it shall be prepared in units or pieces under fifty (50) pounds in weight and placed at a point designated by the director of public works. 
(c)  Tree limbs, shrubs and hedge cuttings must be bundled so as not to exceed five (5) feet in length or so as not to be over fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-29. - Unauthorized handling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner, employees of the city or persons operating under a contract with the city, to empty the garbage cans or trash and rubbish receptacles or to transport garbage, trash or rubbish on the public streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner, employees of the city or persons operating under a contract with the city, to disturb or tamper with the contents of any garbage can or trash or rubbish receptacle in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-30. - Unacceptable items. 
The city contractor or city employees are not permitted to transport or dispose of any hazardous or toxic wastes, including, but not limited to, oil, paint, pesticides, batteries and tires. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-31. - Burning. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any garbage within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash or rubbish within the city, except with the written permission of the fire marshal and in compliance with the city fire code and the Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Secs. 10-32—10-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 
 
Sec. 10-41. - Required; specifications. 
(a)  Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate limits for residential, church, school, college, lodge, commercial business or other purposes shall use the receptacle provided by the collection agency, but, if no receptacle is provided, shall provide and maintain garbage cans and trash and rubbish receptacles of sufficient size and number to hold the garbage, trash and rubbish which normally accumulates on the premises. 
(b)  Garbage cans required by this section shall have a capacity of not fewer than ten or more than ninety-five (95) gallons, shall be constructed of substantial material, shall be equipped with a tight-fitting lid or cover and with handles sufficiently strong for workers to empty conveniently, and shall be tapered so that they are smaller on the bottom than the top. Tote carts or heavy-duty tied plastic bags may be used if there is no collection agency. 
(c)  The total weight of any garbage can and contents or any trash and rubbish receptacle and contents shall be seventy-five (75) pounds or fewer. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-42. - Protection of contents. 
(a)  The lids or covers of garbage cans or containers shall at all times be secured and fastened so that flies and other insects may not have access to the contents thereof, and such lids or covers shall only be opened while the cans are being filled or emptied. 
(b)  The contents of trash or rubbish receptacles shall be protected so that the wind cannot scatter the contents over the premises or over the city streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-43. - Preparation of deposits. 
(a)  All garbage and all trash and rubbish mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained before being placed in the can or receptacle. 
(b)  All garbage which has been drained shall be well-wrapped in paper or other combustible material before being placed in the can or receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-44. - Placement and location. 
The required garbage cans and receptacles for trash and rubbish shall be placed on residential premises in accordance with instructions of the director of public works and the collection agency or, in the absence of such instructions, at the most accessible point for collection and removal. Garbage, rubble, trash, rubbish and debris shall not be placed at curbside for collection prior to 5:00 p.m. of the day prior to the day of collection. Garbage cans and receptacles for trash and rubbish shall be removed prior to 7:00 a.m. of the day following the day of collection. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Secs. 10-45—10-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-56. - Compliance. 
It is ordered that all commercial establishments handling food for human consumption, whether on the premises or off, shall provide garbage containers as provided in this division and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-57. - Container specifications. 
Garbage at commercial food establishments shall be placed in containers, with the combined weight of the garbage and container not exceeding one hundred (100) pounds, except for mechanical type dumpster units which are approved by the city. The container shall be a watertight receptacle of a solid and durable material and shall be provided with suitable handles on the outside and with a tightly fitting cover equipped with a handle. The container must not have any inside structures such as inside bands or reinforcing angles or anything within the container to prevent the free discharge of the contents. Garbage containers that have deteriorated to the extent of having holes or jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury to the garbage collectors or others whose duty it is to handle the containers or to such an extent that the lids will not fit tightly or securely, will be condemned by the city and may not be used. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, §, 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Sec. 10-58. - Removal of garbage. 
(a)  For a commercial food establishment, the contents of any garbage container which is so overloaded that the lid will not fit securely on the container will not be picked up by the garbage collectors, and garbage in a container not in compliance with this division will not be picked up. The contents of any garbage container which, with the container, weighs more than one hundred (100) pounds will not be picked up, unless it is in a mechanical dumpster-type container. 
(b)  Any person desiring to place garbage for collection shall place the containers on his/her property at an accessible place at such residence or place of business not later than 7:30 a.m. on those days designated by the city proper authorities for the collection of garbage. After the garbage has been collected by the collection agency, the owner of the containers shall remove the containers immediately from the front of any property, and no containers may be left out overnight unless the mechanical dumpster-type container is in a location approved by the city. All containers shall be decontaminated or purified at periodic intervals and as often as may be necessary. 
(c)  Rubbish shall be removed from all business premises every day and as often as deemed necessary by the county health officer. 
(d)  Garbage must be disposed of at least on every garbage collecting day and more often if deemed necessary by the city. If it is disposed of more often than regular collection days, it shall be removed at the sole expense of the party involved, but in compliance with city rules and regulations and all applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 2(Exh. A), 11-19-02)  
Secs. 10-59—10-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF DUMPSTERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Since Ord. No. 2002-27, adopted November 19, 2002, which added a new chapter 10, did not specifically repeal Ord. No. 2002-23, adopted October 1, 2002, section 2 of such ordinance was treated as adding a new article II which was redesignated as article III, §§ 10-71—10-78, at the discretion of the editor. See editor's note for Chapter 10. 
 
Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
(a)  Dumpster. The term "dumpster" shall be defined to include any container or device used in conjunction with a commercial establishment, i.e., any place of business, trailer parks property, any leased or rented building (warehouse), auto sales, mechanic shop, apartment building, church, school, any contractors (building materials, wood or concrete), place of assembly, or other place where the public is invited, designed to permit trash, refuse, garbage, or other waste to be deposited therein and which may be emptied or dumped by specially equipped trucks which either lift, tilt or dump the contents thereof through the use of a mechanical arm lift or other devise into the collection container of the truck. (Garbage cans, sacks or containers containing waste, which may be lifted and emptied by human motivation without the use of a mechanical device, shall not be included within the purview of this definition; however, this article regulates them.) 
(b)  Dumpster servicing, or act of servicing. The term "dumpster servicing," or "act of servicing" shall mean the process of entering an area where a dumpster or dumpsters are kept for the purpose of removing, dumping or extracting all, or part, of the contents of said dumpster. Servicing may be accomplished through the use of electrical or fuel-driven mechanism or by devices operated with gears, pulleys or any other means designated to remove in total or in part the contents of the dumpster. The servicing vehicle shall be entirely on the property being serviced. 
(c)  Section 10-11 shall be amended to state that dumpster(s) shall be the responsibility of business owners/managers. The business owners/managers will contract with republic waste services (not the City of South Houston) and provide the appropriate size dumpster(s) to dispose of their trash, garbage, or any building material. Such dumpster(s) shall be approved by the City of South Houston's sanitation department and the City of South Houston's Code Enforcement Office. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Sec. 10-72. - Dumpster servicing. 
(a)  Republic waste services shall not service a dumpster between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Any person permitting or assisting the servicing of a dumpster within the hours as prohibited herein or employed by an entity permitting the servicing of a dumpster within the restricted hours, or having knowledge that a dumpster is being serviced in violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each day a violation shall occur. 
(b)  In the event any person, corporation or other entity deems the existence of an emergency, or other condition that requires the immediate servicing of a dumpster within the prohibited time period, the mayor, building officials, chief of police, fire chief, fire marshal, code enforcement officer, sanitation supervisor or their authorized representative are each hereby authorized to issue an "emergency authorization permit," which must be in writing and which specifies the emergency or matter of urgent public necessity requiring servicing during the prohibited hours and specifying the limitation on the hours in which servicing may be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Sec. 10-73. - Duty to keep dumpsters clean, sanitary and in good repair. 
(a)  All persons using a dumpster shall keep the same in a clean, sanitary condition. 
(b)  Republic waste services shall maintain dumpsters in good mechanical repair. All lids, closure devices and sleeves for lifting dumpsters shall, at all times, be repaired and maintained in good order. 
(c)  Business owners/managers shall be responsible for all hazardous wastes, garbage and trash pick-ups by republic waste services. All trash/garbage, refrigerators, air conditioning units, tires, trees, cement and building materials must be placed in dumpsters. 
(d)  Business owners/managers shall be responsible for disposing of all hazardous waste such as: chemicals, fluids and batteries. This shall be done at the business owner's/manager's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Sec. 10-74. - Duty to erect and maintain warning signs. 
All persons maintaining a dumpster as herein provided shall affix firmly to required screening fence a warning sign which shall state: 
WARNING—It is a violation of city ordinance to enter into an area where a trash dumpster is fenced without authorization of the person(s) or entity(ies) having the right to dump trash. It is further a violation of the city ordinance for any person to scavenge or loot or remove any garbage, trash, refuse or discarded merchandise from this dumpster. Violation shall result in a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation, except wherein the violation is a health or fire hazard, in which case the fine per violation will not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Sec. 10-75. - Entry and removal of refuse prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this Code for any person to enter into a screened area where a dumpster is located for the purpose of depositing or removing garbage, trash, refuse or discarded merchandise from the dumpster without the express permission of the person or entity authorized to use the dumpster. 
It shall at all times be a violation of this Code for any person to scavenge, loot or remove any garbage, trash, refuse or discarded merchandise from any dumpster within the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Sec. 10-76. - Lien for unpaid costs. 
Use, operation or maintenance of a dumpster in violation of any provision of this Code is declared an immediate threat to the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the City of South Houston, Texas. If the city or any person or entity directed and authorized by the city shall be required to enter any property to remove, seize or confiscate a dumpster being operated, used or maintained in violation of the provision of this Code and the owner or user shall fail to reimburse the city all costs incurred by it in the seizure, confiscation or sale of the dumpster, then the city shall have a lien on the property from which the dumpster was seized or removed. The amount of the lien shall be reduced by the amount of monies received by the city in the sale or liquidation of the seized dumpster. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Sec. 10-77. - Franchises. 
Republic waste services shall be required to pay to the City of South Houston a franchise fee for all commercial dumpsters located within the City of South Houston. Such fee shall be in an amount of no less than five (5) percent of the monthly rate charged to the commercial establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Sec. 10-78. - Persons responsible. 
Any persons or other entities permitting, assisting or having knowledge of a person or other entity violating the terms and provision of this article shall likewise be deemed in violation of this Code and may be subject to the same punishment as in a case of any violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, § 2, 10-1-02)  
Chapter 11 - JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, Ch. 10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11-1—11-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUNKYARDS 
 
Sec. 11-16. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "junkyard" shall mean and include any premises or property used for the wrecking or dismantling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the accumulation of rubbish or junk of any description. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, § 1)  
Sec. 11-17. - License—Required; application. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain any junkyard within the city, unless he has a current license so to do. Written application for such license shall be filed with the city secretary. Such application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and a legal description of the property or premises upon which the junkyard is to be located. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 11-18. - Same—Fee; issuance; expiration and renewal. 
(a)  The annual fee for a license required by section 11-17 shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Upon payment of such fee, the license shall be issued by the city secretary; provided, however, that such license shall be issued unless the application has been approved by the city council and unless the operation of a junkyard on the property described in the application is permitted by the zoning ordinance. [2] 
(b)  A license issued under this section shall expire on January first next succeeding the date of its issuance, but may be renewed from year to year in like manner as is provided for the original license. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, § 2) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
Sec. 11-19. - Same—Revocation. 
The city council shall have the power to revoke a junk yard license at any time for good cause, but only after notice has been given to the licensee of a hearing to be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such notice. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, § 4)  
Sec. 11-20. - Maintenance. 
The owner, operator or manager of a junkyard shall maintain the premises thereof in a clean, sanitary, neat and orderly condition at all times. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, § 3)  
Sec. 11-21. - Fence. 
Every junkyard shall be enclosed by a solid fence at least six (6) feet high and located within the building lines of the property. Such fence shall be kept in a neatly painted condition, and no junk of any character or parts or machinery of any kind shall be allowed to remain outside of such fence or piled or stored higher than such fence. 
(Ord. of 10-2-51, § 3) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions of zoning ordinance, App. A, § 2.108(b).  
Secs. 11-22—11-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— For provisions of the Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act authorizing cities to adopt procedures for the abatement and removal of junked vehicles and specifying the requirements for such procedures, see V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074. 
 
Sec. 11-33. - Adoption and title. 
Pursuant to Article 4477-9a V.A.T.S., the following procedures for abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance, from private property, or public rights-of-way are adopted. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "South Houston Junked Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 605, § 1, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 7-21-87)  
Sec. 11-34. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the enforcement and interpretation of this article: 
Antique auto means any passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before or a passenger car or truck that is least thirty-five (35) years old. 
Collector means the owner of one (1) or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Junked vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in Section 1 of Article 6701d-11 Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended, that: 
(a)  Is inoperative, does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and that is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded; or, 
(b)  Remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than forty-five (45) days. 
Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle subject to registration under the Texas Certificate of Title Act (Article 6687-1, V.T.C.S.). 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and because of its historic interest is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 2, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 7-21-87) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001.  
Sec. 11-35. - Administration of this article. 
This article shall be administered by the chief of police or his duly authorized agents; provided, that such agents are regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city; and, provided further, that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be performed by any other person designated in writing by the chief of police upon a form to be prepared by such officer. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 4A, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83) 
State Law reference— Requirement for administrative provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(d).  
Sec. 11-36. - Exemptions from article. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 
(3)  Unlicensed operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on his property, provided that the vehicles and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 4G, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83) 
State Law reference— Exemptions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.077.  
Sec. 11-37. - Declaration of nuisance. 
A junked vehicle which is located in any place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates a fire hazard, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 3, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072.  
Sec. 11-38. - Notice to remove. 
The chief of police or his authorized representative shall give ten (10) day's notice, by certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested as follows: 
(a)  If the nuisance is on private property, then it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junk motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exist. 
If any such notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the public nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return. 
(b)  If the nuisance is on public property, the chief of police or his authorized representative shall give not less than ten (10) day's written notice, stating the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and their request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested to the last known registered owner of the junk motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to abate not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return. 
Such notice shall set forth: (1) the nature of the public nuisance; (2) that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days; and (3) that a request for hearing must be made before the expiration of the said ten-day period, such request to be filed in the office of the city secretary prior to the expiration of such ten-day period. 
If any such notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the public nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 4B, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 7-21-87; Ord. No. 891, § 1, 11-21-90)  
Sec. 11-39. - Hearing by judge of municipal court; order of removal. 
(a)  Should the junked vehicle, or junked vehicle part not be voluntarily removed within ten (10) days of the mailing of the notice as provided in section 11-38 above, then the chief of police shall proceed to set a hearing before the municipal judge to determine whether the complained of junked vehicle or junked vehicle part is in fact a public nuisance. Notice of such hearing shall be by posting same on the city hall bulletin board at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to such hearing, and, in addition, in those instances where a request for hearing has been made as provided in section 11-38 above, by mailing notice to the requesting party by certified mail return receipt requested at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. 
(b)  At the time and place specified in the notice of a public hearing provided for in paragraph (a) immediately above, such hearing shall be held. At the conclusion of such hearing, the judge of the municipal court shall make a finding as to whether or not a public nuisance exists, and in the event of an affirmative finding, the judge shall, by order, require the removal of such junked vehicle or part thereof and shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if such identification and license number are available at the site. The proceedings shall be abated and no further action shall be taken by the chief of police or his agents with regard to the abatement of such public nuisance. The court shall take action within fourteen (14) days from date of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 605, §§ 4C, 4D, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 7-21-87)  
Sec. 11-40. - Removal by city. 
Upon the making of an order of removal and abatement under section 11-39, the chief of police or his authorized agent shall arrange for the removal of the junked vehicle, or part thereof, to a scrapyard, demolisher or other suitable site operated by the city or county for processing as scrap or salvage. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 4E, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 7-26-87)  
Sec. 11-41. - Notice to state highway department of removal. 
The chief of police shall give notice to the state department of highways and public transportation within five (5) days after the date of removal of a junked vehicle, or part thereof, identifying the vehicle or vehicle part, setting forth all identification numbers and such other description as may be available at the site and requesting cancellation of the certificate of title to such vehicle pursuant to Article 4477-9a, Vernon's Annotated Texas Civil Statutes, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 4E, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 7-21-87)  
Sec. 11-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 751, § 2, adopted July 21, 1987, repealed former § 11-42, relative to the disposition of junked vehicles after removal, which derived from Ord. No. 605, § 4F, adopted Nov. 21, 1972 and Ord. No. 711, § 1, adopted Nov. 1, 1983.  
Sec. 11-43. - Not to be reconstructed or made operable after removal. 
Any junked vehicle which has been removed under the terms of this article shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 4E, 11-21-72; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 11-1-83) 
State Law reference— Requirement for above provision, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(b)(1).  
Sec. 11-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 751, § 2, adopted July 21, 1987, repealed former § 11-44, relative to public hearing in other cases, which derived from Ord. No. 711, § 1, adopted Nov. 1, 1983.  
Chapter 11.5 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 685, § 1, enacted March 3, 1981, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new Ch. 12.1, §§ 12.1-1—12.1-7. In order to preserve the alphabetical order of the table of contents, the editor has redesignated these provisions as Ch. 11.5, §§ 11.5-1—11.5-7. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; insanitary, unsightly, etc., conditions on private property, § 12-17 et seq.; zoning, App. A. 
 
Sec. 11.5-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms herein shall be defined as follows: 
Charge, either directly or indirectly, shall refer to a salary, commission, gratuity or other remuneration as paid or made available to a massaginist administering massages as a primary or incidental activity resulting from such payment; a charge, fee, dues or other payment for the purpose of receiving any service or use of an establishment which provides for the payor the opportunity to obtain a massage. 
Genitals shall mean the external sexual organs. 
Health certificate shall mean a certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in Harris County, Texas, showing that the person named therein has been examined and is free from any infectious or communicable disease. 
License shall mean that document issued by the city to a person who administers massages or operates a massage establishment. 
Massage shall mean the act or art of treating the human body or any part thereof by rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction or percussion or like ministrations to stimulate circulation or increase suppleness for a charge, direct or indirect. 
Massage establishment shall mean any building, room, place or establishment where massages are practiced upon the human body for a charge, either directly or indirectly, by a person, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, whether primary or an incidental activity of the establishment in which the massage is performed. 
Massage establishment license shall mean that document issued by the city to an establishment where massages are furnished. 
Massaginist shall mean a person who administers massages. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-3-81)  
Sec. 11.5-2. - Massage establishments generally. 
(a)  Licenses generally. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid, except as otherwise provided herein, from the date of issuance through December 31st of the year in which the license is issued. Any license obtained, as required by this chapter, shall be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be assignable to any other person, firm, corporation or other entity. 
(b)  Inspections. The city shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter in any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The chief of police or his deputy shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the sanitary conditions of any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. Such inspections may be made at any time during which a massage establishment is open for business pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Penalties for violations. The operation of any business, administration of any massage, or use of any license issued pursuant to this chapter contrary to any provision of this chapter or the failure to comply with any provision of this chapter: 
(1)  Shall constitute a violation of this chapter which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day the offense continues shall be a new and separate offense subject to the same penalty; 
(2)  Shall cause the holder thereof to be subject to any other provision for suspension, revocation or denial as provided herein and any other civil or criminal action or penalty or proceeding provided by law. 
(d)  Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or licensed vocational or practical nurse acting at the direction of a doctor; nor a duly licensed establishment wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor and which operate only under such licensed party's direction; nor shall it apply to athletic trainers of a bona fide athletic team when such trainers are massaging members of said team; nor to a duly licensed hospital or medical clinic; nor to duly licensed barbers or beauticians who administer massages to the neck, face, scalp, and hair of the client for cosmetic purposes. 
(e)  Administration of massages. Other than as specifically excepted above no massage shall be administered by a person who does not have a current valid massaginist license. 
(f)  Effective date. All provisions of this chapter shall be effective from and after the date of passage save and except those provisions of sections 11.5-3 and 11.5-5 wherein are contained the requirements for licensing of massage establishments and massaginists. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-3-81)  
Sec. 11.5-3. - Massage establishment license. 
Licenses for a massage establishment, whether for an initial license or a renewal of an existing license, shall be applied for and issued pursuant to the following provisions: 
(a)  Application required. No license to engage in the business of operating a massage establishment shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the chief of police and no massage establishment shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the City of South Houston until such license has been issued. 
(b)  Application form; information required. The city shall provide to an applicant for a massage establishment license a form containing the information as hereinafter specified which shall be completed and filed with the city by each applicant for such license to be accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. Said application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained herein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
(1)  A detailed description of the business to be operated. 
(2)  The name of the business. 
(3)  The location where the business is proposed to be carried on and the telephone number at said location. 
(4)  The legal name of the applicant for the license. If the applicant is a corporation, the date upon which such corporation was registered pursuant to the laws of the State of Texas, the name of its registered agent, the address of its registered officer if the same is different from the address of the location of the business. If the business is not a corporation, the name, home addresses and home telephone numbers of all persons having an ownership interest in such business. 
(5)  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the ninety (90) days preceding the date of the application. 
(6)  The home address of the applicant and his telephone number and the length at which the applicant has been a resident of such address. 
(7)  The social security and federal employer's identification number of the applicant. 
(8)  The name, address, birthdate, social security number, current telephone number and sex of each massaginist presently employed, or who will be employed, by the applicant. For each so-named massaginist, a copy of a health certificate as defined in this chapter, issued not more than fifteen (15) days prior to the submittal of this application, shall be attached to said application. 
(9)  Names and addresses of all persons or legal entities owning and/or controlling said applicant, including, but not limited to, all partners, principals or managers and also, if the applicant is a corporation, the officers, directors and shareholders holding at least ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. 
(10)  Disclosure as to all employees of the applicant and any and all partners, managers or principals of the applicant and also, in the event the applicant is a corporation, all officers, directors or stockholders holding ten (10) percent or more of the capital stock of the applicant specifying all final convictions occurring within five (5) years of the date of such application of any federal or state offense of sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy or lewd house, keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, assault or battery. If such a conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction, and the jurisdiction in which said conviction was entered. 
(11)  That the applicant acknowledges that pursuant to this chapter the City of South Houston shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information above provided and that if such inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of such information, the city has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the person about whom such information is disputed, and the applicant shall be required to provide such to the city upon the request of that official prior to that official making a final decision as to approving or denying such license. 
(12)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the real property on which the massage establishment will be located so that said party may be located if necessary by city employee or official during day or evening hours. 
(c)  Change in information; transmittal to city. The holder of any license issued pursuant to this section shall, within seven (7) days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided for in subsections (a)(8), (9) and (10), transmit the same in writing to the city. Such transmittal shall specify such changed information in accordance with the provisions of said subsections in the same manner as if such information was specified in a license application. 
(d)  Change of location. The license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only at the location specified in said license as issued. Any change in the location of the massage establishment other than by ceasing business at a location shall require the filing of an application for a license pursuant to the requirements of this section. In the event such application is filed for the purpose of changing the location of the massage establishment without adding thereto any total number of locations in excess of those for which the applicant presently holds a license, no additional license fee for the calendar year in which the massage establishment holds a valid license pursuant to this section shall be charged, except that the chief of police may impose a processing charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per application in such event. 
(e)  License fee. A license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall accompany all applications for a license or renewal thereof at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-3-81)  
Sec. 11.5-4. - Operation of massage establishments. 
Any massage establishment in operation pursuant to a license issued as required by this chapter shall comply with the following provisions and regulations in the conduct and operation of its business: 
(a)  No massage establishment shall be open for the business of providing massages during any day prior to 8:00 a.m. and subsequent to 10:00 p.m. Central Standard Time or such other daylight or standard time as may be applicable to the geographical territory of the city. 
(b)  The door to each room in which massages are administered shall be removed or not closed or a clear glass panel not less than ten (10) inches by twelve (12) inches or one observation device having an angle of view of at least sixty (60) degrees into the room shall be placed in the upper portion of the door to each room in which massages are administered if the door is closed. The view through the clear glass shall not be obscured by any means. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sanitized by a modern and approved method of sanitization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices, or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron shall be sanitized before using the same upon another. No towels and linens shall be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered. All massaginists shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering a massage to each patron accommodated. No person suffering from an infectious or communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of the owner, person in control, or any employee, such person is suffering from an infectious or communicable disease. 
(d)  No person shall receive a massage unless said patron is covered by opaque material such as a towel or shorts covering the hips, genitals and anal areas. No massaginist shall touch the genitals or anal area of any patron or the breast if the patron is a female nor shall a patron touch the genitals or anal area of a massaginist, and if the massaginist is a female, the prohibited area shall include the breast. 
(e)  No massaginist shall administer a massage to a person of the opposite sex. 
(f)  No massage shall be administered to any person who is a minor as defined by Texas law. 
(g)  In the administration of any massage the provisions of subsections (d), (e) and (f) shall not be applicable to any person for whom a massage is ordered upon the written certificate of a licensed physician, osteopath or chiropractor; provided that such certificate shall be signed by such physician, osteopath or chiropractor, be dated, shall specifically state the number of treatments, not to exceed ten (10), and the specific type of treatment recommended therein and further that the date and hour of each treatment given pursuant to such certificate, the name of the massaginist giving such treatment, and the name of the patron given such treatment shall be maintained in a record to be preserved by the owner or operator of the massage establishment for a period of two (2) years and shall be available for inspection by the city or its designated representative. 
(h)  No massage establishment nor any massaginist shall either arrange for or conduct the administration of a massage under the license applicable to such party except upon the premises of the massage establishment and at the location specified in the application for such license unless, within said application, information is specifically set forth that it is the intention of the holders of the license to administer massages or arrange for the same at unspecified locations within the city and, in such event, the holder of the license shall maintain records subject to the same provisions as in the subsection (g) above which shall specify as to each massage so arranged or conducted, the name, residential address and telephone number of the person receiving the massage, the date, hour and place at which such massage was administered. 
(i)  Every massage establishment shall post in a conspicuous place available for observation by all patrons a printed list of all services performed or available as provided by the massage establishment and the price or prices therefor in bold printing with lettering not less than one inch high for each character and said notice shall specify whether or not the payment of any gratuity to any massaginist or other employee of the massage establishment is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-3-81)  
Sec. 11.5-5. - Massaginist license. 
Licenses for a massaginist, whether for an initial license or a renewal of an existing license, shall be applied for, issued and held pursuant to the following provisions: 
(a)  Application required. No license to engage in the business of administering massages shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the city, and no massaginist shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the city until such license has been issued. 
(b)  Required information. The city shall provide to an applicant for a massaginist license a form containing the information as hereinafter specified which shall be completed and filed with the city by each applicant for such license to be accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. Said application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
(1)  The kind of license requested. 
(2)  The name of the applicant. 
(3)  The location where the applicant proposes to administer massages and solicit patrons and the telephone number at said location. If the applicant intends to engage in business or administer massages at more than one location, the addresses of such additional locations shall be specified if the applicant intends to or has previously administered massages at such locations on more than two (2) occasions during a calendar year. If the applicant intends to administer a massage at locations to be identified by patrons which are presently unknown to the applicant a specific statement to that effect shall be set forth. 
(4)  The legal name of the applicant for the license. 
(5)  The addresses of any residence of the applicants within the ninety (90) days preceding the date of the application including the current home address of the applicant and his telephone number and the length which the applicant has been a resident. 
(6)  A health certificate as defined in this chapter issued not more than fifteen (15) days prior to submitting such application to be attached to the application. 
(7)  The birthdate and social security number of the applicant. 
(8)  The names and addresses of all massage establishments in which the applicant has been employed for the preceding two (2) years. 
(9)  Disclosure as to the applicant of all final convictions occurring within two (2) years of the date of such application of any federal or state offense which is a felony or misdemeanor offense of sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy or lewd house, keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, assault or battery. If such a conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which said conviction was entered. 
(10)  That the applicant acknowledges that pursuant to this chapter the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information above provided and that if such inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of such information, the city has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the applicant, and the applicant shall be required to provide such to the city upon the request of the city prior to making a final decision as to approving or denying such license. 
(11)  A photostatic copy of a diploma of graduation from a recognized school as an exhibit attached to the application. Such diploma must be representative to the fact that the applicant attended a course of study of not less than six (6) months, wherein such course of study consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene. In the event such applicant should not have such diploma, then the applicant must attach a transcript from an accredited educational institution demonstrating the completion, with passing grades, of courses of instruction of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, and hygiene or must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two (2) years in a massage, physical culture establishment or other equivalent facility in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene. The application shall specify the name and address of such establishments from which the applicant has obtained such training and experience with the periods during which such training was received and a description of such training. 
(c)  Any massaginist administering a massage pursuant to a license issued as required by this chapter shall comply with the substantive provisions and regulations of the following subsections of section 1.5-4 of this chapter: (a), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h). Any reference in said subsections to a massage establishment shall apply to the massaginist in the manner of conduct or performance in the administration of any massage. 
(d)  The holder of any license issued pursuant to this section shall, within seven (7) days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided in subsections (b)(3) and (4) of this section, inform the city in writing of such change. Such notice shall specify such changed information in accordance with the provisions of said subsections in the same manner as if such information was specified in a license application. 
(e)  A license as provided for in this section shall be issued only to an individual. 
(f)  A license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany all applications for a license or renewal thereof at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-3-81)  
Sec. 11.5-6. - Issuance of license. 
Following the submission of an application for a license as provided in this chapter, either for an initial or a renewal license, the following procedures or requirements shall apply thereto in addition to those elsewhere specified in this chapter: 
(a)  Such investigation or inquiry pertaining to the information provided on the license application as may be considered reasonable and necessary shall be made by the city. Such investigation and inquiry shall be concluded within fifteen (15) days of the filing of said application for a license, except that if for any reason the investigation or inquiry is not concluded, the city shall so notify the applicant of that situation. The notice shall specify a reasonable period within which the city expects to conclude the investigation and inquiry, said reasonable period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the period above specified or as extended if the city is unable to conclude the investigation and inquiry by reason of inability to obtain information, the applicant shall be so notified in writing by the city and given a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days during which the applicant may provide such information to the city as the city may consider accurate and complete. Upon the failure to obtain such information or to confirm the accuracy or completeness of the same, the city shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant. 
(c)  If upon concluding the review, investigation and inquiry of the application and the applicant, the city determines that any information provided in the application is false or that the information provided in the application or as determined by the city upon its investigation and inquiry so the following facts are found to exist, the city shall not issue a license to the applicant: 
(1)  That a health certificate as required for any massaginist as attached to an application is absent. 
(2)  That any massaginist employed or to be employed by any massage establishment that does not have a license as required by this chapter or has not submitted application for the same prior to the filing of an application for a massage establishment license by the applicant therefor. 
(3)  That a massaginist does not hold the qualifications specified by evidence of a diploma or training and experience as provided for and being a requirement of the issuance of a massaginist license. 
(4)  That the applicant, if an individual, for any license required by this chapter or any person or entity owning and/or controlling the applicant, including, but not limited to, all partners, principals or managers, and also if the applicant is a corporation, an officer, director or shareholder holding at least ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, has been convicted of any violation of this chapter within the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the filing of such application or any offense specified in subsection (b)(10) of section 11.5-3 of this chapter. 
(5)  That the applicant has previously had a license required by this chapter revoked or is at the time of filing an application for a license presently holding a license which is under suspension pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(6)  That the applicant has been finally convicted within the past two (2) years from the date of application of any offense cited in section 11.5-5(b)(9) of this chapter. 
(d)  Upon refusal to issue a license as above provided, the city shall give to the applicant reasonable notice which shall contain the specific reason(s) for refusal to issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-3-81)  
Sec. 11.5-7. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
Any license pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation subject to the following violations and procedures: 
(a)  The chief of police may suspend a license issued to and held by a massage establishment or a massaginist upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  That a massaginist who has an infections or communicable disease has administered a massage. 
(2)  That any massaginist and/or any massaginist employed by a massage establishment or any party specified in subsection (b)(9) of section 11.5-3 has been convicted of any violation of this chapter pursuant to subsection (e) of section 11.5-2 or any offense specified in subsection (b)(10) of section 11.5-3 of this chapter. 
(3)  That any massaginist has violated or permitted to be violated subsection (c) or (d) of section 11.5-4 of this chapter. 
(4)  That any massage establishment has violated or permitted to be violated any provision of section 11.5-3 of this chapter. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have authority to suspend a license for a period of from one day to ninety (90) days for each occasion upon which one of the grounds for suspension as above set forth has occurred. Such suspension shall be effective from the time specified and during the period specified pursuant to a hearing as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary as specified in the paragraph above, the chief of police shall have authority to suspend a license instanter without hearing, to be effective until a hearing as herein provided, whenever any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  Shall have violated any provision for suspension as specified in paragraph (a) above on more than one occasion or occurrence prior to a hearing as specified herein; or 
(2)  A hearing as specified herein is not held as scheduled by reason of postponement of the same by the holder of the license. 
(d)  The city may revoke a license issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Whenever in the judgment of the chief of police a holder of a license has violated a provision for suspension as specified in paragraph (a) above, and such violation is of sufficient excess, neglect or aggravation as to require revocation rather than suspension or upon a judgment that such violation of this chapter is continuous. 
(2)  That the holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter has had such license suspended on more than one occasion during any calendar year wherein revocation of such license shall be automatic. 
(e)  Any proceeding for suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  Reasonable notice of the proceeding to be recommended or pursued by the city shall be given to the holder of the license. Such notice shall specify the proceeding recommended or to be pursued and the reason therefor pursuant to paragraph (a) above. Such notice shall also state the date, time and place of hearing on said matter. If the provisions of paragraph (c) above are being followed, a statement that such license is suspended from the time of service of such notice till such hearing shall be included. 
(2)  The hearing as specified herein shall be held by the chief of police within thirty (30) days of the date of such notice being served upon the holder of the license. 
(3)  At such hearing the holder of the license shall be required to present the license to the city prior to being heard at such hearing. Within five (5) days of the conclusion of such hearing said license shall either be marked "revoked" or "suspended" with the period of suspension specified thereon or returned to the holder if no action of suspension or revocation is effected. 
(4)  All hearings shall be held by the chief of police or his designated representative. Such official shall be referred to as the hearing officer. However, the chief of police shall not designate any person or persons to perform the duties of hearing officer under this section who has participated in the inspection or investigation of the establishment or individuals whose license is in question, or has prior knowledge of the allegations or circumstances discovered in such inspection or investigations except such person designated as hearing officer may, prior to the hearing, receive a copy of the notice given to the licensee. 
A representative of the legal department shall be present at each such hearing to advise the hearing officer as to procedural matters; however, such attorney shall not partake in any determination of the facts. 
All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with the nature of the proceedings; provided, however, the following rules shall apply to such hearings: 
a.  All parties shall have the right to representation by a licensed attorney though an attorney is not required. 
b.  Each party may present witnesses in his own behalf. 
c.  Each party has the right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
d.  Only evidence presented before the hearing officer at such hearing may be considered in rendering the order. 
If the licensee fails to appear at the hearing at the time, place and date specified, the city shall present sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case showing violation of this chapter or conditions constitution a hazard to public health which formed the basis of the suspension of the license. 
(5)  Subsequent to any action of suspension or revocation as provided herein, the city shall have authority to place one or more notices upon any massage establishment in a conspicuous place or places that the license issued to that establishment has been suspended or revoked and that the same is not open for the business of providing massages without such establishment holding a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter. In the event that the holder of a license fails to deliver the same to the city as regulated herein or upon said license being suspended pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section, the city shall have the authority to take possession of such license from the holder. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-3-81)  
Chapter 12 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES AND PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Glue, paint or cement containing volatile solvents—Sale to minors prohibited; exception. 
(a)  No person shall sell, display for sale, deliver or give to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, any glue, paint or cement commonly known as model airplane glue, plastic cement, household cement, cement, paint, spray paint or any other similar substance, if such glue, paint or cement contains one or more of the following volatile solvents: 
(1)  Toluol. 
(2)  Hexane. 
(3)  Trichloroethylene. 
(4)  Acetone. 
(5)  Toluene. 
(6)  Ethyl Acetate. 
(7)  Methyl Ethyl Ketone. 
(8)  Trichloroethane. 
(9)  Isopropanol. 
(10)  Methyl Isobutyl Ketone. 
(11)  Methyl Cellosolve Acetate. 
(12)  Cyclohexanone. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply where the glue, paint or cement is sold, delivered or given simultaneously with and as part of a kit used for the construction of model airplanes, model boats, model automobiles, model trains or other similar models. 
(Ord. No. 604, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-72)  
Sec. 12-2. - Same—Public intoxication from inhalation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found in a public place under the influence of or in a state of intoxication as the result of inhaling any glue, paint or cement containing one or more of the solvents named in section 12-1. 
(Ord. No. 604, § 3, 8-15-72)  
Sec. 12-3. - Sound and vibration. 
(a)  Legislative findings. The city council of the City of South Houston finds and declares: 
(1)  That sound and vibration of such character, intensity and duration as are reasonably calculated to be detrimental to the health, welfare or safety of a reasonably sensitive person degrades the environment of the city to a degree which: 
a.  Is harmful and hazardous to the health, welfare and safety of it's inhabitants; 
b.  Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation and with the conduct and operation of business and industry; and 
c.  Is a nuisance in fact. 
(2)  The effective control and elimination of excessive sound and vibration is essential to the furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the city's inhabitants. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section and the appropriate court shall take judicial notice of same. 
(1)  Ambient sound pressure level: Composite of sound in the environment excluding the specific sound under investigation. 
(2)  A-weighted network: db(A) frequency response characteristics provided by a standard sound level meter which attempts to duplicate the response of the human ear to a measured sound pressure level. 
(3)  Decibel (dB): A measurement used to express the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. It is defined as a dimensionless unit related to the logarithm of the ratio of a measured quantity to a reference quantity. 
(4)  Equivalent continuous sound pressure level ( l eq): Used to denote the average sound pressure level in dB(A) during a specified period of time. 
(5)  Octave band analysis: A detailed measurement that divides sound into component or octave bands which are limited to a specific frequency range. Sound pressure levels are assigned to each octave band. The specific frequency range is considered to be an octave in width when the upper band edge frequency is twice the lower band edge frequency. 
(6)  Octave band analyzer: An instrument that measures sound pressure levels within a specific frequency range denoted as an octave band. 
(7)  Octave band center frequency: A designation for the octave band frequency widths. The octave band center frequency is the geometric mean of the upper and lower band edge frequencies. 
(8)  Peak sound pressure level: Used to denote the maximum instantaneous sound pressure level during a specified period of time. 
(9)  Person means a person, firm, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature. 
(10)  Real property boundary: An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned or in possession of one person from that real property owned or in possession of another. 
(11)  Receiving real property: Any property outside the real property boundary of the sound source. 
(12)  Reference quantity: The reference quantity used is 0.00002 Newtons per meter squared (N/m 2 ); this quantity is further defined as zero dB. 
(13)  Residential property: Any location used for noncommercial purposes as a place of abode by any person. 
(14)  Sound: Any pressure variation that can be detected by the human ear. 
(15)  Sound amplifying equipment: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or other. 
(16)  Sound level meter: An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighting networks to measure sound pressure levels and that meets the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specifications. 
(17)  Vibration: An oscillatory motion of solid bodies described by displacement, velocity or acceleration. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of sound or vibration or to discharge or allow the escape of any sound or vibration: 
a.  Of such character, intensity, volume or duration as to be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or annoying to a reasonably sensitive person within the area or property receiving such sound or vibration; or 
b.  That causes adverse psychological or physiological effects detrimental to the health, welfare, or safety of a reasonably sensitive person within the area or property receiving such sound or vibration; or 
c.  Which is in violation of standards prescribed by this section. 
(2)  It shall be prima facie unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of sound or to discharge or allow the escape of any sound in such a manner as to cause or create a sound pressure level which reaches or exceeds the following standards when measured at any point within the real property boundary of the receiving real property: 
a.  A peak sound pressure level of seventy-five (75) dB(A) at any time on any receiving property. 
b.  A peak sound pressure level of ten (10) dB above the ambient measured on any nonresidential property located between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
c.  A peak sound pressure level of five (5) dB above the ambient measured on any residential property location between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
d.  A peak sound pressure level of ten (10) dB above ambient as measured in any octave band center frequency as follows: 
Octave Band Center Frequencies (Hertz) 
63 	125 	250 	500 	1000 	2000 	4000 	8000 
 
(3)  It shall be prima facie unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of vibration or to discharge or allow the escape of any vibration in such a manner as to cause by such operation a vibration that can be detected without the aid of instruments at any point within the receiving real property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, including, but not limited to, amplification equipment contained in or mounted on a motor vehicle in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated. The operation of such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, device or amplification equipment in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be "prima facie" evidence of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Measurements and standards. 
(1)  Measurement of sound may be made, as applicable, with a sound level meter or with an octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Institute (ANSI). A calibration check shall be made before and after the time of any sound measurement. Sound measurements shall be obtained in a manner that provides proper representation of the sound in question. A microphone windscreen shall be used when necessary to avoid interference from the wind. The instrument shall be positioned at arms length or positioned on a stationary tripod with the microphone positioned in such a manner that will avoid an unnatural enhancement or diminution of the sound in question. Traffic, aircraft, and other sound shall not be considered except in instances where they interfere with the sound of interest or ambient samples. 
To establish a representative sound sample, at least three (3) sound measurements should be taken within an hour period on at least two (2) separate occasions. Sound samples shall be obtained specifically during sound producing and non-producing or ambient conditions. Ambient sound pressure level shall be obtained in the same manner as described above during periods of ambient conditions. Ambient sound pressure levels shall be obtained as soon as possible and at the same location used to obtain sound pressure levels of the sound of interest. 
(2)  The city or its designated agents or representatives may inspect from time to time any installation, premises, equipment, devices and appurtenances thereto that may, can or do cause sounds or vibrations and the city may take measurements and make analysis of such sound or vibration. Where directed, the owner shall provide assistance in obtaining normal operating conditions during periods of measurement. 
(3)  The city may order the owner, lessee or any agent of any source of sound and/or vibration which may be or is in excess of that permitted by this section or the regulations adopted hereunder to furnish such information, plans, specifications, analysis, performance data and tests or examinations as will disclose the nature, effects, extent, quantity, watts or degree of sound or vibration which are or may be discharged from such source. 
(e)  Penalties and remedies. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues and shall be punishable as such. 
(2)  The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to any other legal remedies available to the city to prevent and prohibit any such violation of this section. The city may institute any appropriate administrative action or proceeding or any action at law or equity to require compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 796, § 1, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 95-004, § 1, 4-18-95) 
Cross reference— Prohibition against noise resulting from playing games on streets and public property, § 19-19.  
Sec. 12-4. - Discharge of firearms or BB or pellet guns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a police officer while in the discharge of his duties, to discharge any firearm, BB gun or pellet gun within the city. Any person charged with a violation of this section shall be afforded the equal protection of the state laws pertaining to the use of firearms. 
(Ord. No. 421, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-58) 
Cross reference— Shooting birds or wild fowl, § 4-2 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit use of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003(a)(8); discharging firearms, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 22.05, 42.01(a)(7), (9).  
Sec. 12-5. - Loitering on property of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found loitering about the property or upon the premises of another without being able to give a good account of himself. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 3, 8-2-60) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.05.  
Sec. 12-6. - Police assigned to motorcycle duty. 
(a)  Use of personal motorcycle authorized. Officers of the South Houston Police Department are authorized to use their personal motorcycles in the course and scope of employment with the South Houston Police Department; provided, however, such vehicles shall meet minimum specifications for police motorcycles promulgated by the chief of police. 
(b)  Chief of police authorized to set specifications. The chief of police shall be and is hereby authorized to promulgate specifications for police motorcycles used in the course of police work with the City of South Houston. Such specifications shall include, but are not limited to, specifications as to engine size, cooling, valve arrangement, tire size, wheelbase, starter, color, and whether motorcycle shall be equipped with saddle bags, police motorcycle equipment (red lights, electric siren, speedometer calibrated for police service, and the like). Such specifications shall be posted in the police station and filed with the city secretary for ten (10) days before taking effect. 
(c)  Monthly allowance. A police officer who works full-time on motorcycle duty and who uses his own motorcycle in the performance of his duties pursuant to this section, shall be paid a monthly motorcycle allowance of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month. A police officer receiving allowances pursuant to this section shall provide all maintenance, oil, gas, tires, red lights, electric sirens, calibrated speedometer for police service, any special clothing or footwear needed for safe operation of a motorcycle, and every other expense, except a police radio, which will be furnished by the city. 
(d)  Insurance required. Each officer who works full-time on motorcycle duty for the city shall maintain continuous motor vehicle insurance. Coverage shall include, but is not limited to, liability, comprehension, collision, and uninsured motorists. A copy of said policy will be furnished to the city by the insurance carrier within thirty (30) days from the effective date of the policy, or proof of insurability will be provided by each officer. 
(e)  Maximum number. In no event shall the number of police officers receiving monthly allowances pursuant to this section exceed ten (10). 
(Ord. No. 690, §§ 1—5, 9-15-81; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 11-3-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 690, §§ 1—5, adopted Sept. 15, 1981, enacted the provisions codified as § 12-6 above. Since said ordinance did not expressly amend this Code, the manner of codification has been at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 12-7. - Leaving a child unattended in a motor vehicle prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he, acting with knowledge, intent, or criminal negligence, leaves a child in a motor vehicle for longer than five (5) minutes if the child is: 
(1)  Younger than seven (7) years of age, and 
(2)  Not attended by an individual who is fourteen (14) years of age or older. 
(b)  The terms knowledge, intent, and criminal negligence as used in this section shall have the same meaning as set out in the definitions of these terms in the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 1, 5-15-84) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 715, adopted May 15, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion of § 1 herein as § 12-7 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 12-8. - Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to minors prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to sell, distribute or display harmful material to minors. 
(b)  A person commits an offense, if, knowing the theme of the material: 
(1)  He sells, distributes, exhibits, or possesses for sale, distribution or exhibition to a minor harmful material; 
(2)  He displays harmful material at newsstands or other business establishments frequented by minors or where minors are or may be invited as part of the general public; 
(3)  He hires, employs, or uses a minor to do or accomplish or assist in doing or accomplishing any of the acts prohibited in subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  For purposes of this section the following definitions of terms shall be used: 
(1)  Minor means an individual younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Harmful material means material whose dominant theme taken as a whole: 
a.  Depicts, describes, or represents: 
1.  Sexual conduct; 
2.  With less than complete opaque covering, an individual's genitals, pubic area, or buttocks or a female individual's breast or portion of breast below the top of the nipple; 
3.  An individual's genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
4.  Flagellation or other torture by or of an individual or in a revealing costume or who is fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained; 
5.  Masturbation or excretory functions; or 
6.  Fondling of an individual's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, or buttocks or of a female individual's clothed or unclothed breasts; and 
b.  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable for minors, applying contemporary community standards; and 
c.  Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for minors. 
(d)  Any individual who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted, and each offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(e)  Should any subsection or provision of this section be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 1, 8-7-84) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 716, adopted Aug. 7, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein of § 1 as § 12-8 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 12-9. - Smoking in buildings and vehicles of the city. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  City's buildings means all of the enclosed areas that are used by the city, its employees, and general public; including, but not limited to, all or any part of the buildings used for any of the operations of the city, such as the city hall, police station, municipal court, fire stations, community center, "city barn," (vehicle maintenance, sanitation, and street and bridge facility), water treatment plant, and wastewater treatment plant. 
(2)  City's vehicles means all cars, pickups, trucks, SUV's, vans or buses that are used by the city's employees or city officials. 
(3)  Smoke, smokes, or smoking includes: 
a.  Carrying or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device; or 
b.  The lighting of a combustion of any cigar, cigarette, tobacco, or similar article, or any other combustible substance in any manner, or in any form; or 
c.  Emitting or exhaling the smoke of pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(b)  Offense, penalty. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if, in a city building or city vehicle, the person smokes and fails, or refuses, to extinguish smoking material or move outside the building or vehicle upon request by any person to do so. 
(2)  Any person convicted of violating this provision shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as set by a judge or jury. 
(c)  Signs. Signs shall be visibly placed at each public entrance to city buildings to notify persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited. This provision does not include exits used exclusively as emergency exits. 
(d)  Penalty. That violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-013, §§ 1, 2, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 2002-25, §§ 1, 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-05)  
Secs. 12-10—12-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSANITARY, UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit conditions designated in this article, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342. 
 
Sec. 12-17. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the enforcement and interpretation of this article: 
Brush. The word "brush" shall include all trees or shrubbery under seven (7) feet in height which are not cultivated or cared for by persons owning or controlling the premises. 
Lot. The term "lot" shall include, in addition to the ground within its boundaries, the ground adjacent thereto and extending beyond the property line of such lot to the curbline of adjacent streets, where a curbline has been established, and fourteen (14) feet beyond the property line where no curbline has been established on adjacent streets, and to the center of adjacent alleys. 
Objectionable, unsightly or insanitary matter. The term "objectionable, unsightly or insanitary matter" shall include all objects and matter not included within the meaning of the other terms defined in this section, which are liable to produce or tend to produce an unhealthy, unwholesome or insanitary condition to the premises within the general locality where the same are situated. Such term shall include any matter which is in such condition as to be liable to cause disease or produce, harbor or spread disease germs of any nature, or which tends to render the surrounding atmosphere unhealthy, unwholesome or obnoxious or which constitutes a fire hazard. 
Rubbish. The word "rubbish" shall include all refuse, rejected tin cans, old vessels of all sorts, useless articles, discarded clothing and textiles of all sorts, and in general all litter and all other things usually included within the meaning of said term. 
Weeds. The word "weeds" shall include all rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which has grown to more than nine (9) inches in height, or which, regardless of height, is liable to become unwholesome or a decaying mass or a breeding place for mosquitoes or vermin. Such term shall include any species of ragweed or other vegetable growth which might or may tend to be unhealthy to individuals residing within the general locality of the lot on which the same is situated. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 2, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89)  
Sec. 12-18. - Prohibited conditions designated—Stagnant water. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other business or nonprofit entity, who shall own, operate or occupy any lot or portion of a lot in the city to permit or allow, by commission or omission, the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or permit the same to remain thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other business or nonprofit entity, who shall own, operate or occupy any lot or portion of a lot in the city to permit or allow holes, depressions or such places on such lot where water or other liquid materials may accumulate and become stagnant, repugnant or a danger to health, or permit the same to remain thereon. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 2, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89)  
Sec. 12-19. - Same—Accumulation of weeds, brush, rubbish, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other business or nonprofit entity, who shall own, operate or occupy any lot or portion of a lot in the city to allow weeds, rubbish, brush or any other objectionable, noxious, unsightly or insanitary matter to accumulate or grow on such lot. The screening or fencing of such materials shall not remove the burden of compliance with this section. No business engaged in the collection of materials described herein shall store those materials on property within the city except in approved containers designed to prevent the escape of solids, liquids or gases, and only for the purpose of temporary (less than seventy-two (72) hours) storage while the materials are in transit to a proper and approved storage or disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 2, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89) 
Cross reference— Prohibition against storage of garbage and trash on residential property, § 10-6.  
Sec. 12-20. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any condition existing on any lot in the city in violation of section 12-18 or 12-19 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 4, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89)  
Sec. 12-21. - Notice to remove or remedy condition. 
Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist upon any lot or premises in the city, the health officer shall notify the owner or person having possession or control of such lot or premises to remove or remedy the condition within ten (10) days after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in writing and served on the owner in person or mailed to him at his last known address. In the event that personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's address is not known, the health officer shall post a conspicuous written "Notice of Violation" (of at least dimensions of fourteen (14) inches in width by twelve (12) inches in length) on the owner's property and provide notice of the violation, identify the owner's address, the owner's legal description, the owner's HCAD account number, the date of notice, the notice of compliance date for the owner to cure the violation, and the penalty for untimely non-compliance (including municipal court citation and/or the city curing the violation and filing a lien on the owner's property through the Harris County Real Property Records). Compliance with this amended section shall eliminate the need to publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 3, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 2, 3-27-12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006.  
Sec. 12-22. - Removal or correction of condition by city—Generally. 
In the event the owner of any lot or premises fails to remove or remedy any condition described in this article within ten (10) days after notice has been given as provided in section 12-21, the city may do whatever is necessary to remove or remedy the condition, or cause the same to be done, and charge the expense incurred thereby to the owner or person in possession or control of such lot or premises and such expense shall be assessed against the real estate upon which the work was done. The amount of said expense shall be determined by adding to the charge incurred by the city for performing, or causing to be performed, the work necessary to cause such lot or premises to come into conformance with Chapter 12 of the South Houston Code of Ordinances, so incurred, plus an administrative fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), all of which shall be due and payable by the owner of the lot or premises upon which said work was done within thirty (30) days of said billing by the city. If such expense is not paid within thirty (30) days of said billing, there shall be added thereto an amount equal to one-third of total billing. The doing of such work and the charging and assessing of the expenses thereof against the owner shall not relieve the owner or occupant of any prosecution for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 4, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 97-031, 11-25-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 342.006.  
Sec. 12-23. - Same—Statement of expenses incurred; procedures for the imposition and collection of liens. 
(a)  The health officer shall compile a statement of expenses incurred under section 12-22, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made, and present the same to the city council. Upon approval of such statement by the council, the mayor or the health officer shall file the same with the county clerk, and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with Article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of such expenses shall bear ten (10) percent interest from the date such statement is filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(b)  The following procedures shall be used in the filing of liens against property owners for charges incurred by the city under this article: 
(1)  Notification effected in accordance with this article. 
(2)  The health officer or other enforcement official designated by him shall, after the ten (10) calendar day grace period allow for correction, determine compliance with this article. If corrective measures are not effected and a violation of this article remains, the lot and block description shall be turned over to an approved contractor for mowing, trash removal or such other corrective measures as prescribed by the health officer. 
(3)  After a subsequent inspection to verify and approve the work done by the approved contractor or contractors, the property owner shall be sent a properly executed and transmitted bill for services performed. The bill will contain pertinent information as to property description, notices given, dates of correction, costs of correction inclusive of inspection, invoicing, records maintenance and such other costs incurred by the city in the correction of the condition and compliance with this article. 
(4)  Sixty (60) calendar days after the initial billing, and provided that payment has not been received by the city, the city attorney shall cause a lien to be filed with Harris County Deed Records. The prevailing charge for filing the lien, the costs incurred and billed by the city attorney shall be added to the lien, the cost of which shall be determined by the total of (3) above. 
(5)  Liens filed in accordance with this article shall accrue interest at the rate of ten (10) percent annually until such time as the lien is paid or recovery and foreclosure is effected. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 4, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89)  
Sec. 12-23A. - Insurance requirements for contractors who are contracted by the City of South Houston to do mowing and cleanup work. 
(a)  Each contractor performing mowing or cleanup work for the city under this article shall comply with the following insurance requirements: 
(1)  He shall carry public liability insurance to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one (1) person. 
(2)  He shall carry property damage insurance to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one (1) piece of property. 
(b)  The insurance required by this section shall be written by an accredited company under the supervision of the state board of insurance commissioners. Evidence of compliance with these requirements shall be met when the policy or a copy thereof or a certificate of insurance has been filed with and approved by the city. The policy shall include an endorsement thereon that the city will be notified at least ten (10) days in advance in the event of cancellation or expiration of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 97-031, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 12-24. - Summary abatement. 
In addition to the remedy provided in the foregoing sections of this article, the cumulative thereof, if it is brought to the attention of the city council and the council determines that any nuisance described in this article is likely to have an immediate adverse effect upon the public health, comfort or safety, the council may, by appropriate resolution or motion, order such nuisance summarily abated by the city in a reasonable and prudent manner. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 4, 1-5-60; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89)  
Sec. 12-25. - Penalty. 
Any person, persons, operator, owner, owners, partners, licensee, or the agents of a corporation, or any part thereof, who shall violate or allow or cause any person or persons to violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for such offense; and the license or licenses shall be subject to revocation or suspension for a violation of any provision of this article or of any other provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston or any violation of the laws of the State of Texas. Any remedy prescribed by this article shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 1, 3-7-89)  
ARTICLE III. - HEALTH 
 
Sec. 12-25.1. - Designation of health authority. 
The City of South Houston designates the Director of the Harris County Health Department as its health authority for the purpose of food establishment surveillance for the public health protection of its residents. 
Harris County Health Department shall be responsible for enforcement of the city's food permit ordinance and shall provide a semi-annual report to the city's health officer which documents violations of health ordinances, and food establishments surveillance program activities within the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. 931 (01-92), § 1(A), 1-21-92)  
Sec. 12-26. - State and county regulations adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by reference the current Texas Department of Health "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" and "Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation" as found in "Texas Food Establishment Rules," 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161-171, 173-175; the "Regulation of Food Service Establishments," Chapter 437, the "Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," Chapter 431, and "Minimum Standards of Sanitation and Health Protection Measures," Chapter 341, and the "Rules Regulating Food Establishments in Harris County, Texas," as amended. 
(b)  A certified copy of each of the above-referenced sets of rules shall be kept on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 931(01-92), § 1(B), 1-21-92; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 1, 4-16-02)  
Sec. 12-27. - Definitions. 
All definitions in "Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation," "Regulations of Food Service Establishments," "Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," "Minimum Standards of Sanitation and Health Protection Measures," and "Rules Regulating Food Establishments in Harris County, Texas," are hereby adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply to this article. 
(1)  Regulatory authority means the Harris County Public Health and Environmental Services. 
(2)  Health department means the Harris County Public Health and Environmental Services. 
(3)  City health officer means the representative of the City of South Houston. 
(4)  Service of notice means the delivery of a notice, prepared by Harris County Health Department, to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. 
(5)  Owner of business shall mean the owner or operator of the business. 
(6)  Food establishment means each place where food or drink is manufactured, packaged, produced, processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, or otherwise handled, whether offered for sale, given in exchange or given away for use as food or furnished for human consumption. The term does not apply to private homes where food is prepared or served for guest and individual family consumption. The term does not apply to a place where a commercially packaged single portion of non-potentially hazardous snack items and wrapped candy are sold over the counter. 
(7)  Child care facility means a facility keeping more than twelve (12) unrelated children that provides care, training, education, custody or supervision for children under fifteen (15) years of age, who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner of operator of facility, for all or part of the day, whether or not facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. 
(Ord. No. 931 (01-92), § 1(c), 1-21-92; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 4-16-02)  
Sec. 12-28. - Food permits. 
(1)  Requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city, unless he possesses a current and valid health permit issued by the Harris County Health Department. 
(2)  Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at a food establishment for which it is issued. 
(3)  Non-transference (change of ownership). Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable. Upon change of ownership of a business the new business owner will be required to meet current standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. 
(4)  Denial, suspension or revocation of permits. The Harris County Health Department may deny, suspend or revoke any permit to operate a food service establishment, retail food store, temporary food establishment, mobile food unit or roadside food vendor if the holder of the permit does not comply with these rules and regulations or if the operation of the establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. A permit can be suspended only after notice and an opportunity for a hearing as described in subsection (5) have been given. This notice must list specific violations of rules and regulations and a period of time in which violations are to be corrected. Failure to correct violations as listed on the notice will be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. If a permit is then denied, suspended, or revoked, the holder of the permit has three (3) working days to request a hearing. This request must be in writing and delivered to the Harris County Health Department. A hearing must be held within seven (7) working days of the request. If no request for hearing is made within the time limits, the denial, suspension or revocation is sustained. 
(5)  Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the Harris County Health Department at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the Harris County Health Department shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder the permit, license or certificate by the Harris County Health Department. 
(6)  Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final pursuant to the determination of the Director of the Harris County Health Department, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit to the health department. 
(7)  Permit fees. A health permit fee is established by the commissioners court in unincorporated areas of the county is required annually for each food establishment and the City of South Houston adopting such fees. Fees are due and payable on or before one (1) year from date of issuance of the permit and are to be paid to the Harris County Health Department at 2501 Dunstan, Houston, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 931 (01-92), § 1(D), 1-21-92)  
Sec. 12-29. - Review of plans. 
(1)  Submission of plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the Harris County Health Department for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the Harris County Health Department for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion has begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The Harris County Health Department shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of these rules. No food establishments shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Harris County Health Department. 
(2)  Pre-operational inspection. The Harris County Health Department shall inspect any food establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 931 (01-92), § 1(E), 1-21-92)  
Sec. 12-30. - Food manager certification. 
(1)  Requirement. Every permitted food establishment except establishments dealing only in: fresh produce, non-potentially hazardous food, and/or prepackaged potentially hazardous food, shall have a person employed in a managerial capacity possessing a current food manager's certificate issued by the Harris County Health Department. A certified manager or person in charge must be on duty all hours of operation of any non-exempt food service establishment employing six (6) or more employees per eight (8) hour shift. 
Upon written request application and presentation of evidence of satisfactory completion of a food manager's course, equivalent training, or examination as approved by the Director of Public Health, the Harris County Health Department shall issue a food manager's certificate valid for three (3) years from the date of completion of training or evaluation unless sooner revoked. Suspension or revocation of an establishment's health permit by the Harris County Health Department shall constitute cause for revocation of the establishment's manager's certification. 
Whenever the food service operator holding the certificate terminated employment, is terminated, or is transferred to another food establishment shall be allowed sixty (60) days (from the date of such termination or transfer of the certificate holder) to comply with this section. 
(2)  Exemptions from certificate requirements. Temporary food establishments and persons participating as volunteer food handlers performing charitable activities for a period of fourteen (14) days or less may be exempted from the requirement for manager's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 931 (01-92), § 1(F), 1-21-92)  
Sec. 12-31. - Authority of health inspector to issue citations. 
The City of South Houston hereby gives to the health authority or his designees the authority to issue citations give notice, make inspections and file charges arising out of violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 931 (01-92), § 1(G), 1-21-92)  
Sec. 12-32. - Harris County Public Health and Environmental Services. 
Any reference in this Code to Harris County Health department shall hereafter mean the Harris County Public Health and Environmental Services. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 3, 4-16-02)  
Secs. 12-33—12-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CURFEW HOURS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-008, adopted June 4, 1996, amended Ord. No. 94-007, enacted March 15, 1994, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Ord. No. 94-007 pertained to similar subject matter and formerly was set out as §§ 12-51—12-55. 
 
Sec. 12-51. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
(1)  Curfew hours means: 
a.  10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
b.  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday. 
(2)  Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. This term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(3)  Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(4)  Guardian means: 
a.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
b.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
(5)  Minor means any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
(6)  Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members of partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
(7)  Parent means a person who is: 
a.  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
b.  At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
(8)  Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(9)  Remain means to: 
a.  Linger or stay; or 
b.  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(10)  Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 96-008, § I, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2007-11, § I, 7-10-07)  
Sec. 12-52. - Offenses; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor twelve (12) years of age or under to be upon any public place in the city during the period from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor thirteen (13) years of age or older and under the age of eighteen (18) years, inclusive, to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public place in the city during the hours as follows: 
10:00 p.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday; 
10:00 p.m. Monday and 6:00 a.m. Tuesday; 
10:00 p.m. Tuesday and 6:00 a.m. Wednesday; 
10:00 p.m. Wednesday and 6:00 a.m. Thursday; 
10:00 p.m. Thursday and 6:00 a.m. Friday; 
12:00 midnight Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday; and 
12:00 midnight Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any minor thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) years of age, inclusive, to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public place in the city, on school days, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on a Monday through Friday, inclusive. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) years of age, inclusive, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor, to allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in subsections (a), (b) and (c) above. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violate this section. Such violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-008, § II, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2007-11, § II, 7-10-07)  
Sec. 12-53. - Compulsory school age minors to be in attendance at school; parental duties imposed; penalty for violation. 
(a)  No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16) inclusive, other than a minor that has been suspended or expelled from school, shall be at any place within the city except in attendance at school between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. during any school day, unless the minor has written proof from school authorities excusing him or her from attending school at the particular time, or unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor. 
(b)  Each parent or legal guardian or a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the minor from behaving contrary to subsection (a) above. No person shall fail to fulfill the duty imposed by this section. 
(c)  Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of failing to supervise a minor of compulsory school age. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violate this section. Such violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-008, § III, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2007-11, § III, 7-10-07)  
Sec. 12-54. - Children suspended or expelled from school to remain under supervision; parental duties imposed; penalty for violation. 
(a)  If a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16) inclusive, is suspended or expelled from school, then each parent or legal guardian of the minor shall have the following duties for the duration of the suspension or expulsion: 
(1)  The duty to personally supervise the minor, or to arrange for a responsible adult to supervise the minor, at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled; and 
(2)  The duty to prohibit the minor from being at any public place at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  When the minor is accompanied by the parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or 
b.  When the minor is on an emergency errand; or 
c.  The minor is married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code Ch. 31. 
d.  When the minor is employed pursuant to approval of school authorities, during the times that the minor is actually on the job or traveling directly from the job site. 
No person shall negligently fail to fulfill the duties imposed by this section. 
(b)  No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, who has been suspended or expelled from school shall fail to comply with supervision provided or arranged by a parent or legal guardian pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(c)  No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, who has been suspended or expelled from school shall be in any public place at the times that he or she would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the circumstances described in subsections (a)(2)a., b., c., or d. of this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violate this section. Such violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-008, § IV, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2007-11, § IV, 7-10-07)  
Sec. 12-55. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section II of this article that: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; 
(2)  The minor was accompanied by a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; 
(3)  The minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency; 
(4)  The minor was attending a school, religious, or government-sponsored activity or was traveling to or from a school, religious, or government-sponsored activity; 
(5)  The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going directly to or coming directly from lawful employment; 
(6)  The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where he or she permanently resides; 
(7)  The minor was engaged in, participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function or activity for which the application of section II of this article would contravene his or her rights protected by the Texas or United States Constitution; 
(8)  The minor is married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code Ch. 31. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section III of this article that the minor, at the time he or she was found at a place other than in school, was not required by law to be in attendance at school. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section II, III or IV of this article that the minor has been directed by his or her parent or legal guardian, or responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor, to engage in a specific activity or to carry out express instructions, during the time that the minor is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 96-008, § V, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2007-11, § V, 7-10-07)  
Sec. 12-56. - Supplement effect. 
The provisions of this article are supplemental and shall be cumulative with all other laws and ordinances applicable in any manner to juveniles. 
(Ord. No. 96-008, § VI, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2007-11, § VI, 7-10-07)  
Secs. 12-57—12-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-02, §§ I—XXVII, adopted March 26, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, this ordinance was treated as amending article V to read as herein set out. Formerly, such article pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 94-018, §§ 1—22 4-19-94. 
 
Sec. 12-67. - Authority, findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  These regulations are promulgated pursuant to and in conformity with Chapter 243 of the Local Government Code of Texas, as amended. The City Council of South Houston makes the following findings: 
(1)  That sexually oriented businesses require special supervision in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such businesses as well as the citizens of the communities where they locate; 
(2)  That permitting sexually oriented businesses is a legitimate means of accountability to help ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to help ensure that enterprise operators do not knowingly or carelessly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation; 
(3)  That sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have objectionable operational characteristics, especially when they are located in proximity to each other. Such proximity contributes to urban blight and downgrades the quality of life in adjacent areas; 
(4)  That sexually oriented businesses can exert dehumanizing influences on churches, schools, and day-care centers; have negative effects on property values; can contribute to increased criminal activities in surrounding areas and exert the same types of negative community influences on other forms of land uses; 
(5)  That a distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet for sexually oriented businesses from various types of establishments will help provide additional protection to the community from the adverse effects of sexually oriented businesses without depriving such businesses of adequate opportunities to locate within incorporated areas of the City of South Houston, Texas; and 
(6)  That the City Council of South Houston wants to help prevent adverse effects caused by sexually oriented businesses. The council also desires to help protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizenry; help protect the public from increased crime; help preserve the quality of life; help preserve property values and the character of surrounding neighborhoods, and help deter the spread of urban blight. 
(b)  It is the intent of the City of South Houston to exercise its regulatory powers permitted under Chapter 243 of the Local Government Code and to enact a content neutral order that addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses. The City of South Houston desires to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of sexually oriented businesses to promote and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of South Houston. The City Council of South Houston also desires to prohibit activities that merely serve as a front for activities prohibited by the Texas Penal Code, including, but not limited to, prostitution and the promotion of prostitution. 
(c)  These regulations have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction of the content of any communicative material, including sexually oriented material. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented material protected by the First Amendment of the United States, to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market or to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment. The promotion of obscene material (not protected by the First Amendment) can be prosecuted through separate criminal sanctions under the penal code. 
(d)  These regulations do not legalize anything prohibited under the Texas Penal Code or any other law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § I, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-68. - Administration. 
(a)  The City Council of South Houston, Texas, hereby designates and directs the Chief of Police of the City of South Houston, Texas, or his/her duly authorized representative(s) ("executive director") to accept applications for a sexually oriented business permit and to certify compliance with the location requirements. The City of South Houston also directs the Chief of Police of the City of South Houston to investigate, deny, issue, attach conditions to, and to suspend and revoke sexually oriented business permits (SOBPs) pursuant to the above authority and these regulations. 
(b)  The executive director may enforce these regulations. An appeal shall not automatically stay the effect of the executive director's determination. The chief of police and the South Houston Police Department are authorized to investigate sexually oriented businesses' service records and to investigate and enforce the provisions of this ordinance as set forth herein. 
Pursuant to Section 243.007(c) of the Local Government Code, the District Court has jurisdiction over a suit that arises from the denial, suspension or revocation of an SOBP by the county. 
Sections 243.010(a) and (b) of the Local Government Code, as amended, authorize the State of Texas to prosecute a violation of these regulations as a class A misdemeanor. 
The revocation or suspension of an SOBP shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of an SOBP pursuant to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § II, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-69. - Area covered by regulations. 
These regulations shall apply to sexually oriented business enterprises located in the incorporated areas of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § III, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-70. - Definitions. 
As used in these regulations: 
Adult bookstore, adult video store, or adult paraphernalia store: A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for money or any other form of compensation or consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, computer programs, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, as defined in this section. 
Adult move arcade or adult arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, computer screen, video player, television projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to twenty (20) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
Adult cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that features: 
(1)  Persons who appear totally nude, semi-nude, or in a state of nudity, as defined in this section; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined in this section; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, computer simulations, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides or other reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
Adult motel: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for money or any other form of compensation or consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other reproductions which are characterized by specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section; or has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is fewer than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is fewer than ten (10) hours. 
Adult movie picture theater: A commercial establishment where, for money or any other form of compensation or consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown and are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
Adult theater: a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features live performances characterized by the exposure, through any kind of media, of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
Allow: To let happen, cause, suffer, or permit, including the failure to prevent. 
Applicant: The individual or entity submitting the application for an SOBP. Where appropriate, this includes a written designated agent of the applicant. 
Cashier: Any employee who handles money or any other form of compensation or consideration from clients of an enterprise for services or products provided. 
Child-care facility: A building used as a day nursery, children's boarding home, child-placement agency or other place for the care or custody of children under fifteen (15) years of age, licensed by the State of Texas pursuant to Chapter 42 of the Texas Human Resources Code. 
Church or place of religious worship: A facility, including all structures and grounds, at which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with faith or for propagating a particular form of belief. 
City: The City of South Houston, Texas. 
Conviction: This term encompasses a defendant adjudged guilty of the offense charged. This term also encompasses a defendant who has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the offense in return for a grant of deferred adjudication, regardless of whether the sentence for the offense was ever imposed or whether the sentence was probated. 
Council: The duly elected members of the City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
County: Harris County, Texas, and its incorporated area. 
Dwelling: A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home, or any other building used for residential purposes, whether single family or multi-family, attached or detached, and regardless of whether tenant or owner occupied. 
Employee: Any person who works in or about an enterprise and renders any service whatsoever to the patrons of an enterprise and receives money or any other form of compensation or consideration for such service or work from the enterprise operator or owner of the enterprise or from the patrons thereof, excepting those persons who have an independent contractor relationship with the enterprise. 
Enterprise operator: An owner, manager, or other natural person principally in charge of a sexually oriented business enterprise (SOBE). 
Entertainment service: Any service provided by a cashier, enterprise owner, server, employee, or independent contractor or other similarly employed person at the sexually oriented business enterprise. This definition does not include persons providing repairs or maintenance to the premises or equipment. 
Escort: An individual who, for consideration, agrees or offers to privately model, dance, or similarly perform for another person, or to act as a private companion, guide or date for another person and offers a service intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
Escort agency: A business that, for consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes and offers a service intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
Executive director: The Chief of Police of the City of South Houston, Texas, or his/her designated representative. 
Hospital: A building used to provide in-patient medical care for the sick or injured. It is licensed pursuant to the Texas Hospital Licensing Law, Chapter 241 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, or is operated by an agency of the Federal Government, or is a convalescent facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 242 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
Interested party: Any person who owns or leases real property within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of a sexually oriented business enterprise; any City of South Houston official who is elected by residents of South Houston, Texas, including the South Houston Chief of Police. 
Live exhibition: A live performance by one or more individuals conducted in front of at least one patron. Live exhibitions include, but are not limited to, dancing, modeling, sword swallowing, juggling, acrobatic acts, wrestling, and pantomime. 
Nude modeling studio: Any place where a person appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas, as such term is defined in this section, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by another person who pays money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or state of nudity: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitalia, pubic region or female breasts; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitalia, pubic region or areola of a female breast. 
(3)  This includes material that is painted or applied to the body, such as paint, liquid latex or employment of any device or covering intended to give the appearance of or simulate the parts of the body listed in (1) or (2). 
(4)  This definition shall not include a mother in the act of nursing her child. 
Operate or cause to be operated: cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business enterprise whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Patron: Any paying or non-paying customer or client of a sexually oriented business enterprise including members of the public or club members invited or admitted to a sexually oriented business enterprise. 
Penal institution: A place designated by law for confinement of persons arrested for, charged with, or convicted of an offense. 
Person: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Principal business or primary business: 
(1)  A business where fifty (50) percent or more of gross floor area is devoted to the sale, display, or inventory of items that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, or that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, as defined herein, or 
(2)  a business where fifty (50) percent or more of gross receipts is derived from the sale or rental of items that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, or that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Public building: A building used by a federal, state, or local government that is open to the general public. 
Public park: A tract of land maintained by a federal, state, or local government dedicated for public use and accessible to the general public for recreational purposes, not including public roads, walkways, easements, and rights-of-way. This term shall also include locations owned by non-profit organizations that provide educational and recreational facilities. 
Regulations: Regulations or Ordinances of the City of South Houston, Texas, for the operation of Sexually Oriented Business Enterprises (SOBEs). 
School: A facility, including all attached playgrounds, dormitories, stadiums, and other appurtenances that are part of the facility used for the primary purpose of instruction or education, including primary or secondary schools, colleges, and universities, both public and private. 
Semi-nude: Any state of dress in which clothing or other matter opaquely covers no more than a human buttock, anus, male and female genitalia, or areola of a female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Server: An individual who serves patrons food or beverages in a sexually oriented business enterprise, including waiters, waitresses, hosts, hostesses, and bartenders. 
Sexual encounter center: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is totally nude, semi-nude or in a state of nudity. 
Sexually oriented business enterprise (SOBE): A commercial enterprise, the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. This definition includes, but is not limited to, sex parlors, nude studios, modeling studios, love parlors, adult bookstores, adult movie theaters, adult video arcades, adult movie arcades, adult video stores, adult motels, adult cabarets, escort agencies, and sexual encounter centers. The commercial enterprises or activities described above shall be subject to regulation under this order at any location at which they may occur, whether conducted within a building, a temporary enclosure, or out of doors. 
The term "SOBE" shall not be construed to include a: 
(1)  Business operated by or employing licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed cosmetologists, or licensed barbers that, as the primary business purpose, perform functions authorized under the license held; or 
(2)  Business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor that, as a major business purpose, is engaged in practicing the healing arts; 
(3)  Massage establishment which is properly registered under Chapter 752, Acts of the 69 th Legislature, Regular Session, 1985 (Article 4512K, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), as amended; 
(4)  Bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business is an adult bookstore, adult movie theater, or adult video store as defined in these regulations; 
(5)  Theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment, unless that business is an adult theater as defined in these regulations; 
(6)  Tanning facility that is properly licensed pursuant to Chapter 145 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, the Tanning Facility Act. 
SOBP: Sexually oriented business permit issued and regulated pursuant to these regulations. 
Sexually oriented modeling studio: Any place where a person appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas as defined herein, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by another person who pays money or any other form of compensation or consideration. 
This does not include modeling classes operated by a: 
(1)  Proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas, a college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  Private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  Structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
Specified anatomical areas: Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether opaquely covered, clothed, or nude. 
Specified sexual activities: includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether clothed or nude; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in (1) through (2) above. 
Totally nude: A person shall be considered to be totally nude as this term is used in this definition if the person's entire pubic region, genitals, or anus is not opaquely covered or if it is covered with a material that is painted or applied to the body, such as paint, liquid latex, or the employment of any device or covering used with the intention of giving the appearance of, or simulating, a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitalia, the pubic region or a female breast. 
Transfer of ownership or control: Includes: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or 
(2)  The transfer of a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, gift, or other means; 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § IV, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-71. - Classifications. 
(a)  Sexually oriented business enterprises are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult movie arcades or adult arcade; 
(2)  Adult bookstores, adult video stores, or adult paraphernalia stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult movie picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies and escorts; 
(8)  Nude modeling studios or sexually oriented modeling studios; 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(b)  The determination of whether an enterprise is a sexually oriented business enterprise (SOBE) shall be made by the executive director. This determination may be appealed to the members of the City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  The commercial enterprises or activities enumerated in this section shall be subject to regulation under this order at any location at which they may occur, whether conducted within a building, temporary enclosure, or out-of-doors. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § V, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-72. - SOBP required for enterprises. 
No person shall conduct business as an SOBE at any location in the incorporated areas of the City of South Houston covered by these regulations without a valid sexually oriented business permit (SOBP) issued in accordance with these regulations. It shall be an offense to operate an SOBE without a valid SOBP. 
(1)  A separate application and SOBP shall be required for each SOBE. 
(2)  Each location or structure located thereon of an SOBE is a separate enterprise for the purposes of these regulations. 
(3)  An SOBE open or operating without an SOBP is a public nuisance enjoinable under these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § VI, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-73. - SOBP displayed. 
The SOBP for an SOBE shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place in the SOBE for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § VII, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-74. - Enforcement. 
(a)  As stated in Chapter 243 of the Local Government Code of Texas, the City of South Houston, Texas, may file suit in district court for an injunction to prohibit a violation of these regulations. In addition, the person is also subject to prosecution for criminal violations. 
(b)  The designated counsel for the city is hereby authorized to file suit to enjoin violations of these regulations. A suit may be initiated upon information received from private citizens or any law enforcement agency. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person violates any one or more of these regulations. The criminal penalty for a violation of any one or more of these regulations is a class A misdemeanor. A class A misdemeanor is defined by and carries the penalties described by the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § VIII, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-75. - SOBP application. 
(a)  To obtain an SOBP, a complete application shall be filed with the executive director. 
(1)  The application shall be filed on the form provided by the executive director or on an accurate and legible copy of that form. 
(2)  The applicant shall apply in person at the office of the executive director at the South Houston Police Department at 1023 Dallas Street, South Houston, Texas. 
(3)  The hours applications may be submitted will be established by the executive director and published to the public. 
(4)  A notice of deficiencies shall be mailed by the executive director to the applicant within five (5) business days of receipt of the application, if all the information required by these regulations has not been provided in the application. 
(5)  A receipt shall be mailed by the executive director to the applicant within five (5) business days of submission of a complete application to the executive director. The SOBP application receipt is required to be displayed in clear view at the premises of an SOBE. Failure to do so will constitute an offense. 
(b)  All applications shall provide the following information. The information in subsections (1) and (2) immediately below will be made available to the public when an application is received: 
(1)  The full legal name and any other name used by the applicant. 
(2)  A general description of the SOBE, which shall include the address of the SOBE and the services and products which will be offered. The permit shall be valid only for the address provided in the application. Additionally, the application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants must comply with the City of South Houston's Code of Ordinances and shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of the City of South Houston's Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  The applicant's complete business license or permit history, including any permit or license which has been issued to the applicant by any agency, board, city, county, or state, and any professional or vocational license or permit. This shall include those that have expired or are currently in effect and shall include any license or permit that has been denied, or was issued to the applicant and subsequently revoked or suspended. If there have been licenses or permits which were denied, revoked or suspended, the permit history shall include the reason for that action. 
(4)  If the applicant intends to operate the SOBE under an assumed name, a copy of the assumed name certificate filed in compliance with Chapter 36 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code. 
(5)  If the SOBE is licensed under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the application shall be filed and the enterprise shall conduct business under the name shown on the liquor license. 
(6)  A non-refundable fee of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) shall be paid in the form of a check drawn on a business or corporate account or cashier's check. Cash will not be accepted. 
(7)  A statement under oath that: 
a.  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; and 
b.  The applicant has read and understands these regulations; and 
c.  The applicant authorizes the executive director to seek such information from any third party or entity he/she requires to confirm any statements set forth in the application. 
(c)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant shall also provide: 
(1)  Each of the applicant's residential addresses for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, indicating the dates of each residence and including the present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's business, occupation, and employment history for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application, indicating the applicable dates and addresses; 
(3)  Documentation that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(4)  The applicant's height, eye color and natural hair color; 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's valid driver's license or Texas Department of Transportation identification card; 
(6)  Other identification and information as determined by the executive director to be reasonably necessary in order to confirm the validity of information provided in the application; and 
(7)  A mailing address where the applicant can be reliably contacted. 
(d)  If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, joint venture, or other similar business entity, the applicant shall also provide: 
(1)  A Texas corporation shall provide a copy of its Articles of Incorporation with amendments, names and residential addresses of all current officers and directors, and the name and address of each stockholder holding more than fifty (50) percent of the stock of the corporation; 
(2)  A foreign corporation shall provide a certified copy of the authority to transact business in Texas, with all amendments, names and residential addresses of current officers and directors, and names and addresses of each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock of the corporation; 
(3)  A general partnership shall provide the name and residential address of each of the partners; 
(4)  A limited partnership shall provide the name and residential address of its general and limited partners and a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the office of the secretary of state, and amendments included; 
(5)  If one or more of the general or limited partners is a corporation, the information required of corporate applicants shall be included in the application in addition to the requirements for general or limited partnerships; 
(6)  A joint venture, limited liability company or other similar entity shall provide the names and residential addresses of the participants and their valid drivers license numbers or Texas Department of Public Safety identification card numbers if the participants are individuals; if any participant is a corporation or partnership, the applicable information required in items (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) above shall be provided. 
(e)  Applicants shall also provide: 
(1)  The name and residential address of each enterprise operator; 
(2)  The street address, the mailing address, and full legal description of the parcel on which the SOBE is to be located; 
(3)  The name and mailing address of each owner of the real property at which the business is to be located and a complete and fully executed copy of any lease or rental agreement; 
(4)  A reliable estimate of the number of employees, including a description of the capacities in which they will be employed; a general description of the management structure for the enterprise; and 
(5)  A certification provided by a registered professional land surveyor that the proposed enterprise will be located at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the protected uses described in section 12-76; SOBEs currently permitted under previously enacted sexually oriented business regulations are not required to comply with this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § IX, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2011-17, § 2, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 12-76. - Location requirements. 
(a)  The SOBE must be located a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from each of the property uses, including: 
(1)  A child care facility, 
(2)  A church or place of religious worship, 
(3)  A dwelling, 
(4)  A hospital, 
(5)  A public building, 
(6)  A public park, 
(7)  A school, 
(8)  Another sexually oriented business enterprise, 
(9)  A penal institution, and 
(10)  Where not more than two (2) other enterprises are located within a distance of two thousand (2,000) feet of the proposed location. 
(b)  This subsection shall apply only to property uses in existence at that location at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the application. 
(c)  For the purposes of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight line from the nearest portion of the proposed SOBE property line to the nearest portion of the property line of the property uses listed above. These distance restrictions apply to an identified property use whether or not the building or appurtenance used for an identified property use is located within the incorporated area of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(d)  A previously permitted SOBE lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location of a protected property use described above subsequent to the conforming operation of the enterprise. 
(e)  Once permitted, an SOBE shall not cause the structure to be enlarged or relocated on the property in such a manner to bring it in non-compliance with the location regulations. Additionally, it shall be an offense if an SOBE increases its floor area occupied by the business by more than thirty (30) percent from the floor area as it existed on April 19, 1994. If the floor area has previously been enlarged since April 19, 1994, it shall be an offense for an SOBE to increase its floor area occupied by the business. It shall be an offense to do so. 
(f)  All currently permitted SOBEs that are not in compliance with the required location from specified property uses will be grandfathered with regard to the property distance requirements and such distance requirements shall not apply, including the enlargement and relocation on the property provisions contained in (e) above. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § X, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-77. - Notification of public and interested parties. 
(a)  Posting: The applicant shall, not later than the 30 th day before the date the application is filed with the executive director, post outdoor signs at the property where the proposed SOBE will be located. The following is required: 
(1)  Sign(s) shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches in width times thirty-six (36) inches in height in size and legibly state that an SOBP application will be filed with the Executive Director of South Houston, Texas. 
(2)  Sign(s) shall state that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the premises, the name and business address of the applicant, the date the application will be filed with the executive director, and the phone number for the Chief of Police of the South Houston Police Department. Sign(s) shall inform the public that persons can contact that office for more information about the application. 
(3)  Each letter on the sign(s) must be at least one and one-half (1.5) inches times two (2) inches in size. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the applicant to erect and maintain each sign so that it is in a location clearly visible from the public sidewalk, road, or highway. If a side of the property is longer than three hundred (300) feet, one sign shall be erected in each three hundred (300) foot increment of the property. 
(5)  The sign(s) must remain in place until the application has been approved or denied by the executive director. 
(6)  If the executive director determines that the sign(s) have not been erected or maintained pursuant to the requirements of this subsection, a written notice shall be issued to the applicant identifying the deficiencies. In addition, no action shall be taken on the application until the sign(s) have been erected and maintained as required. 
(b)  Notice: Every applicant for a new SOBP license shall give notice of the application to all owners and lessees of real property within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of property on which the SOBP is requested. It is the applicant's responsibility to determine who the property owners and lessees are. Harris County Central Appraisal District Records may be used for making this determination. A copy of the list of those persons notified with their addresses must be provided to the executive director. These owners and lessees are interested parties (as the term is defined in these regulations) in any public hearing process connected with the SOBP, including revocation hearings. The owners and lessees of these properties shall be notified as required in this subsection even if the property is not located in the incorporated area of South Houston, Texas. Owners and lessees of property within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed location that are not within the incorporated areas of South Houston, Texas, shall have the same rights under this subsection as the residents of the incorporated areas of South Houston, Texas. The following is also required: 
(1)  Notices to the owners and lessees shall be sent within two (2) business days after the date the executive director issues the receipt for the application. The notice sent shall contain a legible copy of the "Notice to Interested Parties" included in the application form provided by the executive director and shall contain the information described in subsections 12-75(b)(1) and (2). The "Notice to Interested Parties" shall also contain the procedures for requesting and appearing at the hearing. 
(2)  Notice shall be given by posting the notice in the U. S. Mail, properly addressed and with postage prepaid. 
(3)  Each property owner and lessee so notified shall have fifteen (15) days from the date the executive director issues the receipt for the application to file a request for a public hearing. The public hearing will be conducted as provided in section 12-80. 
(c)  An applicant for a renewal SOBP or SOBEs permitted under any previously enacted sexually oriented business regulations are not required to meet the posting and notice requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XI, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-78. - Ongoing duties of new applicants and new holders of SOBPs pursuant to this enactment. 
(a)  Applicants and holders of SOBPs other than those permitted under any previously enacted sexually oriented business regulating shall be under a continuing affirmative duty while the application is pending and during the effective dates of the SOBP to notify the executive director of any of the following events. Notice is to be provided in writing and delivered no later than five (5) business days after the occurrence of: 
(1)  Address and/or name change of the applicant or holder; 
(2)  Revocation or suspension of any permits or licenses listed in the applicant's or holder's permit history; 
(3)  An enterprise operator shall notify the executive director when the enterprise operator learns that any employee or independent contractor providing entertainment or services at the SOBE has been formally charged with a crime listed in this regulation and the crime is alleged to have occurred on the premises of the SOBE. 
(b)  The SOBE shall comply with the conditions attached to the SOBP pursuant to the provisions of this regulation. Each and every day the SOBE fails to comply with an SOBP condition is a separate violation of these regulations. 
(c)  An SOBE shall notify the executive director immediately if an SOBP is lost or stolen. If notice of loss has not been provided to the executive director and an SOBP is found in the possession of any person other than the enterprise operator, it shall be presumed that the enterprise operator had knowledge of the illegal use of the SOBP, and participated in the attempt to transfer the permit. 
(d)  (1)  It shall be a condition of each sexually oriented business permit that each permit holder shall obtain from each employee, independent contractor or any other person who works for or performs at the sexually oriented business the following information: 
(i)  The employee or contractor's full legal name, and any other names (including "stage" names) and aliases used by the individual; 
(ii)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(iii)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(iv)  Present residence address and telephone number; 
(v)  A photo-copy of his/her driver's permit, United States military identification or other state identification card information; 
(vi)  Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(vii)  A 3"×5" color photograph of the person clearly showing his/her face. 
(2)  The licensee shall keep the information required hereby on the premises and exhibit it, upon request, to the executive director. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XII, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 3-18-03)  
Sec. 12-79. - Public hearing on health and safety. 
(a)  When the executive director receives a written request for a public hearing concerning a new SOBP application, the executive director shall confirm that it: 
(1)  Is from an applicant or interested party; 
(2)  Specifically identifies the SOBP application at issue; 
(3)  Is timely filed; and 
(4)  Specifically identifies health and safety concerns affected by the SOBE. 
(b)  If the request meets the criteria above, the executive director shall then initiate the public hearing procedure, as follows: 
(1)  A hearing official, appointed by the Mayor of South Houston, Texas, shall be contacted by the executive director and a date set for the public hearing. 
(2)  The hearing shall be scheduled at a public building within the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(3)  The hearing shall be scheduled either on a weekday at 7:00 p.m. or on a Saturday morning at 9:30 a.m. 
(4)  The executive director shall send the applicant a written notice of hearing at least fifteen (15) days in advance, stating the date, time and place of the hearing. The executive director shall make a copy of the notice of hearing available to the public by posting at the city hall. 
(5)  The executive director shall notify all interested parties requesting a hearing of the hearing by sending them a copy of the written notice of hearing at least ten (10) days in advance. 
(6)  Publicizing the hearing in a newspaper shall be the responsibility of the applicant who requested the permit. The publication must be in a newspaper of general circulation in South Houston, Texas; Houston, Texas; and Pasadena, Texas; and must be at least three (3) columns by five (5) inches and located in retail display. The executive director shall make available to the public a copy of any request for hearing and the notice of hearing. 
(7)  The executive director shall place a notice of hearing sign at the location identified in the application containing the time and place of the hearing. 
(8)  The hearing may be rescheduled by the hearing official for good cause, including, for example, a large number of requests for a hearing that indicates strong public interest in the matter. The hearing may be rescheduled a second time if rescheduling was due to emergency circumstances, such as extreme weather conditions. If rescheduled, the new notice of hearing shall be available to the public at the South Houston City Hall and the applicant must republish the notice using the procedure set forth in subsection (6) above. 
(9)  The applicant may request that a court reporter make a record of the hearing. The applicant must: 
a.  Make this request at least five (5) days prior to the hearing, and 
b.  Bear the cost of making an official record and one (1) additional transcript for the county. 
(10)  The hearing official shall arrange for the court reporter to take the record of the hearing, including exhibits and testimony. One copy of the transcript shall be provided to the hearing official to become the property of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  If the request for public hearing is deficient, the executive director shall return it to the person who submitted the request with a notation stating the deficiency. A request that does not comply with the requirements stated in subsections (a) above or (d) below shall not extend the period of time in which a request for hearing may be filed. 
(d)  If the executive director receives a request for a public hearing after the SOBP has been issued or renewed, the late request shall be attached to the SOBP records. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled when the next renewal application is filed if (i) the late request identifies health and safety concerns affected by the SOBE; (ii) the concerns were not addressed in the current SOBP: (iii) the request was filed by an interested party; and (iv) the requesting party still desires to have a hearing. Upon determining all these conditions exist, the executive director shall initiate the hearing as set out in subsection (a). 
(e)  The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing official under the following guidelines. The hearing official shall liberally construe these guidelines to allow the public input to protect the health and safety of a community affected by the location of an SOBE and to allow the applicant to address these concerns: 
(1)  Applicants and interested parties are entitled to the assistance of counsel obtained at their own expense. 
(2)  Applicants and interested parties may expressly waive the right to counsel. 
(3)  The hearing official shall, upon prior request, provide for appropriate facilities for any disabled person to be able to participate in the hearing. This shall include, but not be limited to: interpreters for deaf or hearing impaired participants, wheel chair access, and special seating arrangements. 
(4)  Participants in the proceeding may be allowed to supply interpreters for language translation and the hearing official shall accommodate the translation of the proceeding. 
(5)  The hearing official may exclude evidence that is irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious. Relevance and materiality shall be evaluated by the relationship of the evidence to health and safety concerns directly related to the SOBP at issue, and conditions that may be attached to the SOBP to address those concerns. The hearing is not limited to the health and safety concerns specifically identified in the hearing request. 
(6)  If no request is made by the applicant for an official record, any person may record, videotape, or transcribe the hearing provided there is no interference with the proceedings. The hearing official shall have the power to limit any interference with the proceedings. 
(f)  The hearing official may continue the hearing to a date no later than ten (10) days after the initial hearing if: 
(1)  The hearing has lasted at least two and one-half (2½) hours and it appears to the hearing official that a significant amount of time is still required to fully present the public concerns and potential solutions to those concerns; or 
(2)  Issues have been raised at the hearing requiring additional research needed in order to develop appropriate conditions to be attached to the SOBP or that the parties need additional time to develop a solution to issues identified at the hearing. 
(3)  A continuance shall not be for the purpose of delay or for developing new evidence. 
(g)  After the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing official shall produce a written statement containing the official's findings of public health and safety concerns and recommendations for conditions to be attached to the SOBP. The recommendations shall be forwarded to the executive director, the applicant, and all interested parties who requested the hearing. When the hearing official determines that public health and safety concerns exist, the executive director shall attach conditions as part of the SOBP. If no official record of the hearing has been requested, the hearing official's statement shall be the official record of the public hearing. The hearing official may consult with the executive director for the purpose of developing appropriate conditions to address the health and safety concerns shown at the hearing. 
(h)  If evidence is produced at the hearing that would support denial of the SOBP, the hearing official shall provide that information to the executive director, who shall investigate whether the evidence warrants denial or revocation of the SOBP under these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XIII, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-80. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  An SOBP shall be issued within forty-five (45) days of submission of a complete application, unless the application is denied. The forty-five (45) days shall run from the date the executive director issues the receipt for applicant's application for the permit. 
(b)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the SOBE. The license shall be and remain posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the SOBE so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(c)  The executive director shall defer determination of whether to issue an SOBP until final disposition of any charge of any of the crimes listed in subsection 12-80(e)(4)a.—j. that is pending or arises during the investigation period. No temporary SOBP shall be issued before there is a final determination of the criminal charge. 
(d)  If the executive director finds that the determination of whether an SOBP can be issued cannot be made within the time period stated in subsection (a) above, a written notice stating the reasons for the delay shall be sent to the applicant within that time period. 
(e)  The SOBP shall be denied upon the finding by the executive director of any of the following facts: 
(1)  The applicant or (if the applicant is a corporation, general or limited partnership, or other business entity) any officer, director, partner, or participant required to be identified in the application, was convicted of any of the crimes listed below and fewer than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement and supervision (if applicable) imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
(2)  Fewer than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction and supervision (if applicable), whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or 
(3)  Fewer than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement and supervision (if applicable) for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within a 24-month period. 
(4)  The crimes considered in applying this section are: 
a.  Prostitution; promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; compelling prostitution; obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; or possession of child pornography as described in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code; 
b.  Public lewdness; indecent exposure; or indecency with a child as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code; 
c.  Sexual assault; or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code; 
d.  Incest; solicitation of a child; or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; 
e.  Gambling; gambling promotion; keeping a gambling place; communicating gambling information; possession of gambling devices or equipment; or possession of gambling paraphernalia as described in Chapter 47 of the Texas Penal Code; 
f.  Forgery; credit card abuse; or commercial bribery as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code; 
g.  A criminal offense as described in Chapter 481, Subchapter D of the Health and Safety Code; 
h.  A criminal offense as described in Chapter 34 of the Texas Penal Code; 
i  Criminal attempt; conspiracy; or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; or any other offense in another state that, if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the aforementioned offenses; or 
j.  A violation of these regulations described in subsection 12-89(a). 
(5)  The SOBE, as proposed, is a prohibited SOBE pursuant to subsection 12-89(b); the SOBE does not meet all the requirements of these regulations; or the SOBE is otherwise prohibited by local, state, or federal law; 
(6)  The applicant has knowingly made a misleading statement of a material fact by omitting or falsifying information in the application for the SOBP or failed to provide information reasonably necessary for the issuance of an SOBP in the application or at any time during the application process. 
(7)  The applicant (if an individual) is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(8)  The applicant or enterprise operator has had an SOBP revoked for the same SOBE or for another SOBE located at the same business location within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date the application was filed; 
(9)  An applicant or any individual related or associated with the applicant is delinquent in the payment to the City of South Houston, Texas, fees, fines, or penalties assessed or imposed regarding the operation of an SOBE or has allowed any of its ad valorem taxes, whether on the property subject to these regulations or any other real or personal property owned by the applicant, owed to the City of South Houston, Texas, or to any taxing jurisdiction which levies ad valorem taxes on property owned in the City of South Houston, Texas, to become delinquent: provided that nothing herein shall impair the right of the applicant to challenge, in accordance with the requirements of Chapters 41 and 42 of the Tax Code, the appraised value of any of its property if, but only if, it follows all steps to perfect that challenge in the year in which the disputed appraisal is rendered; 
(10)  The application or renewal fee required by these regulations has not been paid; or 
(11)  An applicant or enterprise operator has owned or been employed in a managerial capacity of a business or location within the preceding twelve (12) months and during that period the business or location constituted a common or public nuisance as defined in Chapter 125 of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code. 
(f)  The executive director shall attach reasonable conditions on an SOBP pursuant to the recommendations of the hearing officer if a public hearing was held under section 12-80. These conditions shall address the public health and safety concerns identified in the hearing. 
(g)  An SOBP shall be valid for one year from the date it is issued, unless the SOBP is revoked or suspended pursuant to these regulations. 
(h)  In the event the executive director determines that the SOBP is denied pursuant to these regulations, the applicant shall be given written notice of the reason for that determination. The written notice does not prohibit the City of South Houston, Texas, in litigation on appeal, from presenting evidence of additional or alternative facts that support denial of the SOBP. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XIV, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-81. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The executive director shall have the authority and power to initiate a proceeding to revoke or suspend an SOBP if there is probable cause to believe that one or more of the following events or conditions has occurred: 
(1)  The enterprise operator negligently allowed a person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain on the premises of the SOBE during the hours of operation; 
(2)  The enterprise failed to comply with a duty specifically imposed by these regulations; 
(3)  The applicant provided materially false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the original or renewal SOBP application form; 
(4)  The SOBP should not have been issued pursuant to these regulations; or 
(5)  The enterprise operator commits or is convicted of a criminal offense listed in subsections 12-80(e)(4)a.—j. of these regulations. 
(b)  If probable cause is found to believe any of the stated events or conditions occurred, the executive director shall forward to the SOBP holder or its designated agent a written notice of revocation. The notice shall set out the reasons for the action. Subject to a request for hearing pursuant to this section, the revocation shall become final on the eleventh (11 th ) business day after notice is provided pursuant to these regulations. 
(c)  The SOBE or its designated agent shall have the opportunity to appear before a hearing examiner appointed by the mayor upon written request submitted to the executive director within ten (10) business days of delivery of the notice of revocation. The hearing examiner shall not have participated in any investigation of the alleged grounds for the revocation. The hearing will be held as soon as is reasonably possible, but preferably within fourteen (14) business days of the request for hearing. The SOBE and the executive director will be provided an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. They also may be represented by legal counsel. The rules of civil evidence for a non-jury trial shall apply. 
(d)  Upon finding that the facts presented at the hearing support a finding that grounds exist for revoking or suspending the SOBP, the hearing examiner may request that the parties present relevant evidence to show whether suspension or revocation of the SOBP is more appropriate. The hearing examiner may also request that evidence be presented for the purpose of identifying appropriate conditions to be attached to an SOBP if the SOBP is suspended. Reasonable conditions may be attached to an SOBP by the hearing examiner based on the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(e)  If the hearing examiner determines that an SOBP should be revoked, the hearing examiner shall issue a written order revoking the SOBP when notice is provided to the enterprise operator pursuant to these regulations. 
(f)  If the hearing examiner determines, based upon the nature of the violations, that a suspension in lieu of revocation is appropriate, operation of the SOBP may be suspended for a period of time not to exceed two (2) weeks. The hearing examiner shall issue a written order suspending the SOBP and attaching conditions, if applicable, upon notice to the enterprise operator pursuant to these regulations. 
(g)  Revocation shall be subject to the hearing provisions of this section. But revocation shall take immediate effect upon notice being sent, subject to reinstatement resulting from appeal, when there is a necessity for immediate action to protect the public from injury or imminent danger. 
(h)  A revocation shall be in effect for a minimum of three (3) months. After three (3) months, another application could be made for an SOBP. The circumstances surrounding the revocation may be considered by the executive director. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XV, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-82. - Notice. 
(a)  Any notice required to be given by the executive director under these regulations to any applicant or enterprise operator may be given by personal delivery or by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the SOBP or the most recent notice of address change. 
(b)  Mailed notice shall be deemed served five (5) days after deposit in the United States mail. Personal notice shall be deemed served when delivered to an enterprise operator or, if the enterprise operator is not available, posted at the entrance to the SOBE. If the notice is served or posted, the individual serving or posting the notice will note the time and date of his/her action on a copy of the notice posted and return the copy to the executive director. 
(c)  If a notice given by mail is returned by the postal service as undeliverable, it will be presumed the enterprise operator did not comply with the affirmative duty to notify the executive director of any change of address. This presumption may be rebutted by the enterprise owner's showing there was an error on the part of the post office. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XVI, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-83. - Temporary SOBP provisions. 
If the executive director fails to take action on an application within the times specified, or if the hearing officer fails to timely conduct or give notice of the decision after the hearing, the applicant shall be entitled to an immediate issuance of a temporary SOBP upon written demand. The applicant must file the demand with the executive director. A temporary SOBP shall be valid only until notice of the executive director's action on the application or the hearing examiner's order. This section shall not apply if the delay is wholly or partially caused by the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XVII, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-84. - SOBP renewals. 
(a)  SOBP renewal applications must be filed not more than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the SOBP. The renewal application form will be provided by the executive director. 
(b)  An annual non-refundable renewal fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) will accompany the application for renewal to defray costs of inspections and investigation. Only cashier checks and checks drawn on business or corporate accounts will be accepted. Cash will not be accepted. 
(c)  The renewal application must contain: 
(1)  Certification by the applicant that there have been no changes in the information provided in the initial application or the information which has changed since the initial application, supported by related documentation as required in the initial application. 
(2)  Certification the SOBE is in operation. The permit will not be renewed if the SOBE has not commenced operation as proposed in the initial SOBP application. 
(d)  The executive director shall determine if the permit may be renewed based on the information contained in the renewal application. The renewal permit will be denied upon a finding of any of the conditions identified in subsections 12-80(e) (4)a.—j. Notice of renewal or denial will be issued within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the completed renewal application or by the expiration date of the previous SOBP, whichever period is longer. 
(e)  If a renewal application is submitted fewer than fifteen (15) days before the previous SOBP expires, there shall be no temporary SOBP issued to extend the SOBP. The original SOBP will expire and, until the executive director's determination on renewal, there will be no valid SOBP for operation during that period. Upon expiration of an SOBP, the City of South Houston, Texas, shall mail a notice to the SOBE advising that the SOBP has expired. Such notice shall be mailed to the SOBE within five (5) days of the expiration of the SOBP. The SOBE shall have thirty (30) days from the date of receipt to renew its expired SOBP. The renewal fee for an expired SOBP shall be nine hundred dollars ($900.00). 
(f)  If a permit has been suspended pursuant to section 12-81 of these regulations, the renewed permit will be suspended until the suspension period has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XVIII, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-85. - Investigation. 
Upon receiving the application for an SOBP or an application for renewal, the executive director shall perform an investigation to determine compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XIX, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-86. - Inspections. 
The executive director or his/her designees shall make such reasonable, periodic inspections of the premises of all SOBEs that are permitted under these regulations as they deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XX, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-87. - Transfer prohibited of new SOBPs. 
(a)  A new SOBP issued under these regulations is not transferable, assignable, or divisible. It is a violation of these regulations for any person or other legal entity to attempt to do so. Upon transfer by bequest or operation of law upon the death of the SOBP holder, the SOBP will continue in effect for forty-five (45) days after the death of the SOBP holder. Upon the filing of a new application and fee, and posting the application with the prior SOBP, the SOBE may continue to operate until the final determination on the new SOBP. In no application is filed within forty-five (45) days after the death of the SOBP holder, the SOBE shall be in violation of these regulations each and every day it continues to operate without a new SOBP. 
(b)  If an SOBE had been previously permitted under any prior enacted SOB ordinance or regulation, its permit may be transferred to a new operator upon notification to the Executive Director by submitting an SOBP transfer form and payment of a one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) transfer fee. A transference of an existing SOBP must qualify as a new applicant for an SOBP. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XXI, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-88. - Lost or destroyed SOBP. 
(a)  If an SOBP is lost or destroyed, a replacement may be obtained by filing a lost SOBP application and paying a lost permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(b)  A replacement SOBP will be issued immediately upon confirmation of the identity of the applicant through the executive director's records. A replacement permit will expire on the same date as the original permit. 
(c)  It shall not be a defense to prosecution for conducting business without an SOBP that an SOBP was lost or stolen. An SOBE may not conduct business as an SOBE, in the areas covered under these regulations, until a replacement SOBP is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XXII, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-89. - Operating requirements for enterprises. 
(a)  The following shall be violations of these regulations punishable as authorized in Section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code. Each day a violation continues constitutes and is punishable as a separate offense: 
(1)  For any employee, enterprise operator or other SOBP holder to negligently allow any person below the age of eighteen (18) years to remain upon the premises or within the confines of the SOBE during the hours of operation; 
(2)  For any SOBE to exhibit signs, billboards, advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials at the premises that are characterized by specified sexual activities or specified prohibited anatomical areas and are visible from a public road, sidewalk, or other public place; 
(3)  For any person to conduct business as an SOBE in the incorporated areas of South Houston, Texas, without a valid SOBP issued in accordance with these regulations; 
(4)  For any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, duplicate, or alter an SOBP; 
(5)  For any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful material representation, written or oral, or in any other way knowingly conceal any material fact required in the SOBP application. 
(6)  For the enterprise operator to fail to comply with the conditions attached to the SOBP; each and every day the SOBE fails to comply with an SOBP condition is a violation of these regulations. 
(7)  For any person to attempt to transfer, assign, or devise an SOBP unless otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  The following categories of SOBEs are prohibited: 
(1)  Sexually oriented modeling studios or nude modeling studios; 
(2)  Escort agencies; 
(3)  Escorts; 
(4)  Sexual encounter centers; and 
(5)  Any SOBE whose employees appear in a state of total nudity, except SOBEs which were previously permitted under any previously enacted ordinances or regulations; and 
It is a violation of these regulations to engage in prohibited SOBEs. Any person found to be engaged or participating in the business of a prohibited SOBE will be subject to the penalties and enforcement provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XXIII, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-90. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than twelve (12) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an SOBE adult motel under these regulations if the motel also provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of allowing a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(c)  An adult motel permitted pursuant to these regulations may have a resident manager living on site. This shall not be considered a dwelling under the location requirements of section 12-76. 
(d)  No individuals under the age of eighteen (18) may live on the site of an adult motel. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XXIV, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-91. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated an SOBE or any other enterprise that exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of fewer than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor space, a film, motion picture, video cassette, DVD, computer program, or other visual reproductions, depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, has the duty to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The SOBE has the duty to maintain at least one employee on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises; 
(2)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from the owner, operator, or manager's station of every area of the premises, excluding restrooms, to which any patron is allowed access for any purpose; and 
(3)  If the premises has two (2) or more owners, operators, or managers' stations designated, the interior of the premises must be configured so that there is an unobstructed direct line of sight view from at least one station to all portions of the premises where patrons are allowed access, excluding restrooms. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XXV, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-92. - Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of these regulations to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of an SOBE at any time the SOBE is open for business. 
(b)  An SOBE has the duty to station an attendant at each public entrance to the enterprise at all times during the SOBE's business hours. The attendant shall not allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to enter the SOBE. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless the attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A facially valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A facially valid personal identification certificate issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XXVI, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 12-93. - Operative date/amended and superseded regulations. 
The effective date of these regulations is April 3, 2002. 
Except as otherwise stated below, these regulations supplement any previously enacted SOB ordinances or regulations enacted by the City of South Houston, Texas. 
Should any provision in these regulations directly conflict with any provision contained in any previously enacted ordinances or regulations enacted by the City of South Houston, Texas, the language contained in these regulations will control, but only to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § XXVII, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 1, 4-2-02)  
Secs. 12-94—12-98. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 12-99. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner or occupant means the record owner of the lot or parcel of land or other person specifically authorized in writing by the record owner to authorize the placement of any painting, scratching, writing or inscription upon the owner's property, or the tenant of a residential or commercial property. 
Unauthorized means without the consent of the owner or occupant or without authority of law, regulation or ordinance. Unless the owner proves otherwise, lack of consent will be presumed under circumstances tending to show (i) the absence of evidence of specific authorization of the visual blight by the owner, (ii) that the visual blight is inconsistent with the design and use of the subject property, or (iii) that the person causing the visual blight was unknown to the owner. 
Visual blight means any unauthorized graffiti or any other unauthorized form of painting, scratching, writing or inscription, including, without limitation, initials, slogans, or drawings. Regardless of the content or nature of the material that has been applied to any wall, building, fence, sign, or other structure or surface and is visible from any public property or right-of-way or is visible from the private property of another person. 
(Ord. No. 97-013, § 2, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 12-100. - Declaration; notice. 
Visual blight is declared to be a public nuisance. Whenever the existence of visual blight on any lot or parcel of real estate situated within the city shall come to the knowledge of the building official or his representative, such official may forthwith cause a written notice identifying the visual blight and directing its removal to be delivered to the owner of the property, provided that the time allowed in the notice for abatement of the nuisance shall not be less than ten (10) days, and such a notice shall further state that the owner is entitled to request a hearing to be held in the manner described herein. 
(Ord. No. 97-013, § 3, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 12-101. - Hearing. 
The owner or occupant of a lot or parcel subject to abatement under this article may request a hearing by notifying the building inspector within ten (10) days following the date the city delivers the required notice. The hearing shall be conducted by the building inspector for the purpose of determining whether the conditions constitute a public nuisance under the provisions of this article. Unless notice is waived by the owner, the owner shall be provided written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior thereto. At the hearing, the owner or occupant and city officials may present any evidence relevant to the proceedings, in accordance with reasonable rules adopted by the city council. If the building inspector finds that conditions constituting a nuisance hereunder exist, the building inspector shall issue an order so stating. 
(Ord. No. 97-013, § 4, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 12-102. - Abatement by the city; expenses and liens. 
(a)  The city shall be authorized to carry out the abatement of visual blight on any property with fifty (50) percent of the costs charged to the owner or occupant, provided that the property's owner or occupant requests or consents to such abatement within ten (10) days of notification from the building official or an authorized representative. Extensions may be granted at the discretion of the building official or an authorized representative. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant fails to abate the visual blight, request or consent to its removal by the city, or request a hearing, or if it is determined at a hearing that the condition of the property constitutes a nuisance under this article, then the city shall be authorized to carry out the abatement of the visual blight and to assess its expenses and place a lien on the property. 
(c)  If a lien is to be filed, the building official of the city shall file a statement of expenses incurred under this article, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made, with the county clerk and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of the law. 
The amount of such expenses shall bear six (6) percent interest per annum as allowed by law from the date such statement is filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city and the statement of expenses so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvement. The building official is authorized to accept payments for such liens in installments and give releases or partial releases as necessary. 
(d)  If the abatement involves painting the blighted surface, the city will paint over the visual blight area, but paint may not match exactly. 
(e)  The city council authorizes the use of funds and provision of material as available for this graffiti abatement program, including application to a reward fund including monies recovered by fines assessed by the municipal court against perpetrators of graffiti vandalism; and including provision of free paint to volunteer groups for anti-graffiti efforts. 
(Ord. No. 97-013, § 5, 5-13-97)  
Secs. 12-103—12-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 97-026, § 1, adopted September 9, 1997, repealed article VII in its entirety. Formerly, such article pertained to public dances, dancehalls and nightclubs and derived from Ord. No. 97-024, 8-26-97. 
 
Secs. 12-111—12-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENCES OF SEXUAL OFFENDERS 
 
Sec. 12-151. - Findings and intent. 
That repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residences. 
(Ord. No. 2006-20, § 1, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 12-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2006-20, § 2, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 12-153. - Sexual offenders' residence prohibition; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  If a person is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's sex offender database, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including but not limited to, a school, day-care facility, playground, public or private youth center, neighborhood or public swimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas § 481.134. It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if the person's record appears on the database. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer or nearest property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the outer or nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. A map generally depicting the prohibited areas or zones is attached to this article for representation purposes. The city shall review this map at least annually for changes. 
(c)  In cases of dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the measurement to prove otherwise. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation that violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  Exceptions. A person residing within one thousand (1,000) feet of those places where children commonly gather, as specified herein, does not commit a violation of this article if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the date of the adoption of this article. 
(2)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person is a minor. 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2006-20, § 3, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, § 2, 8-14-12)  
Sec. 12-154. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sexual offenders; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful to sell, let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, motor home, trailer, boat or other conveyance with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this article, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, motor home, trailer, boat or other conveyance is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including but not limited to, a school, day-care facility, playground, public or private, youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Art. 481.134. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2006-20, § 4, 7-11-06)  
Chapter 13 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 732, adopted Dec. 3, 1985, amended Ch. 13 to read as herein set out. Prior to said amendment, Ch. 13 pertained to mobile homes and mobile home parks and was composed of substantive provisions contained in Art. I, §§ 13-1—13-3; Art. II, §§ 13-16—13-22; Art. III, Div. 1, §§ 13-34, 13-35, and Div. 2, §§ 13-44—13-52; Art. IV, Div. 1, §§ 13-64—13-78, and Div. 2, §§ 13-86—13-95. These former substantive provisions of Ch. 13 derived from Ord. No. 585, §§ 1—7 and 9, adopted Dec. 1, 1970. 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 6; electrical code, Ch. 8; plumbing and gas fitting, Ch. 17; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 24; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases to be given special definitions and contained in this chapter are defined as follows. Words or phrases not specially defined herein shall be defined in accordance with their accepted meaning as used in context with the pertinent subject or as further defined in other ordinances or resolutions passed by the city council of the City of South Houston. 
License: An authorization, or written evidence thereof, issued by the City of South Houston, to maintain and operate a mobile home park within its corporate limits, and an authorization, or written evidence thereof to place a mobile home on private property. 
Mobile home: A one-family dwelling unit of vehicular, portable design built on a chassis and designed to be moved from one site to another by a power connected thereto. 
Mobile home park: Any lot, lots, block, tract or parcel of land used, in whole or in part, for mobile home parking facilities and accommodations provided by day, week, or for a period of time, with or without compensations, composed of two (2) or more units for human habitation, or living, or sleeping quarters incidental thereto. It is the complex for which mobile home park permits are issued. 
Occupant: A person having custody and control of a mobile home, or a member of the family of such person within the third degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity and living with such person in such trailer. 
Owner: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or groups thereof, who has title to or control, direction, maintenance, and supervision of a mobile home park, or a mobile home as defined herein. 
Parking space: An area of eight and one-half (8 1 / 2 ) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long situated on a mobile home park street. 
Parking stall: An area of sufficient size to accommodate two (2) automobiles, minimum dimensions of such area to be eight and one-half (8 1 / 2 ) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long per automobile. 
Permit: An authorization, and the written evidence thereof, issued by the City of South Houston to construct and equip mobile home park, which, for the purposes to this chapter shall be any mobile home park other than one owned and operated by the government of the United States, the State of Texas, or political subdivisions thereof, within such corporate limits under the terms of this chapter, called "mobile home park." 
Plat: The map, drawing or chart on which a developer's plan of a mobile home park is presented to the City of South Houston [with the] form of dedication. 
Street: Any street, area, avenue, boulevard, drive, public place or highway designed for or commonly used for the purpose of travel by vehicles within the corporate limits of the city. Distinctions are made in this chapter between public, or streets outside the premises of the mobile home park, and private, or streets inside the mobile home park premises. 
Tenant: A person or persons having custody and control of a mobile home. 
Unit: Any place, plot, or parcel of ground located within a mobile home park where mobile homes are parked, erected or placed, used, intended or designated as human habitations, boarding, sleeping, or living quarters, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-2. - Chapter does not permit violations of zoning ordinance. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit property to be used contrary to provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-3. - Mobile home parking limitations; four-hour street parking. 
No person shall park, place, or locate any mobile home upon any public street or public park within the corporate limits of the City of South Houston for a period of more than four (4) hours. Any mobile home shall be parked parallel to the right side curb, completely clear of driving lanes or areas of said street or park, and facing in the direction which traffic shall be designated to travel on said street or in said driving area. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Secs. 13-4—13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME TAXATION; MOVING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 13-16. - Ad valorem taxation; mobile home moving permit and fee. 
(a)  Any mobile home located within a mobile home park or upon a private lot or tract of land as of January first (tax assessment date) of each year shall be rendered for taxation by the mobile home owner to the assessor-collector of taxes as provided for in the Property Tax Code, Section 1.04(2), (3), 11.01, and 25.08, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes. If both the land and the mobile home are owned by the same person, the mobile home shall be rendered as real property. If the owner of the mobile home is not the owner of the land, the mobile home shall be the liability of the owner of the mobile home and not a liability of the landowner. The "Over 65 Residential Homestead Exemption" shall be granted in those cases where applicable. Persons paying taxes under this section shall be issued a small sticker or decal indicating the taxes have been paid for the current year. Such sticker or decal shall be displayed in such a manner and location on said mobile home so as to be visible from the nearest street or drive within the mobile home park or upon the private lot. Each mobile home park owner shall inform the city secretary in writing on "mobile home information" cards furnished by the city of each mobile home located in his park as of January first. 
(b)  Before any mobile home shall be moved within the city limits of South Houston, either entering or leaving a mobile home park or a private lot or tract of land, a mobile home moving permit must be obtained for such move. Said permit shall be issued by the city secretary and shall be issued to the owner of said mobile home being moved or to the mobile home moving contractor involved in moving said mobile home. The fee for said mobile home moving permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) plus 6¢ per square foot in chapter 6, building permit fees. The mobile home moving permit shall state the name and address of the mobile home moving contractor, the name and address of the mobile home owner, the present location and the proposed location of the mobile home, the type, size and serial number of the mobile home. All taxes, fees and other adjudicated debts owning to the city by said mobile home owner shall be made in full payment before said permit shall be issued. Persons issued a permit under this section shall be issued a sticker or decal indicating the date of issue and the present and proposed locations of the mobile home, approximately six (6) feet above the ground or road surface on the side nearest the center of the roadway, and shall remain affixed to the mobile home until it arrives at its proposed location. 
(c)  Before issuance of a permit to move a mobile home which was located in the city on January first to a location outside the city, prior to the establishment by the city council of the current year's tax rate, an estimated tax based on the current year's appraisal method and the previous year's tax rate shall be made. Such payment may be made "under protest," subject to appellate procedures provided under the Property Tax Code. 
(d)  Any movement of a mobile home permitted herein shall comply with traffic regulations. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 2, 6-14-11)  
Secs. 13-17—13-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOMES LOCATED OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-34. - General prohibition. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, no mobile home shall be parked for use or occupancy on any tract of ground within the city limits, except in a duly authorized mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-35. - Temporary location. 
The building inspector may permit the parking, use and occupancy of a mobile home outside of a duly authorized mobile home park for a period of time not exceeding ten (10) days, when such mobile home is occupied by persons employed in the operation of a temporary recreational, amusement or civic activity, or for a period of time not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days, when such mobile home is parked adjacent to and in conjunction with the construction of a residence. A mobile home may be parked on the construction site of a nonresidential structure for a period of time not exceeding the duration of actual construction. Such temporary parking, use and occupancy of a mobile home shall be permitted only when the mobile home is parked on the same premises on which the activity is located and only when adequate sanitary facilities are available upon the premises for the use of the occupants of the mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Secs. 13-36—13-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMANENT LOCATION 
 
Sec. 13-44. - Application of division; authority for permanent location. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to a mobile home permanently located on real property within the city outside an authorized mobile home park. Such location is authorized, when all of the provisions of this division are complied with, subject to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-45. - Compliance with building code and other ordinances; supervision and inspection of placement. 
All applicable requirements of the building code and other ordinances of the city applicable to the installation of plumbing, electricity, water and gas must be complied with and the necessary permits acquired prior to the mobile home being placed on a private lot under the provisions of this division [and the building inspector] shall supervise and inspect the permanent placement of a mobile home in compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-46. - Location with respect to other structures; setback requirements. 
The mobile home shall be so situated upon the lot or tract of land that it will not be within ten (10) feet of any structure and shall be set-back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the front of the property line. There will be a five-foot set-back from each side of the property line and a five-foot set-back from the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 95-012, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 13-47. - Minimum size of slab; use of slab restricted to one mobile home. 
No slab shall be less than twenty (20) feet wide but wide enough for the mobile home and slab shall be the total length of mobile home with minimum length being fifty (50) feet. No more than one mobile home shall be permitted on a single slab. 
(Ord. No. 97-036, § 1, 12-9-97)  
Sec. 13-48. - Mobile home shall be skirted. 
Skirting or screening of material and composition so as to prevent the ingress of rodents and other animals beneath the home shall be attached to the home with galvanized screws or bolts. 
(Ord. No. 97-036, § 2, 12-9-97)  
Sec. 13-49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13-50. - Water and sewer connections. 
A mobile home governed by this division shall be connected to and provided with water lines and sanitary sewer connections. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-51. - Automobile parking stall. 
The lot or tract of land upon which a mobile home subject to this division is situated shall be large enough to accommodate a parking stall thereon for the of-street parking of automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Secs. 13-52—13-63. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-64. - Operating license. 
(a)  Upon the approval of the final plat of a proposed mobile home park, prior to the issuance of the construction permit under division 2 of this article, an annual license for the maintenance and operation of such mobile home park shall be issued to the owner thereof by the city secretary, upon payment to him of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Said license shall be valid for the calendar year for which it is issued and shall expire on December 31st of each year, unless sooner suspended, revoked or surrendered. Such license may be renewed annually in advance thereafter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home park within the city, unless a current license therefor has been under this section. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of ordinance provisions. Any person, firm, corporation or the agent violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and in case of willful and continuous violation of the provisions of this article, the building official shall revoke and repeal all permits and privileges granted to person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 97-036, § 3, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 2011-15, §§ 4, 6, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 13-65. - Construction standards generally. 
All mobile home park construction and installation required or permitted by this article shall conform to ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-66. - Minimum size of slabs; use of slab restricted to one mobile home. 
No slab shall be less than twenty (20) feet wide but wide enough for the mobile home and slab shall be the total length of mobile home with minimum length being fifty (50) feet. No more than one mobile home shall be permitted on a single slab. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 97-036, § 4, 12-9-97)  
Sec. 13-67. - Setback requirements for units and mobile homes. 
Each side of each unit adjacent to a mobile home park street or driveway shall be set back at least five (5) feet therefrom. Each side of each mobile home in the park and adjacent to a public street shall be set back at least five (5) feet therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-68. - Parking stalls or spaces generally. 
Each unit in a mobile home park shall be so laid out as to be provided with at least one parking stall. Every mobile home park shall average, by arithmetic means, two (2) parking places, including parking stalls and/or parking spaces, per unit. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-69. - Clearance between mobile homes. 
All parking stalls and concrete foundations or supports in a mobile home park shall be so laid out as to provide a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between the front and/or rear ends of adjacent mobile homes parked thereon, and no mobile home shall be so parked that either side thereof is nearer than ten (10) feet to either side or end of any other mobile home parked thereon. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-70. - Mobile home foundations or supports. 
Each unit shall be so constructed as to provide a reinforced four-inch concrete pad with minimum dimensions of twenty (20) feet by fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-71. - Water lines and sewer connections. 
Each unit in a mobile home park shall be provided with water lines and sanitary sewer connections, subject to all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and in accordance with the mobile home park standards referred to in section 13-65. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-72. - Off-street parking. 
Parking shall be provided at the rate of not less than two (2) parking spaces per mobile home space, located on the individual lot or within a common off-street parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-73. - Utility easements. 
Easements shall be provided for installation of utilities, exclusive of water and sewer which shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. Additional requirements for public utility easements shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-74. - Mobile home anchorage. 
Every mobile home shall be blocked and anchored in accordance with specifications set by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-75. - Drainage easements. 
Where a mobile home park is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and of sufficient width, as determined by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-76. - Mobile home patio or porch. 
Each unit within the mobile home park shall have constructed a four (4) inch thick concrete slab with minimum fifty (50) square feet area, reinforced with six (6) inches by six (6) inches wire mesh to be used as the floor of either a covered or uncovered porch or patio. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-77. - Sewage system installation. 
Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve each lot in all mobile home parks where connection is to be made immediately to a community disposal system or to a public sewage system as may be specified by the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-78. - Water system installation. 
All water supply, treatment, storage and distribution facilities shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of the standard specifications of the City of South Houston the current policies and specifications of the building inspector and the Texas State Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-79. - Sanitary sewer specifications. 
(a)  All gravity sewers shall be vitrified clay, epoxy lined asbestos cement sewer pipe or schedule 40, polyvinyl chloride (pvc) drain-waste-vent pipe or better conforming to A.S.T.M. and the National Sanitation Foundation Standard 14 and Commercial Standard CS 272-65 and CS 207-60. 
(b)  The minimum size of lateral sewer mains within the mobile home park area shall be six (6) inches in diameter. Minimum grades shall be sufficient to produce a velocity of 1.6 ft. per second. 
(c)  All outfall mains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the maximum anticipated flow from the entire area tributary to the line as approved by the building inspector. 
(d)  Lift stations shall be furnished where necessary, of such size and design as approved by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-80. - Water main specifications. 
(a)  All water distribution mains shall be cast iron, asbestos cement pipe, or polyvinyl chloride (pvc) type 1120, schedule 40 or better and installed in conformance to A.S.T.M. standard D1784-60T with the specifications of the city public works department. Other suitable material may be used when authorized by the building inspector. 
(b)  The minimum size of lateral water mains shall be six (6) inches in diameter, except that a small main may be used when a looped system designed to serve less than eighteen (18) families is approved by the building inspector. 
(c)  All principal mains shall be of sufficient size to meet all anticipated requirements of the system as approved by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-81. - Specifications and standards for mobile home plats. 
Preliminary plats and data for conditional approval. The preliminary plat shall include the following information and other pertinent data as required to support the preliminary design of the proposed development: 
Topographic Data: 
(a)  Existing boundary lines, bearings and distances, and acreage of the proposed mobile home park. 
(b)  Location, size and centerline of all existing utilities, drainage structures, water courses, railroads, and other physical features affecting the proposed development. 
(c)  Location, name, type and width of surfacing of all streets and alleys on or adjoining the proposed development. 
(d)  Location, size and purpose of all easements and public areas on or adjoining the proposed development. 
(e)  Name and width of each street. 
(f)  Number to identify each lot, site and block. 
(g)  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-82. - Report of mobile homes entering park. 
The owner of a mobile home park shall inform the building inspector, in writing, of each mobile home that enters his park and for which utility and sanitary services are desired, in order to allow the permit department to inspect the mobile home location and service connections. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-83. - City agents' right of entry. 
Duly authorized representatives from the department of health, fire department police department, department of taxation, water and sewer department, sanitation department and street department shall be permitted access to every mobile home park and the streets, utility lines and connections and structures thereon, when performing city business, as a condition to the issuance of a permit and license under this article. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-84. - Mobile home shall be skirted. 
Skirting or screening of material and composition so as to prevent the ingress of rodents and other animals beneath the home shall be attached to the home with galvanized screws or bolts. 
(Ord. No. 97-036, § 5, 12-9-97)  
Sec. 13-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION PERMIT 
 
Sec. 13-86. - Required. 
No mobile home park shall be constructed within the city, the owner thereof shall first obtain a permit from the city with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-87. - Application generally. 
Written application for a permit required by this division shall be filed with the city secretary. Such application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the city and shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the parties to be in charge of the proposed mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-88. - Fee. 
At the time of filing an application for a permit under this division, the applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). This is an application fee and inspection fee for the investigation for approval of the application and shall not be returnable, in whole or in part, whether a permit is granted or not. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 8, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 13-89. - Map and preliminary plat to accompany application. 
Each application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by a location map, showing the location within the city of the platted property, and a preliminary plat of the proposed mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-90. - Approval by building inspector, two or less units. 
If the permit application is for no more than two (2) units, upon a finding by the building inspector that the written application meets all of the terms, conditions and procedures described in this chapter and that adequate sewage and utility facilities are available, the building inspector may approve such application and thereupon a permit will be issued, upon payment of all fees. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-91. - Approval or disapproval of preliminary plat; more than two units. 
On applications for permit for three (3) or more units, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(a)  Within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the filing of an application for a permit under this division, the preliminary plat filed with the application shall be presented to the city council at a regularly scheduled council meeting. The applicant or his agent shall be entitled to present evidence and argument to the council at such meeting. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after the presentation of a preliminary plat pursuant to subsection (a), the council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, and written notice shall be given of its decision. If the plat is disapproved, the notice shall state the reasons for disapproval. If the plat is disapproved, it may be resubmitted to the city council, with the necessary recommended changes, and the council must act upon such plat within thirty (30) days from the resubmission date. 
(c)  In the event the city council fails to act on a preliminary plat within the time prescribed by this section, the plat shall be deemed approved. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the permit application or the plat, however, shall wholly defeat and bar such automatic approval. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-92. - Final plat—Filing; form; accompanying plans and specifications. 
When the preliminary plat of a proposed mobile home park is approved, as provided in section 13-91 above, a final plat thereof must be filed with the building inspector within thirty (30) days after the date of preliminary approval, unless an extension of filing time is requested by the applicant and granted by the city council prior to the expiration of such thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-93. - Same—Approval or disapproval; recording. 
The city council shall approve or disapprove the final plat of a proposed mobile home park within thirty (30) days after its presentation and file the same with the city secretary within thirty-seven (37) days after its presentation. In the event the council fails to act upon such plat within thirty (30) days, the same shall be deemed approved as of the thirty-sixth day after its presentation. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-94. - Issuance. 
Upon a finding by the city council that a proposed mobile home park will meet with all of the terms, conditions and requirements prescribed by this chapter, and upon approval of the final plat for such park by the city council, and upon issuance of the license provided for in section 13-64, the city secretary shall issue to the applicant the permit required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-95. - Suspension. 
In the event of violation, during the construction and equipping of a mobile home park, of any provision of this article or of the permit, plat, application, plans or specifications provided for in this division, the building inspector shall have the right to suspend the permit issued under this division. In addition, he may issue stop-work orders and take other corrective action, as provided in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-96. - Termination. 
A permit issued under this division shall automatically terminate, if construction of the mobile home park is not commenced within six (6) months after the final plat thereof is approved, unless a six-month renewal is obtained from the city council. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any work on such mobile home park after the permit has so terminated. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 13-97. - Grandfather clause. 
Lawful mobile home parks in existence at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance Number 732, may continue in use without being in violation of sections 13-65, 13-66, 13-67, 13-68, 13-69, 13-70, 13-72, 13-73, 13-75, 13-76, 13-79, 13-80 and 13-81 as to existing facilities only. 
(Ord. No. 732, 12-3-85)  
Chapter 13.3 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 13.3-1. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  The Clerk of South Houston Municipal Court ("court") shall collect a three-dollar ($3.00) municipal court building security fee from a defendant convicted after passage of this section in the court in a trial for a misdemeanor. The clerk shall pay the security fee to the municipal treasurer. 
(b)  In this section, a person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The municipal treasurer shall deposit the fee in a fund to be known as "the municipal court building security fund." 
(d)  The funds designated herein may be used only to finance items when used for the purpose of providing security services for building housing a municipal court, as appropriate, including: 
(1)  The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Handheld metal detectors; 
(3)  Walkthrough metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electrical locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  Signage; 
(8)  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; or 
(9)  Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices; 
(10)  The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; and 
(11)  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
(e)  The municipal court building security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 96-018, §§ 1—5, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 99-021, §§ 1—5, 9-28-99)  
Sec. 13.3-2. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as the fund, pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on deferred disposition; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on/or the date this section is finally passed and approved. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer of the City of South Houston, Texas, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of/or to maintain technology enhancements for the Municipal Court of the City of South Houston, Texas. "Technology enhancements" shall include any and all items described in Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of South Houston. 
(d)  Administration of fund. The purpose of the use of any funds remaining in the fund shall continue to be used and administered as required by this section and for that purpose this section remains in effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-018, §§ 1—3, 7, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 2004-10, §§ 1—3, 7, 4-6-04)  
Chapter 14 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 81 et seq. 
Annotation— For a case upholding the validity of Ordinance No. 101, from which this chapter is basically derived, see Tyson Oil Company v. Railroad Commission of Texas, 12 F. Supp. 201 (1935). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Chapter does not affect rights of land owners. 
Neither this chapter nor any permit issued hereunder shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the permittee to enter upon or occupy in any respect in the drilling or production operations any land except by the written consent of the owner, nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of any lot owner to contract for the amount of royalty to be paid with respect to his own land, or for damages, rights or privileges with respect thereto. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 10, 2-14-35)  
Sec. 14-2. - Use of streets and alleys in drilling or production operations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drill any oil or gas well within any of the streets or alleys of the city, or to block or incumber or close up any street or alley in any drilling or production operations, except by special permit by order of the city council, and then only temporarily. All excavations in or upon any of the streets and alleys in such operations shall be under the reasonable direction of the street superintendent, and done without expense or cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 101, §§ 5, 11, 2-14-35) 
Cross reference— Authority of holder of permit issued under article II of this chapter to lay and maintain necessary pipelines under public property, § 19-5(b).  
Sec. 14-3. - Drilling districts. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance establishing drilling districts or prescribing areas wherein the drilling of oil and gas wells is permitted or prohibited and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 14-4. - Fire extinguishers at drilling plants. 
All drilling plants at oil and gas wells shall be equipped with fire extinguishers, which shall be maintained in good order. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 8, 2-14-35; Ord. of 2-9-37, § 3)  
Sec. 14-5. - Safety rules for certain gas facilities and equipment. 
The following safety rules shall be applicable to gas facilities and equipment which operate with a pressure in excess of fifty (50) pounds psi: 
(1)  There shall be installed a regulator which will reduce the well pressure to not to exceed seven hundred (700) pounds psi before such gas may be transported through pipelines within the city. 
(2)  All installations, including the well, must be enclosed by a chain link fence which shall not be less than six (6) feet in height. 
(3)  Any equipment in connection with which a flame is used shall not be closer than thirty (30) feet to the property line or a public street and shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet to any gas well. 
(4)  No grass or weeds shall be permitted to grow within six (6) feet of any equipment or installation. 
(5)  An automatic shutoff valve shall be installed in the equipment of each such gas well which will shut off the flow of gas in the event that the pressure in the line shall drop as much as one hundred (100) pounds. 
(6)  All federal and state rules and regulations in connection with the producing of gas must be complied with, including the transportation of gas through pipelines. 
(7)  "No Smoking" signs shall be installed at all producing wells and installations. 
(Ord. No. 554, § 2, 8-16-66)  
Sec. 14-6. - Removal of oil, gas and water. 
All oil, gas and water produced or arising from operations authorized by a permit issued under this chapter shall, within a reasonable time after production, be piped or otherwise conveyed or removed from the territory of the city. This section shall not prohibit the ordinary use of a slush pond and usual production facilities. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 11, 2-14-35)  
Secs. 14-7—14-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of holder of permit issued under this article to lay and maintain necessary pipelines under public property, § 19-5(b). 
 
Sec. 14-21. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or commence to drill a well for oil or gas within the city limits or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution of any such well, without a permit for such well and for the prosecution of the development having first been issued by authority of the city council in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 1, 2-14-35)  
Sec. 14-22. - Application generally. 
(a)  Every application for a permit under this article shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or some person in his behalf and filed with the city secretary. No single application shall be made for a permit covering more than one drilling district. 
(b)  An application filed under this section shall state the drilling district and the particular lot, block and location in the drilling district where the proposed well is to be located, and have attached to it certified copies or photostatic copies of all oil and gas leases, or other drilling contracts with the owners of land in the drilling district which applicant may have, together with abstracts or certificates of title satisfactory to the city council, to the end that the application will show what proportion and what parts of the drilling district the applicant owns in fee or holds under lease or contract from the owner. The application shall also be accompanied with a plat or map of the drilling district showing the exact location of the proposed well. 
(c)  An application filed under this section shall be accompanied by the applicant's affidavit showing the name and last known address of each land, mineral, royalty or lease owner to whom notice is required to be given under section 14-27, and the names of such land, mineral, royalty or lease owners to whom such notice is required to be given, but whose addresses are unknown to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 101, §§ 6, 7, 2-14-35; Ord. of 2-9-37, § 2)  
Sec. 14-23. - Applicant must own or have rights to drilling site. 
No permit shall be granted or issued under this article for the drilling of a well except upon ground owned by the applicant or held by him under an oil and gas lease or drilling contract from the owner, giving the owner's permission to drill the well. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 9, 2-14-35; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 8-16-66)  
Sec. 14-24. - Required interest of applicant in drilling district. 
It shall be a requisite for a permit to drill an oil and gas well within the city that the applicant must have at least seventy-five (75) percent of the South Houston resident mineral ownerships in the drilling district under lease or ownership in fee. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 4, 2-14-35; Ord. No. 403, § 2, 5-2-57)  
Sec. 14-25. - Applicant's bond. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit required by this article shall file with the city secretary, at the time of filing the permit application, a bond meeting the requirements of this section and approved by the mayor. 
(b)  The bond required by this section shall be executed by the applicant, as principal, and a surety company authorized to do business in this state, as surety. It shall run to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned and shall be conditioned that if the permit is granted and if drilling operations are commenced thereunder, the applicant and his assigns will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation of the well; will restore the streets and sidewalks and other public places of the city which may be disturbed in the operations to their former condition; will clear the block and lots of all litter, machinery, derricks, buildings, oil and other substances, erected, used or allowed in the drilling or producing operations, whenever the well shall be abandoned or the operation thereof discontinued; and that he will pay any and all damages suffered by any person from fire or from oil, gas or water caused by or originating from the operations connected with such well, and will hold the city harmless from any or all liability growing out of the granting of such permit. 
(c)  The bond required by this section shall be in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), except that where the applicant holds oil and gas leases on the entire drilling district, the bond shall be in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). In cases where there are no buildings or other improvements on the drilling district, the bond need not be in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(d)  Upon the expiration of ninety (90) days next after the completion of any producing well, the bond theretofore given in connection with such well shall be reduced to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), except that if the bond theretofore given was in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), such bond shall be reduced to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(e)  If any permit issued under this article shall terminate and become inoperative, as in this article provided, or if the permittee files with the city council written notice of his election to surrender his permit and abandon the premises covered thereby, and the well is plugged and abandoned, the permit fee theretofore furnished by the permittee under this section, shall be immediately returned to him, provided he has fully complied with all of the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 101, §§ 6, 9, 2-14-35; Ord. of 2-9-37, § 2; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 8-16-66)  
Sec. 14-26. - Fee. 
The fee for a permit required by this article shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fee shall be paid at the time the permit application is filed. Such fee shall be returned to the applicant, if the permit is denied. 
(Ord. No. 101, §§ 6, 7, 2-14-35; Ord. of 6-5-51)  
Sec. 14-27. - Notice of and hearing on application. 
(a)  Notice of the filing of an application for a permit under this article shall be given by the applicant, in the manner hereinafter provided, to each owner of minerals, royalty, fee or oil and gas leasehold estate in lands within the drilling district in which the lot upon which the applicant seeks a permit to drill is located, as such ownership is disclosed by the deed records of Harris County, except that no notice need be given to the owners of the fee, royalty or mineral estates in lands within such district on which the applicant holds oil and gas mineral leases. Such notice shall be in words and figures as follows: 
"Notice is hereby given that _______ acting under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of Chapter 14 of the Code of Ordinances, City of South Houston, Texas, and any and all ordinances amendatory thereof, did on the _______ day of _______ 19___, file with the City Secretary of the City of South Houston an application for a permit to drill a well for oil and/or gas upon Lot No. _______, Block No. _______, South Houston Townsite, in Drilling District No. _______, as defined by Ordinance No. _______ A hearing upon such application will be held in the office of the City Secretary of the City of South Houston, Texas, at ___ on the _______ day of _______, 19___, at ___." 
(b)  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing on such application, as fixed in the notice, referred to in subsection (a), a copy of such notice shall be mailed by registered mail, addressed to the last known address of such land, mineral, royalty or lease owner, if known to the applicant, and a copy of such notice shall be published, at the expense of the applicant, in every issue of the official newspaper of the city for ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. If the official newspaper is published weekly, the publication shall be made in one issue thereof. Proof of such publication shall be made by the printer or publisher of the newspaper, by affidavit filed with the city secretary, which shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
(c)  At the time fixed in the notice given under this section, a hearing on the application shall be held in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 6, 2-14-35; Ord. of 2-9-37, § 2)  
Sec. 14-28. - Limitation on number to be issued for same reservoir. 
No permit shall be issued under this chapter for more than two (2) wells to each reservoir, as recognized by the state railroad commission as a separated reservoir, in each drilling district; provided, however, that an application may be made and a permit may be issued for a replacement well or wells, but there shall not be more than two (2) wells producing from each such reservoir in each drilling district. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 2, 6-6-72)  
Sec. 14-29. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  Upon the approval by the city council of an application for a permit under this article, the city secretary shall issue the permit. Such issuance shall automatically operate as a rejection and denial of all other applications for a permit covering the drilling district, or any portion or portions thereof, included within and covered by the permit so issued, and which applications are pending at the time of the issuance of such permit or which may be filed during the life thereof. 
(b)  The city council shall have the power and hereby reserves the authority to refuse any application for a permit under this article where, by reason of the location of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the drilling district in question, or adjacent thereto, and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for civic purposes, or for sanitary reasons, the drilling of an oil or gas well will be a serious disadvantage to the city and its inhabitants as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 7, 2-14-35)  
Sec. 14-30. - To specify location of well; drilling elsewhere prohibited. 
A permit issued under this article shall specify the particular location of the well to be drilled, and it shall be unlawful for the permittee to drill elsewhere in the drilling district. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 7, 2-14-35)  
Sec. 14-31. - Rights of owners or lessees of land in district not owned or leased by permittee. 
(a)  In case a permit for the drilling of a well is issued to a person not owning, or holding oil and gas leases or drilling contracts with the owners of, all the area in a drilling district, it shall be a condition of the permit that the permittee, his successors and assigns, shall deliver to the credit of each of such owners whose land shall not be under lease held by the permittee, free of cost, in the pipe line to which the well may be connected, a share of oil produced and saved from such well, equal to one-sixth of the proportion of the whole production that the square feet of ground so owned bears to the square feet contained in such drilling district, exclusive of the streets and alleys, and a like proportion of the proceeds of gas and casinghead gas produced from the well and used off the premises. 
(b)  In case a permit is issued to persons who do not own or hold leases or other valid drilling contracts in writing from the owners of all of the land within the drilling district, other than streets and alleys, any owner of unleased land in the drilling district and any person, other than the permittee, holding oil and gas leases on land in the drilling district, shall have the option, in lieu of the provisions of subsection (a) above, to share in the ownership and benefits of such oil or gas well in the proportion that the area of his land or lease bears to the area of the drilling district, exclusive of streets and alleys; provided that, within ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of such permit, he shall file with the city secretary his election, in writing, to pay to the holder of the permit or his assigns a like proportion of the total cost and expense of drilling and operating the well, and shall, within that time, make and file with the city secretary a bond, with an authorized surety company as surety, and in an amount representing that portion of the estimated maximum cost of the well that the area of ground owned or held under lease by the principal bears to the whole area of the drilling district, conditioned that the principal in the bond will pay to the permittee and his assigns such proportion of the cost of drilling and operating the well, from time to time, as required in the drilling and operation thereof, such bond to be approved by the mayor and held by the city secretary for the benefit of all persons interested. 
(Ord. No. 101, §§ 3, 4, 2-14-35; Ord. No. 403, §§ 1, 2, 5-2-57)  
Sec. 14-32. - Termination for failure to commence drilling. 
A permit issued under this article shall terminate and become inoperative, without any action on the part of the city unless within ninety (90) days from the date of issue, actual drilling of the well shall have commenced. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 9, 2-14-35; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 8-16-66)  
Sec. 14-33. - Termination for cessation of drilling operations. 
(a)  After the drilling of a well under a permit issued pursuant to this article has commenced, the cessation of the drilling operations for a period of six (6) months shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit; provided that, if the well is a producer and shall thereafter cease to produce, the permittee shall have the right to conduct deepening or reworking operations on the well within six (6) months after cessation of production, without having to procure a new permit. 
(b)  After the six (6) months period referred to in subsection (a) has elapsed and the permit has terminated and become inoperative, if the permittee desires to deepen, rework or recomplete the well, the city secretary is hereby authorized to issue a new permit for such well, upon the payment of a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 101, § 9, 2-14-35; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 8-16-66)  
Sec. 14-34. - New permit when oil well converted to gas well. 
In the event an oil well (as classified by the state railroad commission), for which there exists an unexpired permit issued under this article, is changed to a gas well (as classified by the state railroad commission), either by reworking operations or natural change during producing operations, and the operator sells the gas produced from such well, the operator shall secure another well permit from the city. The city secretary is hereby authorized to issue a new permit for such well upon the payment of a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fee shall cover all operations in connection with converting the well from an oil well to a gas well by deepening or reworking operations or otherwise, including the installation of all equipment and appurtenances necessary or convenient to produce the well as a gas well. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 9, 2-14-35; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 8-16-66)  
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parking of mobile homes in parks, § 13-3; required park and recreation area in mobile home parks, § 13-76; public property generally, Ch. 19. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - South Houston Recreation Center and Park. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall effect the validity of the ordinance adopted on September 6, 1949, accepting and regulating the use of the South Houston Recreation Center and Park, and such ordinance is recognized as continuing in full force and affect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Chapter 16 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 771, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1987, amended former Ch. 16, §§ 16-1—16-3, relative to peddlers and solicitors, in its entirety to read as herein set out in Art. I, §§ 16-1—16-17. The provisions of former Ch. 16 derived from Ord. No. 370, §§ 1—3, adopted Oct. 17, 1955. 
Cross reference— Soliciting contributions on streets, § 19-14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 771, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1987 amended former Ch. 16, §§ 16-1—16-3, relative to peddlers and solicitors, in its entirety to read as herein set out in Art. I, §§ 16-1—16-17. The provisions of former Ch. 16 derived from Ord. No. 370, §§ 1—3, adopted Oct. 17, 1955. 
Cross reference— Soliciting contributions on streets, § 19-14. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Peddlers or solicitors engaged in interstate commerce—Registration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate commerce to go from house to house or place to place in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines or subscriptions to magazines, without having first registered with the chief of police of the city, giving the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and local address, if any, of the registrant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, that he represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(3)  The nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited. 
(4)  Whether the registrant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or receive or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(5)  The period of time which the registrant wishes to solicit or sell in the city. 
(b)  The registrant, at the time of registration, shall pay the tax assessor and collector a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to defray the cost of handling registration. 
(c)  The term "interstate commerce," as used in this section, means soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, photographs, newspapers or magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines which, at the time the order is taken are in another state or will be produced in another state and shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of such orders. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-2. - Same—Proof of identity. 
At the time of the registration provided for in section 16-1, the registrant shall submit for inspection of the chief of police written proof of his identity, which may be in the form of an automobile operator's license or an identification letter or card issued to the registrant by the person for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-3. - Same—Bond required. 
(a)  At the time of the registration provided for in section 16-1, the registrant shall file with the chief of police a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) signed by the registrant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs and magazines in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery, and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of the bond at the time of delivery or that may be discovered by such purchasers or customers within thirty (30) days after delivery, which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons who may make any purchase or give any order to the principal or to an agent or employee of the principal. All such bonds so filed shall be subject to the approval of the tax assessor and collector. 
(b)  In case a registrant engages in any activity mentioned in section 16-1 through one or more agents or employees, such registrant shall be required to enter into only one bond, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), as above required, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all his agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-4. - Selling, soliciting, etc., prohibited between certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity mentioned in section 16-8, whether he is licensed so to do or not, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-5. - Going upon posted residence without invitation. 
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city, whereon a sign bearing the words "no solicitors, no peddlers, or similar wording" is displayed, by itinerant vendors, itinerant merchants, peddlers and persons selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines or subscriptions to magazines, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of such private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, or disposing of, or peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-6. - Construction of article. 
This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and its citizens, and all of the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-7. - Sales to occupants of vehicles on streets or public property; aiding a minor in violation of section. 
No itinerant vendor licensed under this article shall sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise to the occupants of any vehicle which is in a street or on other public property, whether or not such vehicle is moving, stopped or parked and whether or not the itinerant vendor is on public street or public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or aid a minor in conduct prohibited by this section or to provide goods or merchandise to a minor with knowledge that the minor intends to sell or offer for sale such goods in contravention of this section. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE FOR ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS 
 
Sec. 16-8. - Definitions. 
An "itinerant merchant" or "itinerant vendor," as the terms are used in this article, shall be held to be any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, or subscriptions to magazines. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-9. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity described in section 16-8, without first having obtained a license so to do from the city chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-10. - Application. 
Any person desiring to engage in any activity mentioned in section 16-8 shall make written application to the tax assessor and collector for a license so to do, which application shall show the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation, if any, that he represents and the kind of goods offered for sale, and whether such applicant, upon any such sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, and the period of time such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-11. - Bond required of applicant. 
(a)  The application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs and magazines in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold, by the principal of such bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within thirty (30) days after delivery, which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal thereon, or to an agent or employee of the principal. 
(b)  In case the applicant is engaging in any activity mentioned in section 16-8 through one or more agents or employees, such applicant shall be required to enter into only one bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as above required, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all his agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-12. - Fee. 
(a)  The fee for an itinerant merchant's or itinerant vendor's license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). When any person engages in any activity mentioned in section 16-8 through one or more agents or employees, such person shall, in addition to such fifty dollar ($50.00) fee, pay a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each agent or employee so engaged. The fees provided for herein shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of such licenses. No such fee shall be prorated. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above provisions, no license fee shall be required of churches, civic clubs, fraternal organizations or charitable, literary or educational clubs or organizations. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-13. - License not to be issued to certain persons. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall not be eligible to receive a license under this division for a period of one (1) year from the date of such conviction. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-14. - Term of license. 
Any license issued under this division shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-15. - License to be carried on person. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity mentioned in section 16-8, unless he is carrying on his person, at all times while so engaged, a valid license issued under this division. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-16. - Exemptions from division. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to vendors of milk, bread, pastries, and newspapers, who make such sales on customary routes or from fixed places, nor to persons engaged in interstate commerce, as that term is defined in section 16-1. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 16-17. - Itinerant vendors on roadway. 
No itinerant vendors shall conduct a stationary business within twenty-five (25) feet of a public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 11-3-87) 
Cross reference— Soliciting contributions on streets, § 19-14; display of merchandise on streets or other public property, § 19-17.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIALLY OPERATED TRANSIENT AMUSEMENTS 
 
Sec. 16-18. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  City is the City of South Houston. 
(b)  Building official is the license officer or permit officer of the City of South Houston. 
(c)  Transient amusement is any circus, carnival, concession, game, ride, exhibit or any other type of public amusement device which is of a type generally considered to be of a transient nature, but shall not include such amusements operated by a school or a church and all of the persons engaged in the operation and control are members of the school or church organization which is operating such amusement. 
(d)  Licensee is any person having a city license in full force and effect issued hereunder for a transient amusement. 
(e)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-19. - License required. 
No person shall install, construct, operate or maintain a transient amusement within the city without having a valid license therefor in force and effect under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-20. - Application procedure. 
Applications for licenses issued hereunder for a transient amusement shall be made upon blank forms to be prepared and made available by the building official and shall state: 
(a)  The name, home address and proposed business address of the applicant; 
(b)  The hours of operation for said transient amusement; 
(c)  The names, addresses and number of employees, exhibitors and other persons to be engaged in the operation of the transient amusement; and 
(d)  If the applicant is a firm, association, partnership or corporation, then all of the information required of an individual shall be required of each individual of the said firm, association, partnership or corporation; and 
(e)  If a corporation, the application shall state: 
(1)  That the applicant is either a domestic corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Texas, or, if a foreign corporation, the state of its incorporation and that it is duly authorized to transact business in the State of Texas; 
(2)  The name of its registered agent and the address of its registered office in the State of Texas; 
(3)  The name, home address and proposed business address of the operator or person in charge of the operation of the transient amusement to be licensed hereunder; and 
(4)  The name, home address and business address of the president and of each member of the board of directors of such corporation. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-21. - Application fee. 
An application hereunder shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to defray the expense of investigation of the application and said fee is nonreturnable if the application for a license is refused or not issued after an investigation has been made. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-22. - License fee. 
After investigation of an application is completed and a license is to be issued, the building official shall notify the applicant and upon payment of a license fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), for each day or part thereof that the transient amusement is to be operated, the building official shall issue the license for the operation of the transient amusement for the period set forth in the application and covered by the license fee paid. Any license issued by the building official shall be to the applicant named at the location designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-23. - Transfer of licenses; changes in partnerships or corporations. 
A license may be transferred to a different location within the city upon application and payment of a transfer fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(a)  A license issued to a partnership is not voided by withdrawal of one or more partners so long as one of the original partners remain. 
(b)  All changes in the membership of the partnership and all changes in the identity of the principal officers of the corporation shall be reported to the building official within ten (10) days after they occur. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-24. - Investigation of application. 
The building official shall forward a copy of each application filed under section 16-19 hereof to the chief of police for investigation. The building official and chief of police shall complete their investigation within two (2) days from date of filing of the application. The report of the chief of police shall include the number of special police that applicant shall, at its own expense, have on duty at the location during the operation of the transient amusement and the building official, when an application is approved, shall give written notice, with the license issued, of such requirements. Every special policeman to be employed by a licensee must be approved by the chief of police prior to his employment. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-25. - Standards for issuance. 
The building official shall issue a license hereunder when and if he finds that the requirements of this article and of all other governing laws and ordinances have been met. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-26. - Duties of licensee. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate a transient amusement in the city without complying with the following requirements and standards of operation: 
(a)  Conduct and operation. The licensee shall maintain good order upon the premises where any transient amusement is operated. 
(b)  Standards for maintenance of premises. 
(1)  Access. The licensee shall provide access available to public streets or other public ways at all times to facilitate departure of persons from the premises where the transient amusement is operated and to permit entrance of fire apparatus or other emergency equipment in case of emergency. 
(2)  Lighting. Licensee shall provide suitable and necessary artificial light whenever natural light is inadequate. 
(3)  Electrical installations. The electrical system shall be installed, maintained and operated in a safe and workmanlike manner. All electrical equipment must meet the requirements of the electrical code of the city. Cables on the ground in areas traversed by the public shall be protected by approved covers. The electrical installations shall be inspected and approved by the city electrical inspector before the transient amusement is opened to the public and shall thereafter be open to inspection by the electrical inspector at all reasonable hours. 
(4)  Fire extinguishing equipment. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be furnished by the licensee in such type and quantity and in such locations as may be directed by the city fire marshal. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be inspected and approved by the city fire marshal before the transient amusement is open to the public and shall thereafter be open to inspection by the city fire marshal at all reasonable hours. 
(5)  Sanitary facilities. When sanitary facilities are to be made available to the public they shall be inspected and approved by the department of health. 
(6)  Attendants. At all times when a transient amusement is open to the public, the licensee shall provide an adequate number of attendants and special police who shall be responsible for seeing that order is maintained, that disorderly or immoral conduct is prevented, that the entrances and exits are kept free from congestion and that this article and all other governing ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to transient amusements are observed. 
(7)  Noise. The transient amusement shall be operated in such manner as to comply with Chapter 12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston. 
(8)  Concessions. Any sales of items covered by any health ordinance of the City of South Houston shall be strictly in compliance with such ordinance and licensee shall obtain the required permits and health certificates prior to the making of such sales to the public. 
(9)  Inspection. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon the premises where any transient amusement is being operated within the city, at any time, for the purpose of inspection, for preservation of law and order and to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Standard for vacated premises. 
(1)  Licensee shall, upon removal of a transient amusement licensed hereunder, clean the premises of any trash, rubbish and other unsightly or unsanitary matter, which has accumulated thereon, within twenty-four (24) hours after removal of the transient amusement. 
(2)  Licensee shall, to guarantee compliance with the foregoing subsection (1), prior to the time a license is issued for the operation of a transient amusement, post with the building official a bond in the minimum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall be issued by a company doing business in the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-27. - Suspension of license; appeal. 
The health officer, building official, chief of police, fire marshal or fire chief shall, upon discovery of a transient amusement being operated in violation of the terms of this article, immediately suspend the license to operate such transient amusement until such violations are removed. Suspension shall be by notice to the licensee or to the person in charge of the operation of such transient amusement. The official who acts to suspend a license under the terms of this section shall, within twenty-four (24) hours following such action, file a written report with the building official setting forth the exact violation, the date and hour of suspension and whether the violation has been removed by the licensee. Where a license has been suspended hereunder and not thereafter reinstated, the licensee may appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, that such proceedings shall be instituted within fifteen (15) days and not thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-28. - Penalty. 
Any person, persons, operator, owner, owners, partners, licensee, or the agents of a corporation, or whoever is in charge or control of a transient amusement, or any part thereof, who shall violate or allow or cause any person or persons to violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for such offense; and the license or licenses shall be subject to revocation or suspension for a violation of any provision of this article or of any other provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston or any violation of the laws of the State of Texas. Any remedy prescribed by this article shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
Sec. 16-29. - Accrued rights and remedies preserved for benefit of city. 
All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under this article and amendments thereto shall be and are preserved for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-18-88)  
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-30. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Coin-operated machine. The term "coin-operated machine" means every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with a coin, metal slug, token, electronic card, check or similar object. Music coin-operated machines and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines, as hereinafter defined, including, but not limited to, coin-operated video games, shall be included in the term "coin-operated machine". 
Music coin-operated machine. The term "music coin-operated machine" shall mean and include every coin-operated machine of any kind or character which dispenses or vends, or which is used or operated for dispensing or vending music and which is operated by or with coins, metal slugs, tokens, checks or similar objects. The following are expressly included within such term: Coin-operated phonographs, pianos, gramophones, radios and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend music. 
Operator. The term "operator" shall mean and include any person, firm, company, association or corporation who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in his or its place of business or upon premises under his or its control, any coin-operated machine in the city. 
Owner. The term "owner" means any person, individual, firm, company, association, business organization or corporation owning any "coin-operated machine" in this city. Owner is solely responsible for paying to the city the occupation tax on each coin-operated machine exhibited or displayed within the city and for securing the city decal evidencing payment of such tax on each coin-operated machine. 
Service coin-operated machine. The term "service coin-operated machine" means pay toilets, pay telephones and all other machines or devices which dispense service only and not merchandise, music, skill or pleasure. 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. The term "skill or pleasure coin-operated machine" means every coin-operated machine or device of any kind or character that is used or capable of use for pleasure or requires or is capable of rewarding or recognizing some degree of user skill in its use or operation or for any purpose other than dispersing or vending of merchandise, music or service exclusively as those terms are defined herein. The following are expressly included within such term: Electronic video games, marble machines or marble table machines, pin ball machines, marble shooting machines, pachinko machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines, coin-operated billiard or pool tables and all or any other coin-operated machines which satisfy some sense of skill or pleasure, including but not limited to every coin-operated machine or device that dispenses or vends merchandise, prizes, trinkets, novelties, commodities or confections or that plays music with or in addition to such games or devices. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 10-17-89; Ord. No. 2010-12, §§ 1—3, 8-24-10)  
Sec. 16-31. - Tax imposed; amount; registration. 
(a)  Every "owner," save an owner holding an import license and holding coin-operated machines solely for resale, who exhibits, displays or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in this state any coin-operated machine shall pay, and there is hereby levied on each coin-operated machine, except those that are exempt under section 16-36, an annual fee the maximum percentage of the State of Texas' annual occupation tax for such devices that a city in Texas may charge, (which at this time is one-fourth (¼) of sixty dollars ($60) per annum the state charges or fifteen dollars ($15.00) maximum for the city in the year 2010). All occupation taxes for coin-operated machines are payable annually in advance. Upon payment of the tax, every owner shall register each machine by make, model and serial number with the city tax assessor and collector or his designated agents. At this time the agent is the city building official. There is hereby established and levied a late fee on any such annual fee equal to the amount of the fee itself in addition to the annual fee due and paid late. 
(b)  Whenever an owner shall exhibit or display, or permit to be exhibited or displayed, any coin-operated machine for commercial use, there shall be securely attached thereto a decal issued by the building official evidencing payment of the tax applicable thereto. Each coin-operated machine is subject to the occupation tax when exhibited or displayed for commercial use within the city. Since the tax is payable in advance on an annual calendar year basis, the following pro rata tax rate schedule will be applicable to a coin-operated machine which is first exhibited or displayed for commercial use within the city during any quarter of the calendar year. 
(1)  First quarter—January 1 to March 31: An amount equal to the applicable annual occupation tax; 
(2)  Second quarter—April 1 to June 30: An amount equal to three-quarters of the applicable annual occupation tax; 
(3)  Third quarter—July 1 to September 30: An amount equal to one-half of the applicable annual occupation tax; and 
(4)  Fourth quarter—October 1 to December 31: An amount equal to one-quarter of the applicable annual occupation tax. 
In computing any tax payable under the aforesaid pro rata tax rate schedule, amounts calculated thereunder shall be rounded to the next higher full cent amount as required. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 10-17-89; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 4, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 2, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2011-23, § 2, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 16-32. - Display and issuance of decal evidencing payment; penalties for noncompliance. 
(a)  The decal issued by the city permit and inspection department to evidence payment of the tax levied herein shall be securely attached with its own adhesive to be a fixed, noninterchangeable part of the coin-operated machine so as to be easily seen by the public and in such a manner that continued application of steam and water be required to remove the same. 
(b)  During the period commencing on December 15 and ending on December 31 of each year, owners shall pay the occupation tax, register the machines taxed, and thereby receive a decal for each coin-operated machine to be within the city as of January 1. At the same time, owners may also pay taxes and receive decals for unregistered machines, up to ten (10) percent over the number registered. As a decal is placed on an additional machine the owner shall notify the building official of taxes of each machine's make, model and serial number, thereby registering it. 
(c)  If, during each calendar year, an owner desires to secure more decals than the additional ten (10) percent which may be obtained during the period from December 15 through December 31, such decals shall be issued upon payment of the tax applicable to the calendar quarter in which such decals are obtained. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit to be exhibited or displayed for commercial use any coin-operated machine which does not have properly attached thereto a decal evidencing payment of the applicable occupation tax. The owner of a coin-operated machine on which the tax has not been paid or which does not have a decal thereon evidencing payment shall forfeit to the City of South Houston as a penalty the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). The penalty, if not paid, shall be recovered by instituting a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 4, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 16-33. - Sealing machine for nonpayment, generally. 
After January 31 of each year, the permit and inspection department or the departmental employees, will seal, in a manner that will prevent further operation, any coin-operated machine upon which the tax required by this article has not been paid or upon which the decal is not properly displayed. Any owner subject to this article shall be required to pay a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the release of any machine sealed as provided herein for nonpayment of the tax or for failure to properly display the decal evidencing the payment of the tax. Upon proof of payment of the occupation tax provided for in this article, the penalties provided for in section 16-32 and the thirty-five dollar ($35.00) release fee, the permit and inspection department or the departmental employees will remove the seal. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 10-17-89; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 6, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 16-34. - Penalty for removal of sealed machine. 
It shall be unlawful to remove from the premises any machine that has been sealed pursuant to section 16-33. Whoever shall remove a machine that is sealed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine in accordance to section 16-71. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-35. - Penalty for breaking seal. 
Whoever shall break the seal affixed pursuant to section 16-33 or exhibit, display or remove any machine on which such seal has been broken, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in accordance to section 16-71. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-36. - Exemptions. 
Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending machines, merchandise vending machines, and cigarette vending machines which are now subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax, stamp vending machines, and "service coin-operated machines," as that term is defined, are expressly exempt from the tax levied herein, and the other provisions of this chapter. 
Coin-operated machines that have been remanufactured or altered not to accept coins are expressly exempt from the tax levied in this division unless they are opened by payment of a fee. 
Coin-operated machines operated solely in a private residence and not available to the general public are expressly exempt from the tax levied in this division. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-37. - Division does not authorize illegal machines. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table or coin-operated machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, displaying or maintenance of which is illegal or in violation of any article of the Penal Code of this State, or the constitution of this state. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATION OF MUSIC AND SKILL OR PLEASURE COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 16-38. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide comprehensive regulation of music and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-39. - Construction. 
Notwithstanding any language in this chapter or any other chapter to the contrary, the term "music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine" shall include coin-operated billiard and pool games and shall exclude coin-operated amusement machines designed exclusively for children. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-40. - Definitions. 
In this division unless the context requires a different definition, 
(1)  Person includes any natural person, association of natural persons, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant, or employee of any of them; 
(2)  Financial interest includes any legal or equitable interest, and specifically includes the ownership of shares or bonds of a corporation. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-41. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business to manufacture, own, buy, sell, or rent, lease, trade, lend or furnish to another or repair, maintain, service, transport within the City of South Houston, store, or import, a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine without a license or registration certificate issued under this article. 
(b)  No license is required for a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, educational, or benevolent purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, to own, or lease or rent from another, a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine for the corporation's or association's exclusive use and in furtherance of the purposes for which it is established. No tax may be assessed against any of these entities if otherwise prohibited by law. 
(c)  No license or tax is required for any individual to own a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine for personal use and amusement in his private residence. 
(d)  No license is required for any person subject to regulation by the Railroad Commission of Texas to transport or store in the due course of business a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine not owned by him. 
(e)  A person who knowingly violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, may be fined in an amount in accordance to section 16-71. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-42. - Nature of license. 
(a)  A license issued under this article: 
(1)  Is an annual license which expires on December 31st of each year, unless it expires as provided in subdivision (e) of this section or is suspended or cancelled earlier; 
(2)  Is effective for a single business entity; 
(3)  Vests no property or right in the license except to conduct the licensed business during the period the license is in effect; 
(4)  Is nontransferable, nonassignable, and not subject to execution; and 
(5)  Expires upon the death of an individual licensee, or upon the dissolution of any other licensee. 
(b)  An application for the renewal of a license must be made to the permit and inspection department before December 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-43. - Temporary extension of license. 
When a license issued under this article expires because of the death of an individual licensee, or the dissolution of any other licensee, or upon conditions involving receivership or bankruptcy, the permit and inspection department, except for good cause shown, shall permit the successor in interest to operate the business under the same license through December 31st of the year. The permit and inspection department shall give this permission in writing upon certification by the county judge of the county in which the business is located that the person requesting the extension is the successor in interest. The extended license is subject to suspension or cancellation as is any other license issued under this article. An original license application is necessary upon expiration of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-44. - Display; penalty. 
(a)  A person licensed to do business under this article shall prominently display his current license certificate at his place of business at all times. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance to section 16-71. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-45. - Application for license. 
(a)  An application for a license to do business under this article shall contain a complete statement regarding the ownership of the business to be licensed. This statement of ownership must specify: 
(1)  The nature of the business entity to be licensed; 
(2)  The name and residence address of every person who has a financial interest in the business, and the nature, type, and extent of that financial interest, except corporate applicants may omit any shareholder holding less than ten (10) percent of the corporate shares. 
(b)  The application shall designate a single individual who is responsible for keeping a record and reporting to the permit and inspection department the following information regarding each music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine owned, possessed or controlled by the licensee: 
(1)  The make, type, and serial number of machine; 
(2)  The date put in operation; 
(3)  The dates of the first and most recent registration of the machine; 
(4)  The specific location of each machine; and 
(5)  Any change in ownership of a machine. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by a sworn written statement executed by the individual designated to maintain the records and make reports that he is aware of and accepts this responsibility. 
(d)  The individual designated to maintain the records and to make reports must have the following relationship to the business to be licensed: 
(1)  The owner of a sole proprietorship; 
(2)  A partner of the partnership; 
(3)  An officer of the corporation; 
(4)  A trustee of the trust; 
(5)  A receiver of the receivership; or 
(6)  An officer or principal member of the association, joint venture, organization, or other entity not specified. 
(e)  The permit and inspection department may require any other pertinent information to be included in the application. 
(f)  The application must contain a statement that the information contained in it is true and complete, and this statement shall be made under oath. 
(g)  The statement of ownership contained in the application becomes a public record upon issuance of a license. Other information in the application is confidential. 
(h)  The application shall designate an office in this state where the applicant proposes to maintain the records which he is required to maintain by this article, otherwise by law, or by rule or regulation of the permit and inspection department. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-46. - Fee with application. 
The application must be accompanied by the annual license fee in the form of cash, cashier's check, or money order payable to the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-47. - Types of licenses. 
(a)  A person who wishes to engage in certain business dealing with music coin-operated machines or skill or pleasure coin-operated machines shall apply for a general business license, or an import license, or a repair license, or any combination of these. 
(b)  A general business licensee may engage in business to manufacture, own, buy, sell, rent, lease, trade, repair, maintain, service, transport or exhibit within the state, and store music and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines. 
(c)  An import licensee may engage in business to import, transport, own, buy, repair, sell, and deliver, music and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines, for sale and delivery within this state. 
(d)  A repair licensee may engage in the business of repairing, maintaining, servicing, transporting, or storing music, skill or pleasure coin-operated machines. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-48. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual license fee for a general business license shall be as follows: 
For an applicant with 50 or fewer machines: ..... $3,000.00 
For an applicant with 51—200 machines: ..... $6,000.00 
For an applicant with over 200 machines: ..... $7,500.00 
(b)  The annual license fee for an import license is: ..... $7,500.00 
(c)  The annual license fee for a repair license is: ..... $750.00 
(d)  The permit and inspection department may not refund any part of a license fee after the license is issued. In the event a license is not issued, the permit and inspection department and collector may retain thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to cover administrative costs, and may refund the balance. 
(e)  A person must renew an unexpired license by paying to the permit and inspection department before the expiration date of the license the annual license fee. If a person's license has been expired for not more than ninety (90) days, the person must renew the license by paying to the permit and inspection department a fee that is one and one-half (1½) times the annual license fee. If a person's license has been expired for more than ninety (90) days but less than two (2) years, the person must renew the license by paying to the permit and inspection department a fee that is two (2) times the annual license fee. If a person's license has been expired for two (2) years or more, the person may not renew the license. The person must obtain a new license by complying with the requirements and procedures for obtaining an original license. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 8, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 2, 7-24-18)  
Sec. 16-49. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A person who owns or exhibits coin-operated machines is exempt from the licensing and record keeping requirements imposed by this article if: 
(1)  He operates or exhibits his machines exclusively on premises occupied by him, and in connection with his business; and 
(2)  He owns no machine subject to the occupation tax imposed by this chapter located on the business premises of another person; and 
(3)  He has no financial interest, direct or indirect, in the coin-operated music, skill, or pleasure machine industry, except for the interest he owns in his machines used exclusively on premises occupied by him. 
(b)  Machines which are exhibited by a nonlicensed owner exempt under this section must be registered with the permit and inspection department. The owner shall obtain a registration certificate each year. The registration certificate shall show the name and address of the location of each machine and shall certify that the machine has a valid tax stamp affixed to it. The owner shall obtain his registration certificate by filing sworn application. 
(c)  Each time the location of a machine is changed, the owner of the registration certificate shall notify the permit and inspection department of the change by filing an amendment to the registration certificate within ten (10) days of the change. 
(d)  An application for the renewal of a registration certificate must be made to the permit and inspection department before December 1st of each year. 
(e)  A person must renew an unexpired registration for a machine by paying to the permit and inspection department before the expiration date of the registration the required registration fee, except that, if a person's registration has been expired for two (2) years or more, the person may not renew the registration. The person must obtain a new registration by complying with the requirements and procedures for obtaining an original registration. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-50. - Removal of stamp prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  No person other than the permit and inspection department may intentionally remove a current registration stamp from a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance to section 16-71. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-51. - License or permit as consent to entry. 
Acceptance of a license or permit issued under this article constitutes consent by the licensee or permittee that the permit and Inspection Department of the City of South Houston or any peace officer may freely enter upon the licensed or permitted business premises during normal business hours for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-52. - Grounds for refusal, suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  The permit and inspection department may not issue a general business or import license for a business under this article if it finds that the applicant as set out in section 16-45 of this article: 
(1)  Has been finally convicted of a felony in a court of competent jurisdiction during the five (5) years preceding the filing of the application; or 
(2)  Has been on probation or parole as a result of a felony conviction during the two (2) years preceding the filing of the application. 
(b)  The permit and inspection department may not issue or renew a license for a business under this article, and shall suspend for any period of time, or cancel a license, if the permit and inspection department finds that the applicant or licensee is indebted to the city by judgment for any fees, costs, penalties, or delinquent taxes. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS AFFECTING SKILL OR PLEASURE COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 16-53. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machines. The term "skill or pleasure coin-operated machines" shall mean and have the same definition as is set forth in section 16-30. 
Video game. The term "video game" shall mean any skill or pleasure coin-operated machine which is a computer-based console equipped with color screen providing special effects wherein the player participates in the action upon the screen. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-54. - Hours. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person owning or having control of premises upon which there is located one or more skill or pleasure coin-operated machines to permit any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to play at any skill or pleasure coin-operated machine before 3:30 p.m. on any day in which the public schools located within the City of South Houston are in session unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent, or managing or possessory conservator. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-55. - Spacing requirements. 
No skill or pleasure coin-operated machine, either taxable or licensed under this chapter shall be placed in an area not providing a minimum of one (1) foot of area on each side of said machine, plus an area of four (4) feet in front of the device. In no event shall more than three (3) persons ever occupy at one time the area around a video game detailed by the foregoing description. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
DIVISION 4. - GAMEROOMS 
 
Sec. 16-56. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Gameroom. The term "gameroom" shall mean any building, room, hall, part of a building or other enclosure or any enclosed or partially enclosed space where more than five (5) skill or pleasure coin-operated machines are available to the public and which derives more than fifty (50) percent of its gross revenues in the city from skill or pleasure coin-operated machines or dedicates more than fifty (50) percent of its usable floor area to the placement of and provision for skill or pleasure coin-operating machines; provided, however, that premises which have been licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission shall not be construed to be gamerooms within the meaning of this division. 
Gameroom operator. The term "gameroom operator" means any person who owns or leases or rents or manages or is in any way responsible for controlling the operation of a gameroom. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 10, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 16-57. - Gameroom operator responsible for violation. 
Any gameroom operator who permits, allows or in any manner condones a violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined in accordance to section 16-71. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-58. - Gameroom employees subject to penalties. 
Any employee of a gameroom who violates or permits patrons or customers of said gameroom to violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance to section 16-71. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-59. - Unobstructed view to interior. 
Each amusement hall shall have unobstructed windows or open space on at least one (1) side, so that the area is open to view by members of the public passing by on a public street, or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public resorts and is admitted without charge. The operator of such gameroom shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, screens, partitions or other structures. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-60. - Operator's responsibility. 
(a)  No operator, owner, manager or employee shall, knowingly or recklessly, permit any person to illegally possess, use or sell any controlled substance on the premises. 
(b)  No operator, owner, manager or employee shall knowingly or recklessly, permit any person to possess, consume or sell any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume or sell any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(d)  No operator, owner, manager or employee shall permit any gambling, wagering or betting to be conducted on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-61. - Operation of business; license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity to engage in the business of operating a gameroom unless said gameroom shall have been first licensed by the City of South Houston in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-62. - License not to issue in violation of deed restrictions or zoning ordinance; duty of applicant with respect to deed restrictions. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under the terms of this article for the location of any gameroom where it is prohibited by any deed restrictions recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Harris County and any applicable zoning ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the applicant for a gameroom license to search the records of the county clerk's office to insure that this type of business is not prohibited by any deed restrictions, and the applicant must file an affidavit that the location of the premises for which he is applying for a license is not prohibited by deed restrictions. 
(c)  No license shall issue nor be renewed to any game room located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, public or private, or any hospital, home for the aged or infirm or any funeral parlor, day-care, church, reception hall and any city park. No license shall issue to any game room located within three thousand (3,000) feet of any other game room. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 12, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 2, 2-12-13)  
Sec. 16-63. - Fees. 
The fee to be collected by the City of South Houston for the issuance or renewal of a license to operate a game room shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). All ad valorem taxes on any and all property, personal or real, necessary to the operation of any game room must be paid prior to the issuance of any license or permit for said operation; provided, however, that no fee shall be required of persons licensed and paying fees under section 16-48 thereof. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 14, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 4, 7-24-18)  
Sec. 16-64. - Application. 
Any person, corporation, partnership, or other business entity desiring a license to operate a gameroom shall present to the City of South Houston, through the city permit and inspection department, a duplicate copy of the application submitted to the Texas Comptroller required by said comptroller for license or registration certificate issued pursuant to Article 8817. Such application will then be investigated by the permit and inspection department who will then recommend to the issuing department as to the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 10-17-89)  
Sec. 16-65. - Appeal from refusal. 
In the event the City of South Houston shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant under this division such action shall be final, unless the applicant shall, within ten (10) days after the refusal to grant such license, file a written appeal with the city secretary addressed to the city council, requesting a hearing upon the question as to whether or not his application shall be granted. In the event such appeal is filed, the City of South Houston shall provide the city council with a record of all proceedings theretofore had with reference to the application, including the written application, together with the action of the City of South Houston and the reasons for such action. The city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the City of South Houston, at which hearing, the council may make such investigation as it may deem fit, whether all the pertinent facts appear in the application or not. Within seven (7) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the city council shall cause a written deduction of its judgment thereon to be filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-66. - Posting. 
A license issued under this division shall be posted in a prominent place in the gameroom for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-67. - Transfer. 
A license issued under this division may be transferred to a different lawful location, upon sworn application and payment of a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00); so long as the new location violates no deed restrictions or other location provisions of this article. Such a license shall not be transferred to a different licensee. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-68. - Renewal. 
A license issued under this division shall be valid from January 1st through December 31st of each calendar year, unless sooner suspended or revoked, and the same must be renewed by January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-69. - Does not grant vested rights. 
No license granted under the terms of this division shall be deemed the granting of a vested right, but such license shall remain subject to the terms and provisions of this article and subject to such future regulations as shall be promulgated by the city council by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-70. - Revocation. 
If a person holding a license issued under the terms of this division violates any provision of this article, this Code or the laws of the state, or if a gameroom licensed under this division is not being conducted in accordance with this article, this Code and the laws of the state, or is being conducted in violation thereof, the City of South Houston may at any time give notice in writing to the operator, licensee, manager, or other person in control of the operation and maintenance of such gameroom that the license issued for the operation and maintenance of such gameroom has been revoked, stating therein the reason or reasons for such revocation. Such notice of revocation shall become a final revocation after the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of the service of same upon the operator, licensee, manager or other persons in charge of the gameroom, unless, on or before the expiration of such ten (10) days, the licensee, operator, manager or other person in charge of the hall shall file with the city secretary a written appeal addressed to the city council, in which it is requested that the city council grant him a hearing upon the question of whether or not the license shall be revoked. Such appeal, if made and filed as prescribed herein, shall operate as a stay or postponement of the revocation, until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make final adjudication upon the question of whether or not the license should be revoked. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the appeal. Within seven (7) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the city council shall cause a written judgment thereon to be filed with the city secretary. Such action and judgment of the city council, after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to all parties, and shall be, in all cases, by a majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 16-71. - Penalty. 
Any person, persons, operator, owner, owners, partners, licensee, or the agents of a corporation, or whoever is in charge or control of a transient amusement, or any part thereof, who shall violate or allow or cause any person or persons to violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not fewer than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for such offense; and the license or licenses shall be subject to revocation or suspension for a violation of any provision of this article or of any other provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston or any violation of the laws of the State of Texas. Any remedy prescribed by this article shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 16, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 16-72—16-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CREDIT-ACCESS BUSINESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1, adopted August 13, 2013, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as §§ 16-81—16-93 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 16-81. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article may be known and cited as "Credit-Access Businesses Regulation." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the citizens of the City of South Houston by monitoring credit-access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this article establishes a registration program for credit-access businesses, imposes restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit-access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit-access businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.010), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-82. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Certificate of registration means a certificate of registration issued by the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit-access business. 
Consumer means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases the services of a credit-access business. 
Consumer's language of preference is the language the consumer understands best. 
Credit-access business has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A. Finance Code § 393.601. 
Deferred presentment transaction has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A. Finance Code § 393.601. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city council or mayor, or city council's or mayor's designee, to enforce and administer this chapter. The City of South Houston hereby designates the city building official (or his or her designee) as the director. 
Extension of consumer credit has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A. Finance Code § 393.001. 
Motor vehicle title loan has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A. Finance Code, § 393.601. 
Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, financial institution, or any other legal entity. 
Registrant means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit-access business under this chapter and includes all owners and operators of the credit-access business identified in the registration application filed under this chapter. 
State license means a license to operate a credit-access business issued by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A. Finance Code Ch. 393, Subch. G. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.020), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-83. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense for each and every violation relating to an extension of consumer credit, and for each day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. 
(b)  An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(d)  The penalties provided for in subsection (b) are in addition to any other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.030), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-84. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the state as a credit-access business under V.T.C.A. Finance Code Ch. 393, Subch. G. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.040), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-85. - Registration required. 
A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts businesses as a credit-access business without a valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically separate credit-access business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.050), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-86. - Registration application. 
(a)  To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit-access business, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the director. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business or trade name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit-access business. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of the credit-access business, and the nature and extent of each person's interest in the credit-access business. 
(4)  A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit-access business pursuant to V.T.C.A. Finance Code Ch. 393, Subch. G. 
(5)  A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that the credit-access business is in compliance with the City of South Houston's Code. 
(6)  A non-refundable application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). This application fee may be modified from time to time by the City of South Houston by Resolution. 
(7)  A non-refundable, annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be due and payable to the City of South Houston before the city issues the renewal of the application. This renewal fee may be modified from time to time by the City of South Houston by resolution. 
(b)  An applicant or registrant shall notify the director within forty-five (45) days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of address and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant or registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.060), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-87. - Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon request. 
(a)  The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration upon receiving a completed, satisfactory application hereunder. 
(b)  A certificate of registration issued under this section must be conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit-access business. The certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director or any peace officer for examination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.070), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-88. - Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration. 
(a)  A certificate of registration expires on the earliest of: 
(1)  One year after the date of issuance; or 
(2)  The date of revocation, suspension, surrender, expiration without renewal, or other termination of the registrant's state license. 
(b)  A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with section 16-86(a)(7). A registrant shall apply for renewal at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.080), 8-13-13; Ord. No. 2013-25, § 2, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 16-89. - Non-transferability. 
A certificate of registration for a credit-access business is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.090), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-90. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  A credit-access business shall maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit arranged or obtained by the credit-access business, which mush include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the consumer. 
(2)  The principal amount of cash actually advanced. 
(3)  The length of the extension of consumer credit, including the number of installments and renewals. 
(4)  The fees charged by the credit-access business to arrange or obtain an extension of consumer credit; and 
(5)  The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under section 16-91 of this article. 
(b)  A credit-access business shall maintain a copy of each written agreement between the credit-access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer). 
(c)  A credit-access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A. Finance Code § 393.627. 
(d)  The records required to be maintained by a credit-access business under this section must be retained for at least three years and made available for inspection by the city upon request during the usual and customary business hours of the credit-access business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.100), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-91. - Restriction on extension of consumer credit. 
(a)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit-access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed twenty (20) percent of the consumer's gross monthly income. 
(b)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit-access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Three (3) percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or 
(2)  Seventy (70) percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  A credit-access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income. 
(d)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit-access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four (4) installments. Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least twenty-five (25) percent of the principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer credit that provides for repayment in installments many not be refinanced or renewed. 
(e)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit-access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three (3) times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least twenty-five (25) percent of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is made to a consumer within seven (7) days after a previous extension of consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.110), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-92. - Requirement of consumer understanding of agreement. 
(a)  Every agreement between the credit-access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer), must be written in the consumer's language of preference. Every credit-access business location must maintain on its premises, to be available for use by consumers, agreements in the English and Spanish languages. 
(b)  For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between the credit-access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(c)  For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and notice required by law must be read to the consumers in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.120), 8-13-13)  
Sec. 16-93. - Referral to consumer credit counseling. 
A credit-access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of consumer credit which references non-profit agencies that provide financial education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit, and must include the information required by section 16-90(a)(1)—(5) of this article specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If the director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of preference, the form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, § 1(1.130), 8-13-13)  
Chapter 16.5 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police civil service, § 2-59 et seq.; police assigned to motorcycle duty, § 12-6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16.5-1. - Office of city marshal. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of city marshal. There may be more than one (1) such marshal at a later date, but initially there shall only be one (1) city marshal. 
(b)  The term of the city marshal(s) shall be for two years commencing when officers are created after the election of the mayor. At this time there shall only be one (1) city marshal's office created. The office shall be appointed and filled by appointment of the mayor, subject to council approval. The first city marshal shall fill a shorter term, which is the remainder of the term that would have been underway had the office existed when new offices were filled by the mayor after the last election. Thereafter, the term shall be a full two (2) years. If and when council deems it necessary to create another marshal's position or office, council may authorize same by resolution without the necessity of changing or amending the ordinance from which this section derives. And if and when another such marshal's position is authorized by council, the method of selection and approval of the person to fill the office shall be as specified herein. 
(c)  City marshals shall serve under the direction and supervision of the judge of the municipal court. The judge shall oversee and supervise the marshal(s) in the exercise of their duties. 
(d)  City marshals shall serve and execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal processes issuing out of the municipal court of the city, as well as subpoenas and other legal processes issuing out of the civil service commission, the council, any board or commission or department requiring legal process for hearings, condemnation (eminent domain or regulation or eradication of dangerous buildings) hearings or the like; and marshals shall perform any other services or duties that may be assigned to them by the municipal judge or the city council. 
(e)  Each city marshal shall meet all qualifications for service as a Texas Peace Officer as established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement and shall seek and receive such peace officer certification within the time prescribed by Texas law, as a necessary precondition for continued employment as a city marshal. Once certified, the marshal shall have full police authority in the exercise of his or her assigned duties, but shall not be a member of the South Houston Police Department nor shall he or she be subject to or enjoy the benefits of the regulations and protection of the South Houston Civil Service Commission or the benefit of police officers' minimum wages, hours of employment or pension rights unless separately authorized in writing. 
(f)  Nothing herein shall prevent, inhibit, invalidate or interfere with the duties of a regular police officer of the city in the service or execution of any process issued out of the municipal court, which process may be placed in the hands of such police officer(s) to be served and executed. Neither a marshal nor a regular police officer has an exclusive duty in that regard. Both are authorized and empowered. 
( Ord. No. 2017-35 , §§ 1—6, 8-22-17)  
Secs. 16.5-2—16.5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNCLAIMED, UNIDENTIFIED OR ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 785, §§ 1—10, adopted March 1, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as Art. II, §§ 16.5-31—16.5-40. 
Cross reference— Junked vehicles, § 11-33 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16.5-31. - Sale of unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified personal property; definition; return of property used as evidence. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to sell at a public auction, through the agency of its chief of police, that personal property which has been in the possession of the police department for a period of at least six (6) months, which property has remained unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by its rightful owner, and which is not being held by that department as evidence for trial or trials and pending cases filed of record, and has not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession of the property by any justice of the peace, county judge or district judge. 
(b)  The following articles are designated as personal property, to-wit: All jewelry, wearing apparel, suitcases, cameras, radios, television sets, phonographs, tape recorders, sewing machines, office equipment, cash registers, typewriters, sporting goods equipment, automobile and truck tires, auto accessories and tools, hand tools, gasoline and electric motors, lawn mowers, electrical and building supplies, household furnishings and fixtures, household appliances and utensils, linens, paintings, paint material and equipment, leather goods, silverware, dishes, lanterns, cash or any other negotiable securities, and all other miscellaneous personal property of the general types and classes described. 
(c)  The city municipal court judge shall have the authority to order that property in possession of the police department be returned to its rightful owner after final disposition of the case in which the said property was being held for evidence. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 1, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-32. - Disposition of motor vehicles, auto accessories and tires; exception. 
(a)  All motor vehicles, auto accessories and tires which have been in the possession of the city police department for a period of at least ninety (90) days, and remaining unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owner, and which is not being held by that department as evidence for trial or trials and pending cases file of record, and has not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle by any justice of the peace, county judge, district judge or federal judge, may be retained by this city for official use only, or may be sold at public auction as set out in section 16.5-37. 
(b)  A list shall be prepared by the police department of all motor vehicles, tires and all auto accessories that have been returned to their rightful owner and of those items retained by the city for official use only. 
(c)  A list shall be prepared by the police department of those automobiles not returned or sold, or being officially used, and a copy of said list shall be mailed to local junk dealers (or advertised) requesting bids for same and stating a three-day period to submit a bid for said vehicles. 
(d)  The highest bidder shall be contracted to bring the said amount (in cash or cashier's check) to the police department and the bidder shall transport the vehicles at his expense and shall have transported all said vehicles within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 2, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-33. - Disposition of firearms; exception. 
(a)  All firearms which have been in the possession of the city police department for a period of at least one (1) year remaining unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owner and which are not being held by that department as evidence for trial or trails and pending cases filed of record, and have not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession of the said firearms by any justice of the peace, county judge, district judge or federal judge, shall be retained by the city police department for its official use and officially placed in the police arsenal. If said firearms are non-usable, then said property shall be destroyed after reporting such disposition to the bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms. 
(b)  Those firearms not retained for official use shall be transported to an established firm that melts steel and said firearms shall be destroyed by melting same. The chief of police shall, or he may direct the identification and records division officer of that police department to supervise this requirement. 
(c)  A list of all firearms that are retained by the police department shall be made by the chief of police, which shall consist of a physical description of the firearms (which shall include the serial number, brand name, etc.), and a copy of said list shall be sent to the mayor and identification and records division officer. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 3, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-34. - Disposition of bicycles and tricycles; exception. 
(a)  All bicycles and tricycles which have been in the possession of the city police department for a period of at least ninety (90) days, which same have remained unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owner, and which are not being held by that department as evidence for trial or trials and pending cases filed of record, and have not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession of the property by a justice of the peace, county judge or district judge, shall be sold at public auction as set out in section 16.5-37. 
(b)  Those bicycles and tricycles not sold at public auction nor returned to their rightful owners, and still in the possession of the city police department on the first day of December of any year, may be donated to any organization, at the discretion of the chief of police, and said organization shall repair same and donate same to needy children. 
(c)  A list shall be prepared by the police department of the bicycles and tricycles that are donated for charity and a copy shall be delivered to the city secretary and city council and a copy of same shall be retained by the police department identification officer. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 4, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-35. - Fitness of property for official use or for sale. 
The mayor and the city council hereby authorize the chief of police to decide on the fitness or suitability of the property for official use, or to be sold at public auction, or to be destroyed, or to be donated to a charitable organization. Said organization shall be of the class of the Salvation Army type organization. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 5, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-36. - Disposition of alcoholic beverages. 
Alcoholic beverages in any type of containers which have been in possession of the city police department for at least thirty (30) days, which have remained unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owner, and which are not being held by that department as evidence for trial or trials and pending cases filed on record, and have not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession of the property by any justice of the peace, county judge, district judge or federal judge, and any container which seal is intact, shall be destroyed under the supervision of the chief of police and he shall certify to such destruction to the mayor within ten (10) days of such destruction. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 6, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-37. - Sale by public auction; procedure. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city shall establish a proposed date for the sale at public auction of the property hereinbefore described whenever, in his opinion, sufficient amounts of such property have accumulated to justify such a sale. At least sixty (60) days before the proposed date of the auction the chief of police shall file an inventory of the property with the city secretary as a public record. While such inventory is on file as a public record the city secretary shall refer any persons who claim to be the rightful owners of any of the property listed thereon to the chief of police. The chief of police shall return any property listed on the inventory to persons who prove to his satisfaction that they are the rightful owners of such property. At least forty-five (45) days before the proposed date of the auction the chief of police shall send the city secretary a list of all items from the inventory to be sold. The city secretary shall then send the mayor, the city council and each department head of the city administration a copy of an inventory of the remaining property. Each department head, including the chief of police, who desires to use, and has a need to use, any of the property listed on the inventory in the official conduct of the activities of his department shall submit a request for such property to the mayor, through the city secretary, within ten (10) days after receipt of the inventory. After the mayor has received all such requests for the department heads, he shall decide, by approval of city council, whether the property, or any part thereof, shall be sold at public auction or shall be retained for the official use of the city. In the event two (2) or more department heads request the use of the same property, the mayor shall decide which department is to use the property. After it has been decided which property is to be retained for official use of the city, the city secretary, for the mayor, shall send the chief of police a list of such property and the mayor and the city council shall by motion authorize him to sell the remaining property at public auction. Before the remaining property may be sold at public auction, the chief of police shall, through the city secretary, cause to be published, ten (10) days' notice of the auction in a daily newspaper of the City of South Houston. The notice shall be published at least three (3) times and shall give the hour, place, and date of the auction and shall contain a list of the classes of property to be sold at the auction. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint a police officer, whose rank shall not be lower than a captain, to do that which this article orders and/or authorizes the chief of police to do, in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 7, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-38. - Storage charges. 
(a)  A charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per day shall be levied against each designated item of personal property as storage charges for each and every day such item or items shall remain in the possession of the police department as abandoned and unclaimed property, commencing seven (7) days after final disposition of the case involving the item or items of property and/or seven (7) days after the rightful owner has failed to pick up said property after being notified by the police department of its whereabouts. 
(b)  The fee for storage of motor vehicles shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each and every day that they remain in the possession of the police department. 
(c)  An officer shall make a notation to be entered on the file as to the date that the rightful owner of the property was notified. 
(d)  A storage fee shall commence seven (7) days after a diligent search by the police department has been unable to locate the rightful owner of the property which has been in the possession of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 8, 3-1-88; Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1, 4-16-02)  
Sec. 16.5-39. - Disposition of funds from public sale. 
(a)  All monies derived from any auction or auctions provided for herein shall be applied first to the storage charge accrued against the personal property sold hereunder and secondly to the general revenues of the city. Provided, however, that all monies received hereunder shall be deposited by the city treasurer into a special escrow account established for that purpose and held for a period of two (2) years prior to being transferred to the general fund of the city or the storage account as the case may be. 
(b)  The city shall not in any instance, however, be liable to any person or persons for damages as compensation for any property retained for official use or sold at public auction. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 9, 3-1-88)  
Sec. 16.5-40. - Rights and remedies preserved. 
All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under this article and amendments thereto shall be and are preserved for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 10, 3-1-88)  
Secs. 16.5-41—16.5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL WARRANT SERVICE SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-027, §§ 1—12, adopted Sept. 6, 1994, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as art. III, §§ 16.5-51—16.5-62. 
 
Sec. 16.5-51. - Participation procedure. 
(a)  Participation in the municipal warrant service system shall be on a voluntary basis and will be open to any commissioned member of the South Houston Police Department. 
(1)  Any nonparticipant may begin participation at any time by submission of a written request to the chief of police, unless barred from participation for a specified time. 
(2)  Any participant may withdraw at any time by giving written notice to the chief of police. 
(b)  Any member who is so barred from participation may apply for re-entry into the system only upon completion of the mandatory period of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 1, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-52. - Hours of warrant system activity. 
All self-initiated activity relating to the serving of a warrant by the participation to whom the warrant is issued shall be conducted during the member's off-duty hours only. If a subject who is named in a warrant calls the police station and requests to speak to the participant holding the warrant during the member's tour of duty, he/she shall be referred to the warrant system supervisor or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 2, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-53. - Funding. 
(a)  The funding for the municipal warrant service system will be generated through the collection of warrant fees. 
(b)  A warrant fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) will be assessed for each warrant issued by the municipal court. 
(c)  A separate warrant and warrant fee will be assessed for each class C misdemeanor for which a person has been charged. 
(d)  The warrant fee shall apply to and be included in all bonds posted (cash bonds, appearance bonds and pr bonds) and all capias pro fines collected. Only one (1) warrant fee will be assessed for each capias pro fines warrant issued regardless of the number of offenses for which the fine was originally levied. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 3, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-54. - Remuneration. 
(a)  All warrant fees collected shall go into the municipal general fund and participants shall be remunerated therefrom. Payment shall normally be made on or about the fifteenth of each month for all payment vouchers submitted to the city treasurer by the ninth of the month; however, when circumstances cause the chief of police to deem it necessary to submit the payment vouchers after the ninth of the month, payment will not be made until the end of month. 
(b)  Payment shall be in the form of a check (separate from participant's city payroll check) from which no taxes will be withheld. Participants will be treated as contract labor for purposes of municipal warrant service system pay. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 4, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-55. - Earned fees. 
(a)  Only the warrant holder (the participant to whom wrote the citation) can earn the warrant fee for the execution of the warrant. 
(b)  Further, the warrant must be executed as a direct result of the warrant holder's documented activity and must occur during the period of time that the warrant is physically in the possession of the warrant holder or within the fifteen-day period. The warrant belongs to warrant holder for fifteen (15) days after being issued by court. 
(c)  The warrant may be executed by: 
(1)  The bond or fine being paid, either in person or by mail; 
(2)  The physical arrest of the person named in the warrant; or 
(3)  The surrender of the person named in the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 5, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-56. - Unearned fees. 
Warrant fees shall be considered unearned by the warrant holder and shall be retained in the municipal general fund under the following circumstances: 
(1)  If a person named in a warrant is arrested by another agency, the warrant fee shall not be considered earned by the warrant holder regardless of whether: 
a.  The arresting agency collects the bond or fine and forwards it to South Houston Police Department; 
b.  Another person comes to South Houston Police Department and pays the bond or fine to gain the release of the person arrested; or 
c.  The person arrested is transferred to the custody of South Houston Police Department. 
(2)  If a person named in a South Houston Police Department warrant is arrested by an on-duty commissioned member of this agency (including the warrant holder), the warrant fee shall not be considered earned by the warrant holder, unless the warrant holder can provide empirical evidence (VIA Activity Documentation), combined with the supporting declaration of the person named in the warrant, that the person arrested was enroute to South Houston Police Department to post said bond as a result of the warrant holder's contact efforts. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 6, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-57. - Warrant execution by arrest. 
(a)  Participants are encouraged to use alternative means to execute their issued warrants prior to incarcerating warrant suspects when practical, however, when affecting such arrest, commissioned members shall adhere to relevant laws and department policies. 
(b)  Participants shall be further governed by the following guidelines concerning all warrants that are executed by arrest: 
(1)  They will be executed only by a uniformed commission member of South Houston Police Department. 
(2)  The commissioned member thus executing a warrant must be in a marked South Houston Police Department vehicle. The use of this vehicle must be approved by the chief of police or his/her designee; all commissioned members using this vehicle must be in uniform. 
(3)  When executed inside the corporate limits of South Houston by one (1) South Houston Police Department commissioned member. 
(4)  When executed outside the corporate limits of South Houston by one (1) South Houston Department commissioned member, he/she shall before entering another city call and request a backup from the law enforcement agency having primary jurisdiction at that location. 
(5)  When executed outside the corporate limits of South Houston by two (2) or more South Houston Police Department commissioned members, they shall notify the law enforcement agency having primary jurisdiction at that location and inform them of their intentions, but will not be required to have a member of that agency present. 
(6)  Commissioned members shall contact the chief of police or his/her designee for instructions prior to attempting to arrest any person on a municipal warrant (except as the result of a routine traffic stop) when that person: 
a.  Has prior felony convictions; 
b.  Is currently a fugitive from justice; or 
c.  Has a history of any assaultive offense. 
(7)  Noncommissioned members shall not participate in the physical arrest of persons named in any municipal warrants. 
(8)  Noncommissioned members are expressly prohibited from accompanying any commissioned member in a marked police vehicle while conducting any warrant service activity without explicit authorization from the chief of police. (This singular exception would be for the positive identification of a warranted subject only). 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 7, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-58. - Work locations. 
(a)  All participants are authorized to perform their warrant service activities (i.e., telephoning, mail-out preparation, paperwork, etc.) from their homes. However, the following areas within the police station shall be available for participant's convenience as long as the use thereof does not interfere with on-going, on-duty police activity: 
(1)  Xerox room—Available to all off-duty participants. 
(2)  Patrol sergeant's office—Off-duty patrol sergeants only. 
(3)  Commissioned members' work stations—Off-duty commissioned members only. 
(b)  Warrant service activity shall not be conducted in the dispatch office. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 8, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-59. - Restrictive guidelines. 
(a)  Participants must receive express authorization from the supervisor or his/her designee prior to using any South Houston Police Department equipment or on-duty members, except as permitted elsewhere in the policy. 
(b)  Participants shall not contact the court clerk in reference to warrant service problems, but shall consult with their supervisor. 
(c)  Participants shall not use the telephones, equipment, and/or office at city hall. 
(d)  Before placing any long distance phone calls which will be billed to the department, participants shall confer with their supervisor to ascertain if a less costly approach might be feasible. All authorized long distance calls shall be logged with long distance telephone slips and left with clerk. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 9, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-60. - Warrant issuance/return. 
(a)  Original issuance. 
(1)  Active warrants, ready to be issued, shall be issued to officer writing citation for fifteen (15) days. The method of dividing the warrants into bundles and issuing the bundles to participants shall be one that affords all participants a relatively equal opportunity for success as determined by the chief of police. 
(2)  Participants or their designated proxy must pick up their warrants within one hundred twenty (120) hours (five (5) days) of the official posting that warrants are ready for issuance. 
(3)  Upon the official posting that warrants are ready for issuance participants will return all unexecuted warrants remaining in the previously issued bundle to the court clerk. 
(b)  Second issuance. 
(1)  After unexecuted warrants from an original issuance have been returned for a period of fifteen (15) days, they shall be eligible for any participant to serve. 
(2)  All unexecuted warrants shall be moved to the inactive files fifteen (15) days after being returned, whereas they may be served by any participant. 
(c)  Reassigned issuance original issuance warrants not picked up within the one hundred twenty-hour limit will be reassigned and issued to those participants who picked up their warrants in a timely fashion. 
(d)  Special request any participant who has reason to believe that he/she can execute a warrant that has been moved to the inactive files may request the warrant. 
(e)  Executed warrants when a warrant is executed, the warrant holder shall immediately complete the officer's return portion of the warrant and return it to the warrant system supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 10, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-61. - Agreements between participants. 
(a)  Participants may make any agreements and/or arrangements with other participants as they deem equitable and practical to accomplish the execution of warrants assigned to them; however, warrant fees will only be paid to the assigned warrant holder. The payment of any monetary amounts due other participants as a result of such agreements shall be the responsibility of the warrant holder and any conflicts arising therefrom will not be resolved by the administration. 
(b)  Any officer wishing to participate in the warrant fee system will be required to be on an active call out list. This list will be on a weekly basis. The call out list will be used when other agencies call and have a subject in custody they need [to have picked up]. The shift supervisor will be responsible for making the decision as to whether an officer should be called or if the working shift can handle it. Any officer called out will receive call out time. Any officer that does not wish to be on the call out list will not be eligible to participate in the warrant program. Only in sickness or emergency will an officer be dismissed from call out. It will be permissible for officers to trade weeks as long as [it is confirmed] in writing and agreeable with both officers. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 11, 9-06-94)  
Sec. 16.5-62. - Severability. 
The governing body of the City of South Houston, Texas, does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phase, word, or portion of this article is declared invalid, or unconstitutional, by a court of competent jurisdiction that, in such event, it would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this article without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid, and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this article dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 94-027, § 12, 9-06-94)  
Secs. 16.5-63—16.5-85. - Reserved.  
Chapter 17 - PLUMBING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2010-14, § 1, adopted September 14, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has amended chapter 17 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 97-007, § 2, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2004-17, §§ 1—3, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 2004-38, § 1, 11-9-04. 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 6; swimming pools, § 6-131; electrical code, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; mobile homes permanently located outside mobile home parks to comply with plumbing ordinances, § 13-45; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 24. 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Adoption of plumbing code by reference. 
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the permit department and the City of South Houston, being marked and designated as 2015 International Plumbing Code, including the IAPMO Installation Standards be and are hereby adopted as the code of the City of South Houston for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the City of South Houston providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such 2015 International Plumbing Code, including the IAPMO Installation Standards published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, on file in the office of the City of South Houston, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2017-33 , § 1, 7-25-17)  
Sec. 17-2. - Fees. 
Section 103.4. Fees. The following fees are established: 
1.  103.4.1 Schedule of permit fees. The fees for all plumbing installations or work shall be in the amounts set forth on "Exhibit A" attached, as amended. 
Sec. 103.4 Fee Schedule
(Exhibit A) 
FIXTURES 	AT 
Lavatory (each) 	$4.00 
Commode (each) 	$4.00 
Bath tub (each) 	$4.00 
Kitchen sinks, bar & mop sinks (each) 	$4.00 
Shower (each) 	$4.00 
Stop & Waste Valve 	$4.00 
Vacuum Breakers 
1—5 hose bib type 	$25.00 
Vacuum Breakers Sprinkler atmospheric 
type (each) 	$15.00 
Floor or area drain (each) to Sanitary 	$10.00 
Rainwater Systems drain inside or outside 
to Storm (each) 	$25.00 
Gas (1—3 openings) 	$35.00 
Drinking Fountain (each) 	$8.00 
Water Heater Gas/Electric/Solar (each) 	$25.00 
Washing Machine (each) 	$4.00 
Disposal (each) 	$5.00 
Dryer (Gas) (each) 	$5.00 
Water Line Tie-in 	$10.00 
Water Line 0—100' 	$30.00 
Dishwasher (each) 	$5.00 
Urinal (each) 	$10.00 
Pool "P" traps 	$20.00 
Swimming Pool or Spa Heater (each) 	$20.00 
Sample Well 	$20.00 
Grease, sand and lint traps (each) 	$40.00 
On Property Replace Sewer 	$40.00 
Each Private Sewage Disposal 
System (septic) 	$80.00 
On Property Tie-In Existing Sewer 	$35.00 
Residential Sewer Tap 4" 
Plus Tie-in 	$375.00 
$35.00 
Commercial Sewer Tap-Size 4" 
Plus Tie-in 	$425.00 
$35.00 
Boilers (min 5 hp) 
Plus $3.00 per each additional hp 	$35.00 
2 & 3 Comp/Mop Sink (each) 	$10.00 
Miscellaneous Permit Amount 	$35.00 
Working without a Permit* 	
 
* $250 or double the permit fee, whichever is greater 
TYPE OF WORK 	AT 
Lawn sprinkler residential 	$45.00 
Lawn sprinkler commercial 	$75.00 
Fire water tap flat fee plus TSV 	$600.00 
Fire sprinkler system 	$90.00 
Fire stand pipes: 	
1 to 25 cabinets 	$30.00 
Plus each additional 	$1.00 
Solar system 1—3 panels 	$35.00 
Solar system over 3 panels 	$2.00 
Tanks except fuel and septic tanks: 	
Thru 1,000 gallons 	$30.00 
1,001—6,000 gallons 	$35.00 
6,000—15,000 gallons 	$40.00 
15,000—30,000 gallons 	$45.00 
Over 30,000 gallons 	$50.00 
Commercial/residential site work: 	
 (1) Storm sewer: 
Manhole (each) 
Inlet area drain 
Tie-in to city/existing storm 
0' to 100' line 
Each additional 100' 	  
$35.00 
$10.00 
$35.00 
$30.00 
$10.00 
Commercial/residential site work: 	
 (2) Sanitary sewer: 
Manhole (each) 
Up to 100 linear feet of sewer feet 
Each additional 100 linear feet 	  
$35.00 
$35.00 
$10.00 
Annual gas test (per meter-one inspection only) 	$40.00 
Vacuum breaker test certificate—Each 	$50.00 
Foundation soaker system 	$30.00 
Modular structures-tap fees plus fixtures: 	
Boring fee: 	
Up to 8? 40 feet minimum 	$1,250.00 
$10.00 per foot thereafter 	
Minimum permit fee 	$35.00 
Reinspection fee 	$35.00 
Application fee 	$10.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 2, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 1-14-14; Ord. No. 2014-21, § 1(Exh. A), 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2017-33 , § 2(Exh. A), 7-25-17)  
Chapter 18 - STANDARD SIGN CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-16, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 14, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-22, and enacted a new Ch. 18 as set out herein. The former Ch. 18 pertained to signs and derived from Ord. of 10-2-51, §§ 1—14; Ord. No. 518, §§ 2, 3, 10-1-63; Ord. No. 97-025, § 1, 8-26-97; Ord. No. 99-031, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-99; Ord. No. 2001-08, §§ 1—4, 6-5-01. 
Cross reference— General requirements of the electrical code as to electrical signs, § 8-6; electrical sign contractor's license, § 8-91, et seq.; circuits for unsupported electric signs, § 8-141; painting signs on street or sidewalk pavement, § 19-20; attachment of signs to trees growing on public property, § 19-51. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all signs, as that term is defined herein, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction or the corporate limits of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Sec. 18-2. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of outdoor advertising existing and proposed in the corporate limits of the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Sec. 18-2.1. - Superiority clause. 
If any subdivision or individual tract of land contains restrictions or covenants relating to signs, or any person or persons enter into a legally binding agreement which provides for the regulating of signs in a particular development, which are more restrictive than these regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Sec. 18-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
Advertising shall mean to seek the attraction of or to direct the attention of the public to any goods, services, or merchandise whatsoever or a location that provides goods, services or merchandise. 
Alterations or repair to an advertising display means repairs or improvements to a display, sign, or sign structure. 
Banner shall mean any piece of cloth, plastic, canvas or similar material on which there appears a display, typically supported at both ends. 
Building inspector or code enforcement officer shall mean the building inspector or code enforcement officer as defined herein and those representatives that he may designate. 
Business shall mean the erection or use of any property, building or structure, permanent or temporary, for the primary purpose of conducting in said building or structure or on said property a legitimate commercial enterprise compliant with all ordinances and regulations of the City of South Houston, governing such activity; business purpose shall not include any property, building, or structure erected or used for the primary purpose of securing a permit or erecting a sign. 
City shall mean the city of South Houston, Texas. 
Display shall mean the message of any sign whether it be in words, symbols or objects. 
Face shall mean the total display area and border of a sign. 
Federal primary system shall mean the interstate and freeway primary system and the non-freeway primary system. 
Intersection shall mean the intersection of streets, driveways, alleys or any two surfaces intended for motor vehicles. 
Interstate and freeway primary system shall mean the portion of the national system of interstate and defense highways located within Texas which are now or hereafter may be officially designated the "interstate system" by the Texas Department of Public Transportation Commission and approved pursuant to Title 3. United States Code, Section 131, as amended. 
Nameplate shall mean a non-electrical sign identifying only the name and occupation or profession of the occupant(s) of premises on which the sign is located and not exceeding six (6) inches by eighteen (18) inches. 
Non-freeway primary system shall mean that portion of the connective main highway located within Texas which now or hereafter may be designated the "primary system" by the Texas Highway and Public Transportation Commission and approved pursuant to Title 23, United States Code, Section 131, as amended. 
Owner shall mean the person who owns or leases the on-premises sign. 
Person shall mean an individual, company, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity. 
Primarily residential area shall mean the right-of-way (and adjoining property area) between two (2) intersecting public streets in which a majority of the total front footage is used for residential purposes. 
Public street shall mean the entire width between property lines of any road, street, way, alley, bridge, or other similar thoroughfare, not privately owned or controlled, when any part thereof is open to the public for vehicular traffic, is the responsibility of the city or other public agency to maintain, and over which the city has legislative jurisdiction under its police power. 
Reconstruction shall mean the repair of a sign. 
Registration shall mean the registration of the currently existing signs. 
Relocate shall mean the removal of a sign and any supporting structure from one location and placing it or its replacement at a new location. 
Residential purposes shall mean property devoted to use as a single family or multi-family residence. Residential purposes shall include, but not be limited to, property used for houses, duplexes, condominiums, town homes, patio homes and apartments; property used for hotels, motels, and boarding houses shall not be considered as used for residential purposes. Property devoted to both residential and nonresidential use shall be considered as used for residential purposes. 
Right-of-way shall mean the property fronting or immediately adjacent to, and on either side of a public street or a non-public street which the public authority has the authority to use for the road or street. 
Sight triangle shall mean the triangle formed at an intersection by intersecting curb lines and a non-curb line joining the curb lines. The triangle is shown in section 22-73 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston. 
Sign shall mean any structure, or part thereof, device, inscription, symbol, or object which is located upon, attached to, or painted or represented on any land, or on the outside of any building or structure, or on an awning, canopy, marquee or similar appendage, or permanently affixed to the glass of a window or door, so as to be seen from the outside of the building or structure, and which displays or includes any numeral, letter, word, model, banner, emblem, insignia, symbol, device, monogram, heraldry, trademark, light or other representation used as, or in the nature of, an announcement, advertisement, attention-arrester, direction, warning or designation of any person, firm, group, organization, corporation, association, place, commodity, product, service, business, profession, enterprise, industry, activity, or any combination thereof. Where the word "sign" is used herein without further modification, the same shall be understood to embrace all regulated signs. 
Sign appeals committee shall mean the committee as defined herein and appointed as established herein. 
Sign company shall mean the person who engages in the business of leasing, constructing, or maintaining signs or sign structures. 
Sign structure shall mean any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be an integral part of a building. 
Time periods shall mean calendar days unless otherwise specified. Such periods shall start on the day following the event starting the time period to run and end at 5:00 p.m. local time on the last day of such period. Any period ending on a day the City Hall is closed for any reason shall be extended until the next actual working day at the City Hall of the City of South Houston. 
Visible shall mean that the message, copy area or advertising display seen (whether or not it is legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity or simply stated, it can be seen. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-4. - Sign classifications. 
(a)  Site classification. For the purpose of this chapter, signs shall be first classified as either an "on-premises sign" or an "off-premises sign". 
(1)  On-premises sign shall mean any sign identifying or advertising the business, person, activity, goods, products or services primarily sold or offered for sale on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained when such premises are used for business purposes or which convey information or messages. 
(2)  Off-premises signs should not be allowed. 
(b)  Type classification. All signs shall further be classified into one of the following type signs: 
(1)  Ground sign shall mean a sign which is supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground. 
(2)  Marquee sign shall mean a projecting sign attached to or hung from a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a frame or pipe support extending beyond a building. 
(3)  Monument sign shall mean any sign six (6) feet or less from the natural ground level to the top of the sign. Such sign shall be solid from the ground to the top and permanently affixed to the ground at intersections. 
(4)  Projecting sign shall mean any sign which is affixed to any building wall or structure and extends beyond the building wall or structure more than twelve (12) inches. 
(5)  Roof sign shall mean any sign erected, constructed or maintained above or upon the roof of any building. 
(6)  Wall sign shall mean any sign affixed to or painted upon the wall of any building. 
(7)  Flag sign shall mean any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric or material affixed to a building, wall, fence or on a staff or pole set in a concrete foundation. 
(8)  Awning sign shall mean any sign made of cloth, metal or plastic with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a sidewalk, thoroughfare, or parking area when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in use; should not extend off of private property. 
(9)  Canopy sign shall mean any sign, other than an awning attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare, sidewalk, or parking area and not erected so as to permit its being raised to a flat position against the building, does not permit use of marquee letters, and is commonly supported by poles or uprights set upon the underlying ground; should not extend off of private property. 
(10)  Multiple business sign shall mean that type of sign that is a single structure but has a different display for each different business such as may be found at a shopping center. 
(c)  Special function classification. Any on-premises or off-premises sign of any type may also be included within one or more of the following additional classifications according to the special functions of that sign: 
(1)  Electrical sign shall mean any sign containing electrical wiring or utilizing electric current, but not including signs illuminated by a light source exterior to the sign structure. 
(2)  Portable sign shall mean any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another, including signs mounted upon a motor vehicle or designed to be mounted upon a trailer bench, wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure. A portable sign with the wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign hereunder. For the purpose of this chapter, trailer signs and signs on benches are "portable signs". 
(3)  Spectacular sign shall mean any sign which has any automatically changing advertising, which is equipped with glaring or rotating strobe or spotlights, or which has any moving message whatsoever. 
(4)  Temporary sign shall mean any sign including a banner constructed of cardboard, wallboard, or other light materials, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in size. Further, a temporary sign is intended to be used for a specific period of time (not to exceed thirty (30) days) and then removed. A portable sign and flag sign shall not be considered a temporary sign. 
(5)  Moveable sign shall mean signs designed to be moved by hand and normally stored inside the building during the nighttime. (NOT ALLOWED) 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 2, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-5. - Sign administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Building inspector or code enforcement officer. The mayor shall appoint or shall designate a building inspector or code enforcement officer to administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter and all other provisions of the laws relating to signs. The building inspector or code enforcement officer is empowered to delegate the duties and powers granted to and imposed upon him/her by this chapter to other persons serving under the building inspector or code enforcement officer. The building inspector or code enforcement officer and such other persons shall constitute the sign administration section. The building inspector or code enforcement officer is directed to enforce and carry out all provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Enforcement responsibility. The duties of the building inspector or code enforcement officer shall include not only the approval of issuance of permits as required by this chapter, but also the responsibility of ensuring that all signs comply with this chapter and all other applicable law, and that all signs for which a permit is required do in fact have a permit. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall make such inspections as may be necessary and initiate appropriate actions to bring about compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws if such inspection discloses any instance of noncompliance. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this chapter. 
(c)  Powers of the building inspector or code enforcement officer. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall have the power and authority to administer and enforce the conditions of this chapter and all other laws relating to signs. Included among such powers are the following specific powers: 
(1)  Inspection and approval. Every sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the building inspector or code enforcement officer. When deemed advisable by the building inspector or code enforcement officer, a sign may be inspected at the point of manufacture if such point is within or adjacent to the city limits of the City of South Houston. 
(2)  Warrantless search. Presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in charge of such property will admit the building inspector or code enforcement officer or his representative to the premises to inspect said premises concerning the sign. The applicant, owner or other person in charge of the premises where the sign is located agrees, by making application for a sign or renewal for a sign permit, to admit the building inspector or code enforcement officer or representative for the purposes of inspecting and investigating signs or sign structure, any building, structure, or other premises or property between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Thursday, and 7:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. on Friday; provided, however, that in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life or severe property damage, and where the owner, agent or tenant in charge of the property is not available after the building inspector or code enforcement officer has made a good faith effort to locate same, the building inspector or code enforcement officer may enter the aforementioned structures and premises at any time upon presentation of proper identification to any other person on the premises. 
(3)  Stop order. When the building inspector or code enforcement officer or his/her representative discovers that a sign is being constructed not in conformance with this chapter he/she shall issue a "stop work order" to the person or persons known to be so engaged. Upon notice and issuance of a stop order from the building inspector or code enforcement officer, work on any sign being conducted in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice and order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required to be given by the building inspector or code enforcement officer. The stop order shall contain a notice of the right to appeal as provided herein. Work shall not resume until the condition causing the stoppage is corrected to the building inspector or code enforcement officer's satisfaction or the appeal process results in a reversal of the administrator's stop order. 
(4)  Permit and license revocation. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall have, and is hereby granted, the power and the authority to revoke any and all licenses or permits authorized by this chapter for violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
a.  Appeal procedure. Upon revoking such license or permits, the building inspector or code enforcement officer shall notify by certified mail with return receipt requested to the address given by the permittee or licensee on the application for such permit or license, to advise the permittee or licensee of such revocation and notify the permittee or licensee that the revocation will become final if not appealed to the sign appeals committee within ten (10) days. 
(5)  Establish procedures. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall have the authority to adopt procedures and provide forms required to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Enforce state and federal regulations. Pursuant to and in accordance with any agreement between the City of South Houston and the State of Texas, or the United States Government, the building inspector or code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enforce any applicable terms and provisions of the Texas Highway Beautification Act, Texas Civil Statutes Annotated, Article 6624v.1, the Agreement for Carrying out National Police Relative to Control of Outdoor Advertising, entered into between the United States of America and the State of Texas, by instrument dated May 2, 1972, and any supplements or amendments to that agreement, and any rules or regulations promulgated by the State of Texas and/or the Texas Highway Department, pursuant to the said act or agreements, with regard to signs. 
(7)  Issue citations. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue citations in the amount of $500.00—$2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, §§ 1, 3, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-28, § 4, adopted October 14, 2014, repealed § 18-6, which pertained to sign appeals committee. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 18-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-28, § 4, adopted October 14, 2014, repealed § 18-7, which pertained to appeals to city council. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 18-8. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  General. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction thereof, be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city attorney is hereby authorized to take all actions, both legal and equitable, necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Subterfuge. Any permit secured before or after the effective date of this chapter which in the opinion of the building inspector or code enforcement officer has been secured through subterfuge and not in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the building inspector or code enforcement officer. 
(c)  Denial of entry for inspection. Whenever the building inspector or code enforcement officer or his/her representative, after showing proper identification, is denied admission to inspect any premises, the building inspector or code enforcement officer may revoke all sign permits. 
(d)  Work done without a permit. Any person, firm or organization installing, erecting or reconstructing a sign or changing the location of a sign without a proper permit will be assessed an amount twice the applicable permit fees or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), whichever is greater, in addition to any penalties, civil or criminal, which may be assessed as a result of a violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(e)  Illegal political campaign signs. No political campaign signs of any description shall be allowed on publicly-owned property or the property of a public utility. All political campaign signs posted on private property shall be posted only with the consent of the owner or lessee of such property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, §§ 1, 5, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-9. - Sign applications, permits and fees. 
(a)  Application procedure. Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made upon forms provided by the building inspector or code enforcement officer and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. This shall be kept current at all times. 
(2)  Location of the building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected, including lot, block, section number and subdivision name, or a metes and bounds description. 
(3)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures and all street rights-of-way bounding any part of the lot on which such sign is to be placed. 
(4)  Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings on a scale not smaller than one (1) inch to fifteen (15) feet of the plans and specifications showing the method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground. 
(5)  Applications for new signs shall be accompanied by a drawing of the sign structure and sign prepared by and certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  A copy of stress sheets and calculations showing how the structure is designed for dead load and for wind pressure on every point in the display surface. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign. 
(11)  Evidence of the insurance policy and bonds required by this chapter. 
(12)  Such other information as the building inspector or code enforcement officer shall require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(13)  Permission to enter the property under the provisions herein set out for inspection of the sign and its structure. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall hereafter erect, construct, reconstruct, relocate, alter or use a sign without first having secured written permit as herein provided from the City of South Houston. All signs illuminated by direct or indirect lighting, shall, in addition, be subject to the electrical code and the permit requirements thereof. Permits are not transferable and will be used only by the person to whom they were issued. A copy of the permit will be posted at each erection site. 
(c)  Construction permit duration. Any permit for construction of a sign shall become null and void unless construction of the sign is completed within one hundred eighty (180) days, or the permit is renewed for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days, in which case an additional fee shall be payable equal to the original fee paid and the proposed sign shall meet all of the requirements of this chapter on the date of renewal. 
(d)  Reports required. 
(1)  Change in condition. Any person holding a permit shall report any change in condition that makes the sign nonconforming within ten (10) days of when that condition becomes known to the permit holder. 
(2)  Damage to the structure. Any person holding a permit shall report any damage to the structure that makes the sign structure nonconforming within ten (10) days of when that condition becomes known to the permit holder. 
(3)  Change of address. Any change of address of the permittee must be provided to the building inspector or code enforcement officer within ten (10) days of such change. 
(e)  Relocation permits. Relocation permits are required before any sign may be removed for relocation. 
(f)  Definition of permits. Applications and fees. The following is a list of the various required applications and permits and for which a fee is charged: 
(1)  Application. There shall be an application made for all permits or renewal of permits. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Construction/reconstruction permit. The permit required to construct or reconstruct a sign or sign structure. 
(4)  Operating permit. Permit required to display and operate any sign other than a portable sign and an exempt sign. These permits shall be valid for one (1) year and shall expire on December 31. Each face requires a separate operating permit. 
(5)  Inspection. Inspection, except for portable and exempt signs, will consist of three (3) phases: 
a.  Site inspection required for pylon or pole before a sign may be located; and 
b.  Hole inspection; and 
c.  Final inspection. 
(6)  Inspection of portable signs. Inspection of portable signs will consist of two (2) site inspections and a final inspection after installation. 
(7)  Portable sign operating permit. Permit required for right to operate portable sign during permit term. All portable sign permits shall expire thirty (30) days after permits are taken out. A new portable sign permit will be given after a six-month period, and then only for thirty (30) days. A portable sign permit will be issued only twice in one (1) calendar year. 
(8)  Reinspection. When the initial inspection reveals nonconforming items, inspection must continue until there are no nonconforming items. A fee for each reinspection will be charged. 
(9)  Renewal of operating permits. Before the expiration of each operating permit, the owner shall apply for a new operating permit. 
(g)  Fees. The applicant for a permit or holder of a permit shall not be entitled to a refund of any fee paid in the event the permit is revoked. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Fees for permits and other administrative procedures shall be as follows: 
  	On-premises Signs 	Off-premises Signs 
Non-portable Application fee 	$10.00 	Not Allowed 
Re-inspection fee 	$50.00 	
Multiple business signs permit 	Flat fee - $500.00 	
Sign permit charge per sq. ft. 	$2.50 per face 	
Operating permit every two years bi-annual 	$25.00 per face 	
Flag sign 	$20.00 per flag/year 	
Portable sign fee 	$150.00 per year 	
Application fee 	$10.00 	
Re-inspection fee 	$50.00 	
 
(h)  Registration. All nonexempt signs not possessing a current operating permit shall be registered and receive permits on the basis of the owner's affidavit that they meet or exceed the safety standards set out herein. Any sign registered without an affidavit of safety shall be removed. Any registered sign not meeting the safety standards herein shall have one (1) year from registration to meet the standards. 
(i)  Electrical signs. Any electrical sign shall conform fully to the requirements of the prevailing City of South Houston Electrical Code and shall additionally receive a permit under the provisions of that code. 
(j)  Political campaign signs. No political candidate shall post political campaign signs or cause to be posted any political campaign sign if that candidate has not first made a cash deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) as a bond and fee with the permit department, and obtained a permit to post such signs. If there are no violations of the sign code by the candidate and all signs are removed as herein provided, one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the deposit will be refunded to the candidate. The remaining fifty dollars ($50.00) will be considered as the operating fee. No political campaign sign shall be posted or displayed before the candidate has officially filed for the office for which the campaign is conducted. All political campaign signs must be removed by the candidate within seven (7) days of the deciding election for that candidate. 
(k)  Reserved. 
(l)  Permits not transferable. Permits are issued to the applicant only and no permits are transferable except as herein provided. 
(m)  Exemptions. No permit shall be required under this chapter for the following on-premises signs unless any such sign is a spectacular sign or a portable sign. Any sign listed hereunder shall be erected and maintained in conformity with the provisions otherwise of this chapter. 
(1)  Reserved; 
(2)  Directional and regulatory signs erected by the city, State of Texas (including its political subdivisions, such as counties and school districts), or the federal government and the lessees of such governmental entities; 
(3)  Railroad signs; 
(4)  Legal notices, house numbers, "no trespassing", "no parking" and other similar warning signs, not exceeding two (2) in number; 
(5)  Temporary signs smaller than twelve (12) square feet, provided the number of such signs on any one address does not exceed one (1) in number; 
(6)  Signs required by federal, state, or local law; 
(7)  On-premises signs setting forth the location of or directions to parking or buildings located on the premises or regulating the flow of on-premises traffic, only if they do not include any electrical wiring; 
(8)  Signs displayed, designed, or used for or upon motor vehicles as long as such vehicles are used by the business for delivery or identification. (This is not to be construed to exempt signs built or placed upon a motor vehicle solely for the purpose of advertisement.); 
(9)  Signs designed and used for display upon or with heavier-than-air craft; 
(10)  Signs within a stadium, open-air theater, arena, public or recreational area which are designed primarily to be viewed by patrons within such stadium, open-air theater or arena; 
(11)  On-premises real estate signs five square feet or less; 
(12)  Christmas displays and similar temporary displays erected without advertising; however, such displays shall be subject to the fire and electrical code and fire safety rules promulgated by the fire marshal; 
(13)  A sign not over forty (40) square feet in area setting forth information concerning a building or other structure under repair or construction or advertising the sale or rental of the premises; 
(14)  Subdivision identification signs, one (1) per subdivision forty (40) square feet or under; 
(15)  One (1) flag of the United States and/or the State of Texas and/or the flag of the City of South Houston; 
(16)  Fast food establishments may have in and out directional signs with the company logo if they do not exceed one and one-half (1.5) square feet in addition to the five (5) allowed by this subsection; 
(17)  Any on-premises sign viewed only from within the premises and not visible from any public road; 
(18)  Any name-plate sign placed on the entrance door or within six (6) inches of the entrance opening; 
(19)  Signs exempt from operating permit only. 
a.  Any "on-premises" sign used for the purpose of perpetuating the doctrines and teachings of any generally recognized church or religious organization holding a valid "non-profit" charter which has been filed in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of Texas and for which a current tax exemption certificate has been issued by the Internal Revenue Service; or 
b.  Any on-premises sign operated by and used to further the interests of other recognized charitable organizations holding valid "non-profit" charters which have been filed in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of Texas and for which current certificates have been issued by the Internal Revenue Service. 
It shall be the duty of any person, company, organization or entity claiming exemption status under this section to provide any documentation or other items of proof to the building inspector or code enforcement officer. An organization claiming exemption status as a tax-exempt organization shall submit a photocopy of its charter and state and federal tax exemption certificates to the building inspector or code enforcement officer. 
(n)  Normal maintenance, changing of electric light bulbs. No sign permit is required for the change of any of the ornamental features or normal maintenance of a sign previously permitted. This provision shall not release a person from complying with all other applicable permitting requirements of the City of South Houston, including those of the 2006 Edition of the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, §§ 1, 6—12, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 10-28-14; Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 18-10. - Sign companies. 
(a)  License required. Any person or company wishing to engage in the business of leasing, repairing, constructing or erecting signs shall first obtain a license from the City of South Houston. A notarized form, approved by the building inspector or code enforcement officer, shall be completed by the person or company, submitted to the building inspector or code enforcement officer and placed on file with the City of South Houston. This license requirement shall apply to any business or individual erecting, repairing or constructing. 
(b)  License fee. Any person required to obtain a license under the terms of this section shall pay an annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Address and agent for service of process. Any person who is required to obtain a license under the terms of this section shall provide a current address, and keep such address current at all times, at which services of process may be had, or provide the current name and address of its registered agent, such agent's name and address to be kept current. Any person failing to comply with this provision is subject to having his/her license revoked. 
(d)  Insurance. Each person licensed under the terms of this section shall submit copies of policies of insurance certified by the agent issuing them, together with written proof that the premiums have been paid, showing that the performance of work in connection with each sign will be covered by approved public liability and property damage insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any person injured; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person; and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. Such policies of insurance shall be in a form selected or approved by the city and shall name the city as an additional insured. In addition, such policies of insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue such policies of insurance in the State of Texas and maintaining an office or represented by an authorized agent in the State of Texas, shall expressly state that it may not be canceled unless ten (10) days' written notice is given to the building inspector or code enforcement officer before cancellation of the policy, and must contain an endorsement to the effect that the issuer waives any claim or right in the nature of subrogation to recover against the city, its officers, agents or employees. Whenever any policy of insurance is canceled, the building inspector or code enforcement officer shall require that all work to which such policy applies be stopped immediately. No permits shall be issued until such time that the person or company complies with these insurance requirements. 
(e)  Number to be displayed on vehicle. Vehicles owned or operated by a duly licensed sign installer shall have displayed thereon, at all times, the license number shown on such installer's license, prefixed by the initials "S.H.I." 
(f)  Electrical sign contractors. Each person licensed under the terms of this section whose operations include signs that in any manner include the use of electrical power shall adhere to the requirement provisions of the electrical code of the City of South Houston as that code now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-11. - Sign maintenance and removal. 
(a)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The area around any sign location must be maintained and kept clean by the owner. Grass will be cut a minimum of six (6) feet from said sign on all sides and entirely to the street curb on the side nearest the street, and debris, etc., will be removed at least weekly. 
(2)  All signs shall be thoroughly painted as often as is necessary; unless constructed of galvanized or noncorroding metal or treated with appropriate wood preservative, and shall be kept in good repair consistent with good maintenance. All braces, bolts, clips, supporting frame and fastenings shall be free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot, or loosening. All signs shall be able to withstand safely at all times the wind pressures specified elsewhere in this chapter. In case any sign is not so maintained, the building inspector or code enforcement officer shall give written notice to the owner or lessee thereof to so maintain the signs, or to remove the sign. Non-maintenance shall be considered a misdemeanor and penalty shall be assessed accordingly. 
(b)  Unsafe signs. Should any sign, in the opinion of the building inspector or code enforcement officer, become unsecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, the building inspector or code enforcement officer shall give written notice of the condition of the sign to the person owning the sign. Said person so notified shall correct the unsafe condition of the sign in a manner to be approved by the building inspector or code enforcement officer in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Unlawful signs. In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, in addition to any other rights and remedies provided herein, the building inspector or code enforcement officer shall give written notice to the owner, lessee, or person responsible for said sign ordering said owner, lessee or person to alter the sign such that it complies with this chapter, or to remove the sign. 
(d)  Removal of signs. 
(1)  Signs with current permits. Any sign with a current operating permit that is in violation of the previsions herein shall be subject to removal. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall notify the person responsible for the sign by certified mail, return receipt requested, to repair or remove within twenty (20) days. If the sign is not repaired or removed, the city may remove the sign at the owner's expense and a lien may be placed against the property of the owner for such expense. 
(2)  Signs without current permits. Any sign without a current operating permit that is in violation of the provisions herein shall be subject to removal. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall notify the person responsible for the sign by certified mail, return receipt requested, to remove the sign within ten (10) days. If the sign is not removed, the city may remove the sign at the owner's expense and a lien may be placed against the property of the owner for such expense. 
(3)  Abandoned signs. Any abandoned sign or sign structure shall be treated as a sign without a current permit. 
(4)  Removal of unlawful signs by the city. The following procedures will be followed by the city in removal of unlawful signs by the city: 
a.  Signs found on public property. All signs found on public property or public utility property or easement may be removed and discarded by the city without notice to the owner. This removal does not relieve the owner of any penalties. 
b.  Portable signs found on public property. The owners of portable signs that have the proper identification on them found on public property or public utility property or easement may be removed by the city and stored for ten (10) days after the notice of removal is received by the owner for the owner to reclaim. If not reclaimed within ten (10) days, the sign will be sold at auction. The cost to reclaim shall be the sum of the following: 
1.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) civil penalty. 
2.  Actual cost of removal and hauling: Minimum fifty dollars ($50.00). 
3.  Storage fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
4.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for employee's time to administer such confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-12. - Prohibited use of signs. 
(a)  Signs not to be posted on or to public property. It shall be unlawful for any sign other than official signs erected by the city, county, independent school district, State of Texas or railway company to be placed or caused to be placed, painted, printed, posted or affixed in any manner, any picture, bill, sign or other advertising matter whatsoever on any curb, sidewalk, pavement, telephone pole, electric pole, traffic signal standard or pole, or other public improvement in any public street or grounds, or upon any bridge, overpass, underpass or parts of the same, median, esplanade, road right-of-way, or public utility easement, traffic island, or public building, structure or erection of any type belonging to the city. 
(b)  No sign shall resemble an official sign. No sign shall be constructed which resembles any official marker erected by the city, state or any governmental agency or which, by reason of position, shape or color, could conflict with or be confused with emergency vehicle lights, especially blinking lights. Use of words such as "stop", "look", "danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic is prohibited. 
(c)  Signs not to interfere with official ones. Signs may not be located or illuminated in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal or device, or to obstruct or interfere with the view of a driver or approaching, emerging or intersection traffic. All such signs shall comply with the provisions of section 22-73 of the City Code. 
(d)  Proper shielding of lighted signals; interference with drivers' motor vehicles. Signs containing lights which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way from which the sign is primarily viewed and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle, are prohibited. 
(e)  Spectacular signs. The following types of spectacular signs shall be deemed prohibited: 
(1)  Signs with strobe, rotating strobe, or blinking strobe lights. 
(2)  Signs with flashing spotlights, rotating spotlights, or blinking spotlights shall not operate in a capacity which will interfere with traffic. 
(3)  Automatically changeable advertising signs with more than one message which changes every three (3) seconds. 
(4)  Flashing lights with bulbs of greater than fifteen (15) watts. 
(5)  Spectacular signs placed perpendicular to the roadway with the exception of automatically changeable advertising as regulated above. 
(f)  Signs not to obstruct egress. 
(1)  No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any means of egress, or any opening necessary for required light, ventilation or fire fighting or for escape from the premises, or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. 
(2)  No sign shall be attached to any exterior stairway, fire escape, fire tower balcony, or balcony serving as a horizontal exit. 
(3)  No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to interfere with the operation of a counterbalanced section of a fire escape, and no projecting sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained without a minimum of seven (7) feet of clearance over any such counterbalanced section. 
(4)  No sign shall obstruct the free use of any window above the first story. 
(g)  Emitting signs prohibited. No emitting sign shall be permitted and is strictly prohibited at any location within the city. 
(h)  Signs employing motion picture machines. No sign shall employ a stereopticon or motion picture machine. 
(i)  Signs not to create easements. No permit for a sign extending beyond private property onto a public street, public sidewalk or public alley shall constitute a permanent easement, and every such permit shall be revocable at any time by action of the city council. The city shall not be liable for any damages to the owner by reason of such revocation. The only time such a permit shall be issued shall be in the case of a projecting sign extending over a public sidewalk when such sidewalk abuts the front of the building to which the projecting sign is attached. Nor shall any sign, by virtue of its longevity, create an interest in real property by limitations or otherwise. 
(j)  Location on vacant building. No sign or sign structure shall be permitted to remain for more than ninety (90) days on any vacant building or premises, except a conforming sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building or premises, or a sign which is maintained in a manner conforming to the requirements of this chapter. After ninety (90) days of vacancy, the message must be blanked out. 
(k)  Vision restrictions prohibited. Any sign that restricts vision necessary for safety is prohibited. If such a sign is erected and it does restrict vision so as to be a safety hazard, it will be removed or modified to correct such restriction and eliminate the hazard. It is the responsibility of the person owning and erecting the sign to ensure that the sign does not create such a hazard. The following are guidelines to construction to prevent such restrictions of vision: 
(1)  Any sign over pedestrian traffic shall be no lower than eight (8) feet above the pedestrian surface. 
(2)  Any sign over passenger vehicle traffic shall be no lower than ten (10) feet above the vehicular traffic surface. 
(3)  Any sign over general vehicular traffic shall be no lower than fourteen (14) feet six (6) inches above the traffic surface. 
(4)  Any sign which obstructs vision within the sight triangle. 
(l)  Obscene signs prohibited. No obscene sign shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 13, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-13. - On-premises and off-premises sign regulations. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  No sign in sight triangle. All ground signs discussed in this section shall meet all requirements of section 22-73 of the City Code, and shall not be placed in, or extend on public streets, easements, or rights-of-way. 
(2)  Shall not obstruct view. No sign shall in any way obstruct the view of traffic over the sight triangle or as defined in this chapter. 
(3)  Roof sign clearance. Roof signs must have one foot of open space between the roof line and the bottom of the sign, and three (3) feet of open space shall be required between the sign structure and edge of the roof, and between sign structures. 
(b)  Identification of signs. Every off-premises (not allowed) sign shall have identification (ID) marks assigned to it. Every business which has on-premises signs shall have one set of identification (ID) marks assigned to it. Each off-premises sign shall display the sign permit sticker provided by the city and the (ID) marks painted or attached in a conspicuous place on the sign. Each business sign shall display the sign permit sticker provided by the city on each sign and one set of (ID) marks painted or attached in a conspicuous place on the most noticeable sign. The required (ID) marks are to be four letters assigned by the building inspector or code enforcement officer at the time the sign is permitted. The (ID) marks shall be one (1) inch in height for each forty (40) feet or fictional part thereof from the center of the nearest public road. The (ID) marks may be black on a white background or yellow on a black background only. The marks must be readable from the nearest public road. 
(c)  Height restrictions. An on-premises sign may not be erected that exceeds an overall height of forty-two and one-half (42½) feet, excluding cutouts extending above the rectangular border, measured from the highest point on the sign to the ground level of the ground. A roof sign may not at any point exceed twenty-five (25) feet above the roof level. A variance up to twenty-five (25) feet above the adjacent roadway may be granted for good cause shown. 
(d)  Face restriction. 
(1)  No business may have more than five (5) faces per on-premises location except for wall signs. For signs on a double-faced, back-to-back, four-sided or V-type nature, each face is considered a separate sign in computing the face area. A curved surface sign shall be considered as three (3) faces and a circular sign shall be considered as four (4) faces. Those five (5) signs may not exceed in total face area the greater of: 
a.  Three hundred (300) square feet; or 
b.  One (1) percent of the total useable square feet of the building, plus one square foot for each linear foot of frontage on the adjacent streets. 
c.  The total area of all wall signs shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the wall of the building below the roof line. 
(2)  No off-premises billboards allowed. 
(e)  Size and quantity of types restrictions. Total number of on-premises signs allowed at any one business shall not exceed five (5) except for wall signs. The maximum of the individual types of categories of signs are as follows: 
(1)  One (1) portable sign only permitted once a full year. The frame and wheels shall be enclosed so the portable sign will look like a monument sign and meet the safety requirements for the protection of the public. 
(2)  One (1) monument, maximum of sixty (60) square feet on each side. 
(3)  Two (2) monument signs if business has frontage on two roads with a total street frontage of three hundred (300) feet or more. 
(4)  One (1) marquee sign. 
(5)  Two (2) canopy signs. 
(6)  One (1) ground sign per separate street frontage. 
(f)  Monument signs. All on-premises signs shall be of the monument style insofar as it is feasible. 
(g)  Cutout areas permitted. Exclusions or appendages (cutouts) shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total sign face area and shall not exceed five (5) additional feet in height or three (3) feet of additional width. 
(h)  Spacing. No on-premises pole sign shall be erected within five hundred (500) feet of a pole sign for the same business on the same street; except each business within the limit of five (5) signs shall be permitted one sign for each street frontage. 
(i)  Multiple business signs. Multiple business signs, in addition to all other regulations herein contained, shall observe the following rules that apply to the installation and operation of multiple business signs. 
(1)  If there is a multiple business sign it shall be the only sign within one hundred (100) feet of the nearest street except for signs on the buildings of the business or directional signs. 
(2)  There shall be only one multiple business sign per multiple business center per five hundred (500) feet of street frontage on one street. 
(3)  There can be one or more multiple business signs on each separate street for which the multiple business center has at least two hundred (200) feet of frontage. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  Subdivision signs. Only one off-premises sign with the name of the subdivision and directions thereto will be permitted in addition to the one exempt sign for a residential subdivision situated within the city limits of the City of South Houston that has been approved by the city and duly platted and recorded in the records of Harris County, Texas. The size of such sign inclusive of all sides shall not exceed a total of three hundred (300) square feet. Such sign is allowed for a maximum period of two (2) years and shall be promptly removed at the end of the two-year period. If the subdivision is less than ninety-five (95) percent sold, the sign may be re-permitted for two (2) years. 
(l)  Relocation. A site for relocation of a billboard sign must be obtained within six (6) months of removal and construction completed within one hundred eighty (180) days thereafter. 
(m)  Accumulation of rain water prohibited. All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained to prevent the accumulation of rain water in or on the sign. 
(n)  Garage sale signs. The person obtaining the permit for the sale is entitled to post original on-premises and five (5) off-premises temporary signs on private property only not to exceed one and one-half (1.5) square feet in size. All signs must be removed after the sale or the holder of the sale is subject to penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, §§ 1, 14, 15, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-14. - Structural requirements; generally and for specific signs. 
(a)  Design. 
(1)  General. All sites and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as not to over-stress any of the elements thereof. The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the deal load resisting moment for all signs. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building for all signs. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(2)  Wind loads. All signs and sign structures shall be designed to resist wind loads as follows: 
Wind Load Pressures in Pounds per Square Foot for All Signs 
Height Above Ground*, Feet 	Pressure, Pounds/Sq. Ft. 
0—50 	30 
 
*Measured above the average level of the ground adjacent to the structure. 
(3)  Vertical design loads. Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind loads. 
(4)  Working stress. All signs shall be designed to conform with the requirements of the 2006 Edition of the International Building Code, regarding allowable working stresses. The working strength of chains, cables, guys or steel rods shall not exceed one-fifth ( 1/5 ) of the ultimate strength of such chains, cables, guys or steel rods. 
(5)  Registered engineer's seal. All commercially erected signs shall be approved by a professional registered engineer registered in the State of Texas and all plans shall contain the engineer's seal. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  General. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of the 2006 Edition of the International Building Code. 
(2)  Materials. Materials for construction of all signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for building in the 2006 Edition of the International Building Code. 
(3)  Nonstructural trim. Non-structural trim and portable display surface may be of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof, consistent with the 2006 Edition of the International Building Code. 
(4)  Anchorage members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed the safe values stated in section 18-14(a)(1) herein. All ground signs shall be anchored to resist the wind load specified in section 18-15(a)(2) herein, acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pull out amounting to a force twenty-five (25) percent greater than the required resistance to overturning. 
(c)  Electrical requirements. All electrical fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances installed in conjunction with a sign shall be designed and installed in accordance with the City of South Houston's Electrical Code as it now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(d)  Clearances: 
(1)  Clearances from high voltage power lines. Signs shall be located a minimum distance of twelve (12) feet measured horizontally and twelve (12) feet measured vertically from overhead electrical conductors commonly called distribution lines and a minimum distance of five (5) feet measured horizontally and five (5) feet measured vertically from what are commonly called service drop lines. The term "electrical conductors" as used in this subsection means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground. 
(2)  Clearance from poles. No sign shall be erected nearer than five (5) feet horizontally or eight (8) feet vertically from any telephone pole or cable pole or cross-member of that pole. 
(e)  Exempt signs not exempt from this section. No sign which is otherwise exempt is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Sec. 18-15. - Portable signs. 
(a)  Hitch. Every portable sign shall be equipped with a trailer hitch and locking device approved by the building inspector or code enforcement officer to hold the trailer in a securely locked position during transport. All such hitching equipment shall also comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws regulating same. 
(b)  Anchoring. Every portable sign not in transit shall be securely anchored to the ground by cables, ground supports, or such other methods in order to comply with the wind load requirements set out herein or so anchored so that the sign will fall to its side without moving beyond the limits of that fall. All anchoring systems intended to be used by the sign company or sign owner shall be approved by the building inspector or code enforcement officer and the application for a portable sign, whether it be original, re-permit or re-location, shall designate the anchoring system to be used on that particular sign. 
(c)  Standards. Portable signs for the purposes of this chapter shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including the structural requirements, spacing requirements, permitting and fee requirements, insurance and bonding requirements, and all other provisions of this chapter applicable to ground signs unless a provision specifically includes or excludes a portable sign. 
(d)  Maintenance. The area where any portable sign is located must be maintained and kept clean by the owner. Grass will be cut a minimum of six (6) feet from said sign on all sides and entirely to the street curb of the side nearest the street and debris, etc., will be removed at least every seven (7) days. 
(e)  Electrical. No portable sign may contain electrical components. Extension cords may not be laid across any sidewalk, driveway or any other line of traffic. 
(f)  Changeable face protection. Portable signs with changeable face display shall be secured by a locked cover so that the message cannot be tampered with and the changeable items will not be blown away by any wind. 
(g)  Size. No portable sign shall exceed in outside dimension six and one-half (6½) feet vertical or twelve and one-half (12½) feet horizontal. The advertising space on each side shall not exceed seventy-two (72) square feet or a dimension of six (6) feet by twelve (12) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-16. - Registration of existing nonpermitted signs. 
The owners of all signs now existing in the city that are not exempt as herein provided and do not have current operating permits and are subject to the provisions hereof, have the responsibility to register or permit each and every sign. Any sign not currently permitted or registered by the provisions hereof by January 31 of each year shall be considered in violation of these provisions and subject to the penalties herein contained. 
All signs that were erected prior to the date of passage hereof, if they have been either continuously permitted since erection or continuously permitted since October 18, 1983, which do not conform to the provisions hereof shall be considered nonconforming, but legal, signs; provided, however, that all signs after January 31, 1996, shall fully comply with the identification provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Sec. 18-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-28, § 16, adopted October 14, 2014, repealed § 18-17, which pertained to variance procedure and committee. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 18-18. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Adverse possession. No sign or its location will gain any future rights to that location or rights to a sign no matter how long it has been displayed. 
(b)  Presumptions of ownership. There is a rebuttable presumption of ownership under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Printed name of the owner on the sign. 
(2)  Molder of the permit number on the sign. 
(3)  The beneficiary of the display on the sign. 
(4)  The property on which the sign is located. 
(c)  Current address required. Any person, company, firm, partnership or corporation who is required to obtain any permit under this chapter will maintain his current address with the building inspector or code enforcement officer. The last address furnished by the entity holding the permit shall be presumed to be the correct address and any notice sent to that address shall be effective delivery of notice. 
(d)  Presumption of notice. Each notice required hereunder shall be sent to the listed owner of any sign by certified mail with return receipt requested and at the same time by regular mail. If the registered mail is not picked up, refused, or undeliverable, but the regular mail is not returned, it will be presumed that the notice sent by regular mail was delivered on the 5 th day after posting or the date of first notice of the registered or certified mail was given to the addressee. 
(e)  Notice to presumed owner. Notice of a violation will be sent to the person presumed to be the owner in the order above set out and if the presumed owner refused to acknowledge that he is responsible for the sign, the city may without further notice remove the sign. 
(f)  City permit is not an endorsement. Any approval of a sign or its structure by the city is not a verification or endorsement of the worthiness of the sign and any failure of the sign or its structure is strictly the responsibility of the owner, operator, designer or person erecting the sign and its structure. 
(g)  The sanitation division is designated to assist in removals. The sanitation division of the public works department is designated as the division of the city government to assist and aid the building inspector or code enforcement officer in the removal of signs. The building inspector or code enforcement officer shall make a request in writing on forms provided and prepared by him to the sanitation division indicating the sign and its location and the location to which it is to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-19. - Use of temporary structures, fences and barricades for advertising purposes. 
(a)  Temporary structures used for advertising. Temporary structures, fences and barricades placed around excavations or used during building operations, whether on public or private property, maybe e used for advertising purposes during the necessary maintenance of the barricades, so long as their use does not become a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Sec. 18-20. - Signs within 100 feet of city's war memorial. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place a sign on public property within one hundred (100) feet of the city's War Memorial located at Virginia and State Highway 3 in South Houston, Texas. 
(b)  The penalty for any violation shall be a fine not to exceed the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per sign for each day or any part thereof during which a sign is located in the prohibited area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Sec. 18-21. - Signs in or adjacent to the memorial park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place any sign, including political signs, upon any public street, public sidewalk, public right-of-way, public curb, or other public improvement abutting or adjacent to the city's Memorial Park or in or upon the Memorial Park property unless express consent thereof shall have been first granted by the city council. 
(b)  Any unlawful sign found in violation of this chapter shall be seized and removal thereof is hereby authorized. The code enforcement officer, employees of the police department, and the department of public works are hereby authorized to impound any such signs which shall be transported to a location to be designated by the code enforcement officer for storage. Snipe signs which have a value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00) may be disposed of immediately. The custodian of the storage area shall maintain records of where such signs were located when they were so impounded and the date on which they were so impounded and shall hold the same in the storage area for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. Any sign so held may be redeemed by the owner thereof upon the payment of a fee to the City of South Houston consisting of a total of fifty dollars ($50.00) for hauling the same to storage, plus ten dollars ($10.00) per day storage fee for each day the sign is stored. Such fee shall be in addition to, and not in lieu, of, any fine imposed upon the owner for violation of this subsection. Any sign impounded and stored and not redeemed by the owner thereof within thirty (30) days may be sold at public auction in the same manner as surplus property of the city. 
(c)  For the purpose of the chapter, snipe signs are defined as signs which are tacked nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, stakes, fences, or other like objects, the advertising matter of which is not applicable to the present use of the premises on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2(Exh. A), 6-14-11)  
Chapter 19 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Appointment and removal of bridge and street superintendent, §§ 2-3, 2-5; dogs not to run at large on streets, sidewalks or other public grounds, § 4-19; use of streets by wreckers, Ch. 5; fences prohibited on public right-of-way, § 6-4; deposit of garbage and trash on public property, § 10-5; use of loudspeakers or amplifiers on streets, § 12-3(6); driveway required for mobile homes permanently located outside mobile home park, § 13-52; street specifications for mobile home parks, § 13-66; limitation on mobile home park access ways to streets, § 13-70; use of streets and alleys in oil and gas drilling or production operations, § 14-2; parks, Ch. 15; signs located on or projecting over public property, § 18-12 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 22; unlawful disposal of sewage on public property, § 24-39; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 311. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed as repealing or otherwise affecting the validity of any ordinance: 
(1)  Dedicating, accepting, naming, renaming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, improving, widening or vacating any street or other public way in the city; 
(2)  Establishing or otherwise relating to any system of numbering blocks and assigning street numbers for buildings or lots; 
(3)  Relating to street maintenance agreements with the state; or 
(4)  Establishing or prescribing grades for streets; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 19-2. - Encroachments by buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 8, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-3. - Obstructing drains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any drain in any public street or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 9, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-4. - Permission for erection or maintenance of poles and wires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over any street, alley or other public way or public place, without having first secured permission from the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 10, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-08, adopted June 12, 2012, repealed the former § 19-5. At the editor's discretion, new provisions have been added as a new Art. III in this Chapter. The former § 19-5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 102, § 1, 8-13-35; Ord. of 9-10-35.  
Sec. 19-6. - Permit for placement of drainage pipe or culvert in street right-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any drainage pipe across or upon any drainage ditch or bar ditch located upon any street right-of-way in the city, or to construct any culvert thereupon, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city secretary. Application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city secretary, which shall show the location, size of the pipe and such construction details as may be required by the city secretary, including the location of all drainage outlets, which shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a permit under this section the applicant shall post with the city secretary a one hundred dollar ($100.00) bond or one hundred dollars ($100.00) in cash, which shall be refundable upon the inspection of the site by the building inspector and his that the drainage opening. 
(c)  The placement of pipes residential lots on which are situated single family dwellings is exempt from the provisions or this section. 
(Ord. No. 602, §§ 1, 4, 6-6-72)  
Sec. 19-7. - Walking or driving on or injuring new pavement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement, while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft or newly laid pavement. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-8. - Repair of pavement. 
All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be in good repair. Such repair work, whether done by the city or by the abutting property owner, shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of streets. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 2, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-9. - Barricades and lights for paving work and excavations. 
(a)  Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place or making an excavation in the same shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury of any person or by reason of the work. Such barricades shall be by a light at night. Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury, and any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation, while the same remains open, shall guard the same with proper barricades and lights. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 469, §§ 5, 6, 11-5-60) 
Cross reference— Use of barricades for advertising purposes, § 18-20.  
Sec. 19-10. - Unlawful use of streets, sidewalks and easements generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public street, alley or easement for any purpose other than that for which it was dedicated. 
(Ord. of 8-1-50)  
Sec. 19-11. - Street and sidewalk obstructions generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may be specified by ordinance or by the superintendent of streets. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 4, 11-14-60)  
Sec. 19-12. - Construction or maintenance work obstructing streets. 
(a)  Any person desiring to perform any construction or maintenance work in the city which may block any street or impede any traffic shall first obtain a permit prior to performing such construction or maintenance work. Such person may obtain such permit by applying for same at the police department of the city and paying a ten dollar ($10.00) fee for new construction and a one dollar ($1.00) fee for maintenance work. Such permit shall specify the location and approximate time, in specific hours, that the person will block such street or impede traffic. A permit shall not be required for emergency maintenance work which can be performed within one hour or less, provided that the police department is notified and gives its approval prior to commencement of the work. 
(b)  A flagman or policeman shall be required to direct traffic during the progress of work done pursuant to a permit issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 618, §§ 1—4, 1-23-75)  
Sec. 19-13. - Living in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dwell, sleep or live in any railway coach, motor vehicle or tent located or situated in any street in the city, or to otherwise dwell or live in any such street. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 1, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 19-14. - Soliciting contributions on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit contributions of any nature, whether for charity or otherwise, on the paved portion of any street in the city. 
(Ord. No. 588, 1-19-71)  
Sec. 19-15. - Openings or stairways in streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley, without a permit from the city council. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 13, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-16. - Rock gardens, boulders, benches and fences prohibited in parkways. 
No rock gardens, boulders, benches or fences shall be built or maintained in any parkway. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 14, 11-15-60) 
Cross reference— General prohibition against fences on city right-of-way, § 6-4.  
Sec. 19-17. - Display of merchandise on streets or other public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, public right-of-way, public easement, city owned and controlled land, sidewalk or other public place for the display of goods or merchandise for sale. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 7, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-18. - Gasoline pumps prohibited on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any gasoline pump on any public street or sidewalk in the city. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 11, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-19. - Playing games on streets and other public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play any game upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, where such game causes unnecessary noise or interferes with traffic or pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 12, 11-15-60) 
Cross reference— Noise generally, § 12-3; traffic, Ch. 22.  
Sec. 19-20. - Writing, painting, etc., on pavement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write upon or paint or mark any sign or advertisement upon any street, sidewalk or alley pavement. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 7, 11-15-60) 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 19-21. - Deposit of injurious material on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any glass or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(Ord. No. 469, §§ 22, 23, 11-15-60) 
Cross reference— Deposit of garbage and trash on public property, § 10-5.  
Sec. 19-22. - Burning of leaves, paper, etc., on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys in the city. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 24, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-23. - Duty of city officers and employees to report street and sidewalk defects and obstructions. 
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to report the same to the supervisor of street and bridge, as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 3, 11-15-60; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 11-6-01) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted November 6, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code. Such ordinance abolished the job position superintendent of street and bridge and created the supervisor of street and bridge. Therefore, this reference was changed at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 19-24. - Supervisor of street and bridge department. 
(a)  Position created. There is hereby created the job position of supervisor of street and bridge department. 
(b)  Appointment. The supervisor shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, and may be discharged by the mayor with the consent of city council. 
(c)  Salary. The salary of the supervisor shall be set by the city council. 
(d)  Duties. The supervisor of the street and bridge department shall have supervision of all employees of that department and of employees temporarily assigned to that department while they are performing work for street and bridge. He shall perform all other duties as prescribed by the mayor and city council. He shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper administration and operation of the street and bridge department and affairs, and shall make frequent reports to the mayor and city council. 
(e)  [Budget provisions.] The budget provisions for salary of superintendent of street and bridge are hereby transferred to supervisor of street and bridge. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, §§ 2, 4, 11-6-01) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2001-22, § 2, 4, adopted November 6, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, § 19-24 was added at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 19-25. - Construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No persons, firm, or company shall commerce the construction or installation of facilities within the public rights-of-way in the city without a valid construction permit form the city. 
(b)  No permit for construction in the public rights-of-way shall be issued until the city has enacted an ordinance providing for registration and construction permits, providing for construction standard, providing for "plans of record", providing for conformance with public improvements; providing for type of facilities; providing for revocation or denial of permit and such other provisions as the city council may deem appropriate. 
(c)  The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person, firm, or corporation from knowingly using the public rights-of-way unless the person, firm or corporation has complied with the terms of this section. 
(d)  The fact the present ordinances and regulations of the city, due to state legislation, have become inadequate to control right-of-way management within the corporate limits to the city, creates an emergency for the immediate preservation of the public business, property, health, safety, and general welfare of the public which requires that this section shall become effective from the after and date of its passage. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, §§ 1—4, 10-30-00)  
Sec. 19-26. - Paving of public alley. 
(a)  Finding that alleys shall not be paved without preapproval, including an acceptable drainage and paving plan. The city council finds that the unpaved public alleys of the city shall not be paved or permitted to be paved by abutting lot owners or any other persons, firms or corporations unless the paving is conducted entirely pursuant to a permit granted by the city, after an acceptable drainage and paving plan for the paved area and its surroundings has been filed with and approved by the city, and then only if the paving is done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance with city paving specifications and is paid entirely by the person, firm or corporation seeking such paving approval. 
(b)  Prohibition against unauthorized paving of an alley and establishing criteria for a paving permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to pave or cause to be paved a public alley in the City of South Houston, Texas, unless and until the paving has been approved by the city and the permit fee has been paid. And it shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation who has obtained a permit to pave an alley, to allow the paved alleyway to fall into disrepair. Should the alley fall into disrepair and should the permit holder for the paving fail to promptly repair same upon written notice, the city may perform the repairs and charge them, and its attorney's fees for that action, if any, to the applicant/permit holder; and those charges shall be promptly paid to the city in reimbursement. A condition precedent to the issuance of such a paving permit shall be the requirement that the applicant for the permit shall file, or cause to be filed, a drainage and paving plan from a registered professional engineer (bearing his/her professional seal) for the alley and its surrounding properties that assures the city that the normal sheet flow of surface drainage for the unpaved area shall not be adversely impacted in any way by this paving project. The failure to file such a plan showing no such impact shall be grounds for denial of the permit. The city may charge a reasonable administrative fee for this discretionary program. Another condition precedent for such an approval shall be the assumption of financial responsibility for all paving costs and inspection costs from the city, so that the net effect of this approval shall be at no cost to the city for the project. Finally, the application for the permit shall contain these conditions precedent, shall be agreed to and accepted by the applicant and shall further state and applicant shall agree that in the event that the city must excavate the area paved in the future for a public purpose such as, but not limited to, the removal or replacement or repair of buried utility equipment, lines, cables or apparatus of any kind, the city shall not be responsible for the repair of the excavated area and the applicant shall indemnify the city for and shall promptly pay for such costs. Such a commitment and assurance to the city for this permitted encroachment may be incorporated into a consent to encroachment agreement to be signed by the applicant and the city, but even if no such separate agreement is executed, the conditions and terms of the consent by the city for this paving shall be governed by this section with or without such a signed consent to encroachment agreement. The person, firm or corporation who paves the alley or who causes it to be paved, or who parks on the paved alleyway, shall never acquire any ownership or right to park or use the paved area in the alley. This shall be a privilege and not a right and this privilege may be withheld or withdrawn if the applicant or user fails to meet all the ordinance requirements, including, but not limited to, the continuing obligation to maintain the alleyway paved in a good state of repair. The cessation of use by the applicant/user shall not terminate any continuing responsibility of the applicant for the continued maintenance and repair of the paving unless and until the city permanently removes said paving at applicant's expense. 
(c)  Penalty. It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this section and the penalty shall be the applicable penalty provided for ordinance violation in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, §§ 1—3, 7-13-10)  
Secs. 19-27—19-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 19-46. - Certain trees prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, set out or propagate in any public street, parkway or other public place any of those species of trees commonly known as soft maple, poplar, willow or catalpa or any variety thereof. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 14, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-47. - Permit to plant; approval of city council. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree or shrub in any public street or parkway or other public place, without having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the city secretary and referred by him to the superintendent of streets before issuance. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the direction and the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 14, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-48. - Permit to remove or cut down. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cut down any tree or shrub growing in any street, parkway or other public place, without having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permit shall be made to the city secretary and shall be referred to and approved by the city council before issuance. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 15, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-49. - Trimming or removal when obstructing public way or are likely to fall. 
(a)  Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel, or within ten (10) feet of a street or seven (7) feet of a sidewalk level, shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises abutting or on the premises on which such tree or shrub grows, so that the shall cause. 
(b)  Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the tree grows or stands. 
(c)  The superintendent of streets may trim any such tree or shrub or remove any such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be done away with. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 18, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-50. - Injury generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrub planted or growing in any street, parkway or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 16, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-51. - Attachment of signs, advertisements or notices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 17, 11-15-60) 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 19-52. - Attachment of wire or rope. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the permission of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 19, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-53. - Duties of persons maintaining utility poles and wires. 
Any person who maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places shall, in the absence of a provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees and shrubs in such places, as far as may be possible, and keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the superintendent of streets, so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 19, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-54. - Protection from gas leaks. 
Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the city shall keep such pipes free from leaks, so that no injury shall be done thereby to any trees or shrubs located in any street, parkway or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 20, 11-15-60)  
Sec. 19-55. - Protection from excavating work. 
In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, wherever possible. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 21, 11-15-60)  
Secs. 19-56—19-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental release means any unplanned, uncontrolled or unconfined release of hydrocarbons or other chemicals from a pipeline or pipeline facility. 
Adjustment means the horizontal or vertical repositioning of a pipeline due to reasons unrelated to pipeline operations. 
Interstate gas pipeline means a pipeline used in the transportation of a natural gas, flammable gas or a gas which is toxic or corrosive which is subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission under the Natural Gas Act, except that it shall not include any pipeline within a state which transports gas from an interstate gas pipeline to a direct sales customer within such state purchasing gas for his own consumption. 
Interstate liquid pipeline means a pipeline used in the transportation of hazardous liquids in interstate or foreign commerce which are subject to the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979, as amended. 
Intrastate pipeline means a pipeline which is not an interstate pipeline. 
Leak (gas) means any accidental release of hydrocarbons or other chemicals which are a gas or vapor in the pipeline. 
Leak (liquid) means any accidental release of more than five barrels (forty-two (42) gallons each) of hydrocarbons or any other chemicals, excluding water, which are a liquid in the pipeline. 
Owner or operator means the individual, partnership, corporation or other entity that operates the pipeline. As used in this article, one term is always inclusive of the other unless otherwise specified. 
Pipeline means any pipe used in the transportation of gaseous or liquid hydrocarbons or any other chemicals, except pipelines which transport gaseous or liquid hydrocarbons through onshore production facilities, including flow lines, gathering lines and gas lift lines, and except pipelines located within property owned or leased by the pipeline owner and part of any oil refining or petrochemical plant, pipeline station or terminal or other industrial manufacturing or processing facility. 
Repair means to restore or replace any broken, leaking or defective part of a pipeline or replace any portion of the corrosion protection system. 
Replacement means any new pipeline or new section of a pipeline replacing any old pipeline or old section of pipeline being removed from service for any purpose other than to repair existing facilities. Replacement must occur in the same easement as the line being removed from service. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-72. - Effect of other laws; zoning compliance. 
This article shall be subject to any federal and state legislation, rules or regulations enacted or adopted to the extent that such laws and regulations shall preempt or supersede the authority of the city with respect to this article. Any pipeline constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with this article shall be deemed to be a conforming use under any zoning ordinance of the city then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 2, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-73. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail or refuse to comply with any of the sections of this article or of any permit issued under division 2 of this article or to fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof in violation of this article. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this article is committed or continues, and upon conviction such person shall be punished by a fine up to the highest amount permitted by law. In addition, the permit may be revoked. 
(b)  The city council further finds, determines and ordains that the operation of any pipeline in violation of section 19-85 and division 3 of this article constitutes a condition which imperils and threatens the public health, safety and welfare; which interferes with and endangers the reasonable and peaceful use of public property; and which is a nuisance. Any such violation shall be subject to all of the remedies by law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 6-12-12)  
Secs. 19-74—19-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 19-81. - Required. 
No new pipeline shall be installed or existing pipeline adjusted, relocated or replaced and thereafter maintained within the city without permit of the city granted pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 4, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-82. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. Prior to beginning any work or preparation for any pipeline activities within the city, an application for a permit to do so, in the form described in this section, must be filed with the building official. Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of such application, the building official shall advise the applicant as to the acceptability of his proposed pipeline location and route. If a permit application, as to location and routing, is denied, the building official shall explain in writing to the applicant the reasons for denying the permit. If the proposed route or location is approved by the building official, the application shall be presented to the city council for consideration for final approval, and if the application meets all applicable departments of transportation regulations and the terms of this article, the city council shall approve the application within thirty (30) days. 
(b)  Intrastate pipelines. Every permit application for an intrastate pipeline submitted pursuant to this section shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, business address and telephone number of the applicant and of the pipeline owner when the applicant is the operator but not the owner. 
(2)  The names, titles and telephone numbers of the persons: 
a.  Preparing the application; 
b.  Designated as the principal contact for information; and 
c.  Who will operate the pipeline if other than the applicant. 
(3)  The origin and destination of the pipeline. 
(4)  The material to be transported through the pipeline. 
(5)  The maximum allowable operating pressure on the pipeline as determined according to the applicable United States Department of Transportation or state railroad commission procedure. 
(6)  The normal pressure at which the pipeline is to be operated. 
(7)  Drawings or maps showing the horizontal and vertical location of the pipeline. 
(8)  Complete and detailed cross-sections for all public street, right-of-way and easement crossings. 
(9)  An affidavit to the effect that the pipeline will be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the lawful requirements of this article. 
(10)  A hold-harmless agreement, bond and liability insurance policy as set forth in section 19-85. 
(11)  The required permit fee as set forth in section 19-84. 
(12)  Written consent from the owner of any pipeline corridor or easement in which the pipeline will be installed and or operated. 
(c)  Interstate pipelines. Every permit application for an interstate pipeline submitted pursuant to this section shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, business address and telephone number of the applicant and of the pipeline owner when the applicant is the operator but not the owner. 
(2)  The name, title and telephone numbers of the persons: 
a.  Preparing the application; 
b.  Designated as the principal contact for information; and 
c.  Who will operate the pipeline if other than the applicant. 
(3)  The origin and destination of the pipeline. 
(4)  The material to be transported through the pipeline. 
(5)  The normal pressure at which the pipeline is to be operated. 
(6)  Drawings or maps showing the horizontal and vertical location of the pipeline. 
(7)  Complete and detailed cross-sections for all public streets, right-of-way and easement crossings. 
(8)  An affidavit to the effect that the pipeline is an interstate pipeline. 
(9)  Liability insurance, bond and hold-harmless agreement as prescribed herein. 
(10)  The required permit fee as set forth herein. 
(11)  Written consent from the owner of any pipeline corridor or easement in which the pipeline will be installed and or operated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 5, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-83. - Fees. 
The following fees are applicable until changed by resolution of the City of South Houston City Council: 
(1)  Initial fee for permit and construction phase assessed at one dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of pipeline utilized: One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), whichever is greater. 
(2)  Administrative fee for data and inspections: One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(3)  Annual fee for renewal and administrative tasks, additional engineering review and safety training of staff, as needed: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (assuming no new construction). 
4.  Any new construction requires a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 6, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-84. - Indemnity; bond; insurance. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation making an application for a pipeline permit, which shall include a pipeline within, under, across or along a public street, alley or other public way or easement, shall, as a condition precedent to the granting of such permit, hold the city harmless, indemnify the city for any liability arising out of or connected with the granting of such permit or any construction or operating pursuant thereto as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement except for the negligence of the city. In addition, the applicant shall furnish a bond on a form and with corporate surety satisfactory to the city in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each location involving the crossing of all or a part of a public street, alley, way or easement and ten dollars ($10.00) per linear foot of line within such public street, alley, way or easement in cases other than a crossing. An aggregate total bond shall not be required in excess of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), regardless of the number of crossing or linear feet of line within a public street, alley, way or easement. Such bond shall inure to the benefit of the city for any loss which may result from the applicant's operation under his permit, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement, during the period until completion of installation of the line is approved in writing by the city engineer. The applicant shall further maintain, at all times during the life of the permit, comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. 
(b)  A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage required in subsection (a) of this section with an insurance company having acceptable insurance rating shall be furnished to the city secretary prior to the issuance of any permit. Such certificate of insurance shall provide that at least fifteen (15) days' prior written notice of the termination of insurance or any modification of insurance shall be given to the city. 
(c)  Any bond provided pursuant to this section may be terminated upon completion of the installation of the pipeline to which it relates upon the written certification of completion by the city engineer and provided that the permittee shall maintain liability insurance as required under subsections (a) and (b) of this section. The termination of the bond shall not affect any claim, damage, injury or cause of action arising thereon prior to the date of termination. 
(d)  In lieu of the bond or liability insurance required under this section, a permit applicant may furnish evidence of financial responsibility which demonstrates the applicant's qualification as a self-insurer. Such evidence may take the form of the most recent corporate financial report which is acceptable to the city council as giving assurance of the applicant's financial ability to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 7, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-85. - Liability. 
Each permit issued under this article shall specify and each permittee by his written acceptance thereof shall agree that the permittee shall be liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, other direct expenses and court costs in any legal proceedings resulting in a ruling in favor of the city and a finding of permit violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 8, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-86. - Revocation. 
The city may at its option revoke any permit granted under this article and order the cessation of operation of any pipeline or pipeline system constructed or maintained pursuant to such permit. Prior to the revocation of any permit, the city council shall set a time and place for hearing on such revocation. The city secretary shall be directed to give written notice to the holder of such permit by registered mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for such hearing. The following shall be grounds for revocation of the permit by the city council: 
(1)  The permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(2)  The owner or operator of the pipeline has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 9, 6-12-12)  
Secs. 19-87—19-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-101. - Notice of repairs. 
Prior to making planned normal repairs to a pipeline or pipeline facility which would disturb a public street, alley or any other public land within the city or interfere with the use of such public property, the owner or operator of such pipeline or pipeline facility shall give written notice of the work to be done to the building official in such manner that the building official has at least five (5) days' advance notice before any on-site work is begun. If in his discretion the building official believes the magnitude of the work to be done justifies it, he may direct the owner or operator to post a performance bond, not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in value prior to beginning on-site work. For emergency repairs necessary to stop an accidental release from a pipeline or pipeline facility, the written notice requirement will be waived. However, telephone notification shall be given as soon as possible, but in any event within twenty-four (24) hours, to the building official or chief of police if the building official is not available. This notification shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the pipeline operator; 
(2)  The name and telephone number of the reporter; 
(3)  The location of the accidental release; 
(4)  A description of the material released; and 
(5)  Any other significant information. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 10, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-102. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be given by the new owner to the building official in each instance of the transfer of ownership of an existing pipeline within the city. The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  If previously permitted: 
a.  The original permit number. 
b.  The material to be transported through the pipeline. 
c.  An affidavit that the pipeline will comply with the standards and permit required by this Ordinance and the prior permit. 
d.  A fee prescribed to cover the administrative costs incurred. 
e.  Liability insurance, bond and hold-harmless agreement as prescribed herein. 
(2)  If not previously permitted: 
a.  The origin and destination of the pipeline. 
b.  The material to be transported through the pipeline. 
c.  Drawings of the location and alignment of the pipeline. 
d.  An affidavit that the pipeline will comply with the standards required by this Ordinance and the prior permit. 
e.  A fee as prescribed to cover the administrative costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 11, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-103. - Location, routings to be established. 
(a)  The city council, upon the recommendation of the building official, shall establish locations for routings of pipelines within the city in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Where feasible, new pipelines shall be located within pipeline corridors as delineated upon the pipeline corridor maps of the city, which is on file in the office of the city secretary. The map is made a part of this section as if the map were set forth in this section in detail. 
(2)  When it is not feasible for new pipelines to be located within designated corridors, they should: 
a.  Acquire title to the new right-of-way. 
b.  Follow property boundaries of existing easements to avoid unnecessary fragmentation of land, avoid diagonal routes except if following manmade or topographical features and avoid the creation of slivers of land between rights-of-way. 
c.  Avoid areas of unique recreational or aesthetic importance, environmentally sensitive areas and areas of historical or cultural significance. 
d.  Avoid conflict with existing urban development. 
(3)  Permits issued under this article shall authorize the location of a new pipeline only in accordance with vertical and horizontal routings established as provided in this section. Permits shall be issued subject to all necessary rights-of-way being acquired by the applicant. 
(b)  Production lines need not comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 12, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-104. - Minimum standards, specifications and expense of change or alteration (intrastate). 
(a)  All new intrastate pipelines within the city shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest approved minimum standards established by the United States Department of Transportation, the state railroad commission or the county commissioner's court, whichever is more stringent, and any special requirements for street crossings established as a condition of permit approval by the city. The operation and maintenance of all pipelines within the city, including without limitation existing pipelines, shall conform in all respects to the standards, rules and regulations established by the United States Department of Transportation or the state railroad commission, whichever is more stringent. 
(b)  No new pipeline or existing pipeline shall be laid, maintained or repaired in such a manner as to interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair of any city road, street, roadbed, ditch, easement or right-of-way in, over, across or along which such pipeline is constructed. If any such pipeline does interfere in any manner with the construction, maintenance or repair of any city road or street, in, under, across or along which it is constructed because of the depth at which such pipeline has been laid, because of widening, improving, maintaining or repairing of such city road, street, roadbed, ditch, easement or right-of-way or for reasons of public safety and welfare, upon the requirement of the city engineer such pipeline shall be changed or altered promptly under the existing right-of-way by the owner or operator of such pipeline in such a manner as to interfere no longer with such construction, maintenance, repair or the safety of the traveling public. The owner or operator of such pipeline shall, upon demand of the city council, bear all of the cost and expense of such change or alteration. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 13, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-105. - Information on existing pipelines. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any existing pipeline within the city shall furnish the building official with the following: 
(1)  Maps or drawings showing the location of such pipeline; 
(2)  A description of the materials transported, their source and their destination; 
(3)  The normal and maximum operating pressures on the line; 
(4)  The name, title and telephone number of the person responsible for the operation of the pipeline; 
(5)  The name, title and telephone number of the person to be contacted in an emergency; 
(6)  An affidavit that the pipeline will comply with the applicable standards required by this article; and 
(7)  An affidavit as to whether the pipeline is an interstate or intrastate pipeline. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a pipeline in the city unless or until the information enumerated in subsection (a) of this section has been provided to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 14, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-106. - Markers to indicate location. 
Where practical, the owner or operator of any pipeline within the city shall place line markers as close as possible over each pipeline crossing of a public street, utility easement, alley or other public land and each crossing of drainage canals and railroad rights-of-way. Such markers shall be of permanent-type construction of metal or concrete and shall contain a permanent label identifying the pipeline owner or operator, telephone number and type of product in the line. Products may be broadly classified as crude oil products, natural gas or light hydrocarbons. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 15, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 19-107. - Required reports for intrastate pipelines. 
(a)  Every person operating an intrastate pipeline within the corporate limits shall file with the city council, on or before January 15 of each year, a copy or an original of all reports submitted to the United States Department of Transportation and the state railroad commission for the preceding year relating only to the pipeline being operated and maintained within the corporate limits, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Operating and maintenance plans and reports; 
(2)  Emergency plans and reports; 
(3)  Annual reports; 
(4)  Construction and maintenance reports; 
(5)  Safety inspection plans and reports; 
(6)  Pipeline rupture or leakage reports; and 
(7)  Pressure test reports. 
(b)  Every person operating an intrastate gas pipeline within the corporate limits shall file a written leak report with the building official, within twenty (20) days of the discovery of any leak. Such report shall provide at a minimum the information required on the most current U.S. Department of Transportation or state railroad commission leak report form, and the report may be copies of reports given to those agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 16, 6-12-12)  
Chapter 20 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Appointment and removal of tax collector, §§ 2-3, 2-5; city secretary to be tax assessor and collector, § 2-13. 
State Law reference— Taxation generally, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 1 et seq.; municipal taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 301. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Code does not affect tax levies. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be deemed to affect the validity of any ordinance levying any tax, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 20-2. - Homestead exemption for persons sixty-five years of age or older or disabled persons. 
(a)  Forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) of the market taxable value of all residence homesteads, as now defined by law, of all persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older before the first day of January of each calendar year are hereby exempted from all ad valorem taxes levied by the city after the thirty-first day of December, 1989. 
(b)  Forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) of the market taxable value of all residence homesteads, as now defined by law, of all disabled persons, as now provided by law, are hereby exempted form all ad valorem taxes levied by the city after the thirty-first day of December, 1989, provided that any person qualifying in both categories may claim only one exemption. 
(c)  The filing period for applications for such exemptions shall be for the tax year 1989 and thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 1, 5-6-80; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 857, § 1, 12-27-89) 
State Law reference— Residence homestead, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13. See also Texas Constitution art. VIII, § 1-b.  
Sec. 20-3. - Continuation of tax on sale and distribution of gas and electricity for residential use. 
The City of South Houston, by majority vote of the membership of its governing body, hereby votes to continue the taxes authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act (Article 1066c, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, effective October 1, 1979, as authorized by Section 6 of House Bill No. 1 Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session. 
(Ord. No. 648, § 1, 2-20-79) 
Editor's note— Section 20-3 is derived from Ord. No. 648, § 1, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this Code.  
Sec. 20-4. - Fee for tax certificate. 
(a)  The tax collector and assessor of the city is hereby authorized to charge a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each tax certificate which is issued by the city tax collector and assessor for property for each taxing unit. 
(b)  The tax collector and assessor is hereby authorized to deposit said funds into the general funds of the city. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 1, 2, 11-24-87)  
Secs. 20-5—20-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 714, §§ 1—8, adopted Feb. 8, 1984, enacted provisions which did not specifically amend the Code which at the discretion of the editor have been include herein as Art. II, §§ 20-21—20-28. 
 
Sec. 20-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases are, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
Assessor-collector shall mean the assessor-collector of taxes of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
Hotel shall mean any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 1, 2-8-84)  
Sec. 20-22. - Tax levied; amount; exceptions. 
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to four (4) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel; provided, however, that no tax shall be hereby imposed on a corporation or association that is organized and operated exclusively for a religious, charitable or educational purpose if no part of the net earnings of the corporation or association inure to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 2, 2-8-84)  
Sec. 20-23. - Collection of tax. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by section 20-22 hereof for the city. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 3, 2-8-84)  
Sec. 20-24. - Quarterly reports to tax assessor-collector. 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 20-23 hereof to collect the tax imposed herein, shall file a report with the assessor-collector of taxes showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any other information the assessor-collector of taxes may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 4, 2-8-84)  
Sec. 20-25. - Reimbursement for tax collection. 
The person required to file a report under this article may deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due to the city on the quarterly return, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one (1) percent of the amount of the tax due as shown on the report. If taxes due under this article are not paid to the city within the time required or if the person required to file a report fails to file the report when due, the person forfeits the claim to reimbursement that could have been taken if the tax had been paid or the report filed when due. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 5, 2-8-84)  
Sec. 20-26. - Rules and regulations of tax assessor-collector; access to books and records. 
(a)  The assessor-collector of taxes shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby. 
(b)  After the assessor-collector gives reasonable notice to a person that the assessor-collector intends to inspect the books or records of the person, the assessor-collector has access to the person's books or records necessary for the assessor-collector to determine the correctness of a report filed under this article or the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 6, 2-8-84)  
Sec. 20-27. - Penalties for delinquent reports and payments. 
If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall fail to pay to the assessor-collector of taxes the tax imposed herein when said report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five (5) percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days he shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax. Provided, however, that such penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due. The first report and payment required by this article shall be on the last day of the month following the first quarterly period, as hereinabove defined, of 1984. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 7, 2-8-84)  
Sec. 20-28. - Use of funds derived from levy of hotel occupancy tax. 
The revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be used for the following purposes and none other: 
(a)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities including, but not limited to, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, civic theaters, museums, and parking areas or facilities for the parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances located at or in the immediate vicinity of the convention center facilities; 
(b)  The furnishings of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(c)  For advertising for general promotional and tourist advertising of the city and its vicinity and conducting a solicitation and operating program to attract conventions and visitors either by the city or through contracts with persons or organizations selected by the city; 
(d)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including music (instrumental and vocal), dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, television, radio, tape and sound recording, and the arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; 
(e)  Historical preservation and restoration. 
Provided that a portion of the said tax revenue equal to at least one (1) percent of the cost of occupancy of hotel rooms shall be reserved for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public meeting and convention facilities, and for promotion of tourism and advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or through contract with organizations or persons selected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 8, 2-8-84)  
ARTICLE III. - GROSS RECEIPTS TAX ON BINGO GAMES 
 
Sec. 20-29. - Tax authorized. 
The city is hereby authorized to collect a tax of one (1) percent of the taxable gross receipts on bingo games conducted within the corporate city limits of the City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas, in accordance with Article 179D, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and as may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 826, § 1, 1-3-89)  
Chapter 21 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 870, § 1, adopted July 17, 1990, repealed the substantive provisions of former Ch. 21, relative to taxicabs, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 21 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Ch. 21 derived from Ord. No. 472, §§ 1—8, adopted Nov. 19, 1960. 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Taxicab. The term "taxicab" as used in this chapter, shall mean every motor vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire, under the directions of the passenger or person hiring the same, over the public streets of the city with the exception of ambulances, hearses, transport for the aged and physically handicapped and vehicles operated over fixed routes or on regular schedules. 
(b)  Permit. The term "permit" means a certificate of public convenience and necessity, issued by the secretary, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a vehicle-for-hire business in the city. 
(c)  Person. The term "person" includes an individual, corporation, a partnership, any unincorporated association or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-2. - Franchise acquired. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a taxicab business within the city unless a written franchise therefore shall first have been obtained from the city council. A person desiring to operate a taxicab business within the city shall obtain such franchise from the city in addition to the license and permits required by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-3. - Certificate of public convenience and necessity required. 
No person shall operate or permit a vehicle for hire owned, leased or controlled by him/her to be operated as a vehicle for hire within the territorial limits of the city without having first obtained a vehicle-for-hire permit from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-4. - Application for permit. 
[The permit application shall contain the following information:] 
(1)  The name and form of business under which the taxicab will be operated (if a partnership or corporation, copy of the partnership agreement or article of incorporation must be attached). 
(2)  The number of permits requested. 
(3)  A schedule showing the model, type, make and ownership of vehicles that will be put into operation. 
(4)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate vehicles of the applicant, if any. 
(5)  Such further information as the city council may require. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-5. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application, the city secretary shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Written notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons who may have vehicle-for-hire permits. Due notice shall also be given to the general public by publishing notice of said hearing in the official newspaper of the city at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Said public hearing shall be held at a regular scheduled council meeting. Any interested person may file with the city secretary a memorandum in support of or opposition to the issuance of a vehicle-for-hire permit. 
(b)  In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the issuance of the taxicab permit to the applicant, the city council shall take into consideration the following requirements but are not limited to such: 
(1)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(2)  Number of vehicles to be operated. 
(3)  Make, model, type and ownership of vehicle or vehicles to be used. 
(4)  Color scheme to be used. 
(5)  The total number of taxicab permits in operation. 
(6)  Whether the requirements of public convenience and necessity can be met and complied with only by the issuance of additional permits. 
(7)  The resulting effect upon the business of existing permit holders. 
(8)  Any other facts the city council may deem relevant. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-6. - Police investigation of applicant; traffic and police. 
The applicant shall be in compliance with the police investigation requirements of the City of Houston and the City of Pasadena regarding their ordinances controlling vehicles-for-hire. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-7. - Issuance of vehicle-for-hire permit. 
If the city council finds that further vehicle-for-hire service in the city is required by the public convenience and necessity, and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to furnish public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the chief of police, the city secretary shall issue a permit certificate, stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under said certificate and the date of issuance; otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
In making the above findings, the city council shall take into consideration the number of vehicles for hire already in operation; whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need; the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions; and the character, experience and police record of the applicant. 
Such permit shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar year. A permit for every calendar year thereafter shall be issued upon the payment of a renewal fee, unless the permit for the preceding year has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-8. - Street rental charges. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab in this city unless there has been paid in advance, an annual street rental charge for said taxicab operated by any person in accordance with the following schedule. 
1 to 5 cabs ..... $ 100.00 
6 to 10 cabs ..... 200.00 
11 to 25 cabs ..... 500.00 
26 to 50 cabs ..... 1,000.00 
51 to 150 cabs ..... 1,500.00 
151 to 350 cabs ..... 2,000.00 
351 cabs or more ..... 2,500.00 
(b)  Each person affected hereby shall file, before beginning taxicab operations in this city, with the chief of police of this city, a written schedule (hereinafter called "initial schedule") detailing the total number of cabs to be operated, the make model of each taxicab, the color such taxicab is painted, and the company number or other identifying taxicab number painted upon such taxicab, together with a showing as to the franchise or permit under which it is operated. Such initial schedule shall normally be filed on or before the first day of January of each year, but any person subsequently commencing operations in this city after such date may lawfully file such initial schedule on the date of commencement but shall pay a pro rata rental for the remainder of the calendar year. The prescribed street rental charge shall be an annual charge and shall cover the period from January 1 to December 31 of each year. No person paying a street rental shall operate any taxicab not shown on the initial schedule, or on a supplemental schedule, filed with the chief of police. If a vehicle is added during the year, a supplemental schedule must be filed with the chief before the vehicle is operated on the street; the additional sum of money required by this section shall be paid to the city, prorated to cover the unexpired portion of the year. Any person filing an initial schedule or supplemental schedule shall simultaneously file an exact copy of same, reproduced by photostat or copying machine methods, which copy shall be endorsed by the chief of police with the date of filing and with the chief's certificate that the same is a true copy of the schedule filed, which copy shall be forthwith delivered to the person filing. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-9. - Indemnity bond or liability insurance required. 
(a)  No vehicle-for-hire permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect an indemnity bond for such vehicle authorized in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury to any one (1) person; in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries to more than one (1) person which are sustained in the same accident; and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. Said bond or bonds shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder, his/her servants or agents. Said bond or bonds shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas. 
(b)  The city council may, at its' discretion, allow the holder to file, in lieu of bond or bonds, liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, which maintains a duly authorized agent in the city. Said policy shall conform to the provisions of this section relating to bonds. 
(c)  Before any taxicab permit shall be issued to any person, before renewal of such permit shall be granted, the applicant shall file an insurance policy evidencing insurance coverage complying with the requirements contained in subsection (d) below or give proof that he has qualified as a self-insurer, as the term is defined in the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety-Responsibility Act as now in force or thereafter amended. 
(d)  Insurance coverage in subsection (c) above means an insurance policy covering all licensed taxicabs of the insured issued by a company qualified to do business in the State of Texas and performable in the county. Such policy must contain a provision or an endorsement requiring that the city secretary given fifteen (15) days' notice before the policy can be cancelled for any cause. Such policy shall provide no less than the minimum coverage required to "show proof financial responsibility" as that term is defined in the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety-Responsibility Act as now in force or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-10. - Transfer of application. 
No vehicle-for-hire permit may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the written consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-11. - Suspension and revocation of permit. 
A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city council at a regular meeting, or suspended temporarily, if the holder thereof has: 
(1)  Violated any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Given false information on the permit application; 
(3)  Discontinued operation for more than ten (10) days; 
(4)  Has violated any ordinance of the City of South Houston, or the laws of the United States or the State of Texas, which act reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to furnish public transportation. 
Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given written notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-12. - Identification of vehicles generally. 
No permittee shall drive or cause to be driven or operate or cause to be operated a taxicab in the city unless the taxicab shall have signs on the front doors on each side of the taxicab stating the telephone number and the name or the assumed name under which the owner operates or the name of the partnership, co-partnership, association, society or corporation under which the owner operates such taxicab, as is on file with the city secretary. Such name and numbers shall be in letters of not less than three (3) inches in height and not less than five-sixteenths of one (1) inch in width and shall be a solid color and of a color contrasting with that of the color of the taxicab where the sign appears. The telephone number shall also be placed on the rear of the taxicab and be plainly visible. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-13. - Receipt for payment. 
Every taxicab driver, upon receiving payment for a fare and upon request of the passenger, shall give a receipt to the passenger showing the amount so paid, the name of the company or person operating the taxicab, the vehicle number of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-14. - Failure to pay fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the full fare of any taxicab after having hired the same, and any person who shall hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-15. - Records to be kept by licensee. 
(a)  Each licensee shall maintain its records in accordance with the guidelines designated by city council or its designated representative. All such records shall be kept current and must be made available for inspection by designated city personnel during business hours. 
(b)  Each licensee shall keep complete records of all physical properties used and useful in recording taxicab service in the city, showing date of purchase, purchase price, terms of payments, and to the extent to which such property has been depreciated, by principal items of property. Such property records shall be kept in accordance with sound accounting principals and up-to-date at all times and available for inspection by designated city personnel during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-16. - Expiration of license. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the year in which they are issued. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
ARTICLE II. - DRIVER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 21-17. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or act as a chauffeur of a taxicab within this city without having secured a valid taxicab driver's license form the City of Houston or the City of Pasadena. 
In the event that the driver has a taxicab license from the City of Houston or the City of Pasadena, in compliance with their ordinances, then he shall be deemed to have qualified to operate a taxicab in the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-18. - Display of license. 
The driver of a taxicab in this city shall display said City of Houston or City of Pasadena taxicab driver's license in the rate card holder or have such license within their possession at all times. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-19. - Inspection authorized. 
Any police officer of the city shall have the right to inspect any taxicab at any time, to determine whether the taxicab is being operated in a safe condition and in compliance with these ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-20. - Vehicle equipment and maintenance. 
(a)  Safety requirements. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle for hire which does not meet the current State of Texas motor vehicle safety requirements. 
(b)  Periodic inspections. Every vehicle operating under this chapter may be periodically inspected by the police department. Should any vehicle be found in an unsafe condition, the chief of police shall have the power to suspend the holder's permit until the defects or unsanitary conditions are corrected and the vehicle for hire is reinspected. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Sec. 21-21. - Reports of accidents. 
All accident reports arising from or in connection with the operation of vehicles-for-hire which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any vehicle, or to any property shall be made available to the permit holder upon request. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 7-17-90)  
Chapter 21.1 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 21.1-1—21.1-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF TOWERS 
 
Sec. 21.1-26. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed below, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Alteration means any modification, replacement, or reconstruction that increases the height or materially increases the dimension of a tower structure. 
Antenna means a tower, as herein defined, or a device or system of wires, poles, rods, dishes, discs or similar devices used for the transmission and/or receipt of electromagnetic waves. 
Building official means the building inspector, after consultation with and plan approval by the city engineer. 
Camouflage design or camouflage tower means the design of a tower or tower structure that blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. Examples of a camouflage design or tower are architecturally screened, roof-mounted antenna/array/equipment, building-mounted antenna/array/equipment that is painted and treated as an architectural element to blend with the existing building, designs that conceal the antenna/array/equipment, man-made trees, clock towers, bell towers, steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures. 
Department means a tower permit team consisting of the building inspector and the city engineer, who shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building or structure and a line five (5) feet from the building or structure. 
Height of the building means the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of the building: 
(1)  The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when the sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten (10) feet above the lowest grade. 
(2)  The elevation ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in item (a) above is more than ten feet above lowest grade. 
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
Height of the tower (or antenna) means the vertical distance between the finished grade at the base of the tower or the lowest point of contact with the building, and the highest point of the tower structure, excluding the antenna, if any. 
High mast light structure means a fixed, freestanding uninhabitable structure of a minimum height of one hundred (100) feet, specifically designed to carry light fixtures that is built on land on, along or adjacent to streets, roads, highways and bridges maintained by the state or political subdivision of the state. 
Park means any property of the state or political subdivision thereof that is designated for and restricted to use by the pubic for park purposes. 
Public utility means any person, company, corporation, cooperative corporation, partnership, or any combination thereof, that is subject to both a municipal franchise agreement and the comprehensive regulatory system established by and defined in the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, that owns or operates for compensation equipment or facilities for: 
(1)  Producing, generating, transmitting, distributing, selling, or furnishing electricity; or 
(2)  The conveyance, transmission, or reception of communications over a telephone system as a dominant carrier. 
The term "public utility" shall not include, as is defined in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, telegraph services, television stations, radio stations, community antenna television services, general radio-telephone services, or radio-telephone services authorized under the Public Mobile Radio Services rules of the Federal Communications Commission or private water companies. 
Residence means any permanent building or structure containing habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy, designed and used primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, which is intended to be used or occupied as a dwelling place for residential purposes, whether or not attached, including homes, town homes, patio-homes, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, condominiums and apartments. Multi-unit complexes shall be included at a ratio of one-eight acre of land, or any fraction thereof, as being equivalent to one residential tract. For purposes of calculating the ratio of multi-unit complex acreage to residential tracts, only that portion of the multi-unit complex acreage within the residential test area shall be considered. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, group homes, half way houses, nursing homes, hospitals, nursery schools, schools, and child care facilities shall not be considered residences. A building or structure located on a lot or tract of land used as the site of a tower shall not be considered a residence so long as its primary use is to contain, house, store, and protect materials or equipment directly related to the purpose and use of the tower. 
Residential means pertaining to the use of land for a residence as is defined in this section or any property zoned as either R1A, R1B, R2, R3, R4 or R5C. 
Residential area means the area within five hundred (500) feet of a proposed tower site that contains fifty (50) percent or more tracts wholly or partially therein that are subject to residential restrictions or are in use for residential purposes or that are zoned R1A, R1B, R2, R3, R4 or R5C. 
Residential lot means: 
(1)  A lot which is included within a recorded residential subdivision subject to any enforceable, valid and unexpired residential deed restrictions upon which a residence exists or may be constructed pursuant to those valid and applicable deed restrictions, or 
(2)  An unrestricted lot upon which a residence exits, or 
(3)  A lot zoned residential. 
Residential restrictions means one or more restrictive covenants limiting the use of the property to residential purposes that are contained or incorporated by reference in a property recorded map, plat, replat, declaration, deed, judgment or other instrument filed in the county real property records, map records or deed records. 
Setback area means the circular area surrounding a proposed tower structure and which delineates the area between the site of the proposed tower and the nearest residential structure or residential restricted tract of land as established in this article. 
Subdivision means all land encompassed within one or more maps or plats of land within the city that is divided into two (2) or more parts and are recorded in the deed, map or real property records of the county or counties in which the land covered by the map or plat is located. 
Tower or tower structure means a fixed, freestanding or guyed, uninhabitable structure, not designed as a shelter or to be occupied for any use. This definition includes, but is not limited to, any such structure supporting antennae that transmit or receive any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum of radio waves. The following are, by way of example but not limitation, towers or tower structures: guyed or freestanding monopole structures, lattice or open framed structures, antennae supports, water towers, and other simple self-supporting, trussed, or open framed structures. 
Tract means a contiguous parcel of property under common ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-27. - Tower permit required. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the building department and approved in accordance with the provisions of this article prior to the construction, placement or alteration of any tower or tower structure, as defined in this article and not specifically excluded herein, that is located within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(b)  A tower permit shall not be required for any tower repaired, replaced, or modified with no resulting increase in height or dimension and any tower repaired, replaced or modified in order to comply with the requirements of any statute, regulation, order, or rule of the FCC, the FAA, or any other federal, state or governmental agency or authority. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the owner of an antenna tower for which a tower permit and building permit were issued prior to April 15, 2000, may, without obtaining a new permit, upon written notice to the Building Official, replace the tower with a new tower if the new tower structure complies with the requirements of this article and: (1) is specifically designed to accommodate additional antenna arrays, (ii) is not more than ten (10) feet higher than the tower structure being replaced, (iii) is not more than fifteen (15) feet from the location of the tower structure being replaced and (iv) the center of the tower structure is no closer to the nearest residence than the center of the tower structure it replaces. The new tower structure shall be assigned the same permit number as the tower structure it replaces. A tower structure may be replaced only once under this subsection. 
(d)  A tower permit shall be renewed for a co-locator on an existing permitted tower. Co-location on the same tower is encouraged before a new tower is authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-28. - Exemptions. 
This article does not apply to the following structures: 
(1)  Church bell towers and religious symbols associated with a place of worship; 
(2)  Tower structures less than fifty (50) feet in height; 
(3)  Tower structures that are attached to, placed upon, or constructed on top of a building provided that the height of the tower structure does not exceed twenty (20) feet or the height of tower structure does not exceed twenty (20) feet or the height of the building upon which the tower is constructed, whichever is less; 
(4)  Tower structures constructed or placed on land or other structures owned, leased, held or dedicated for use by the state or federal government or any political subdivision thereof, which land or other structures are used by the governmental entity primarily for rendering fire, police or other public protection services or utility services, whether or not the tower structure is used jointly by the governmental entity and any other public or private person or entity for other and additional public or private purposes; 
(5)  Temporary tower structures used as or in conjunction with construction cranes; and 
(6)  Co-locator apparatus mounted on a permitted existing tower. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-29. - Location of towers. 
(a)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction of a tower on a lot, tract or parcel of land where the construction of a tower is prohibited, expressly or impliedly, by duly recorded and unexpired deed restrictions or covenants running with the land. 
(b)  In a residential area, a tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure. Such a permit may be approved in the following zones of the city: C1, C2 or M or any other zone not carrying an "R" designation. 
(c)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure unless the proposed tower structure is located a distance at least equal to the applicable setback area established by subsection (e). 
(d)  A tower permit shall not be used for the construction or alteration of a tower structure in a park or on a tract surrounded by a park. 
(e)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure unless the distance between the center of the base of a tower and the nearest residential (including but not limited to small neighborhood commercial uses in a Residential Area as herein defined) lot is at least one and one-half times the height of the tower or tower structure. The foregoing measurement shall be made to the nearest point on the property line of the residential lot, unless the tower permit application includes a category 3, condition II survey, as defined by the Texas Surveyors Association, of all properties within the setback area. If the survey is provided, the measurement shall instead be made as follows: 
(1)  If a residence has been constructed on the lot, the measurement shall be from the tower structure to the nearest outside wall of the residential structure on each lot; or 
(2)  If a residence has not been constructed on the lot, the measurement shall be from the tower structure to the center of the residential lot minus twenty-five (25) feet. 
(f)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure within one thousand (1,000) feet of an approved tower structure, other than a tower structure for which a permit would not be required under this article. For purposes of this requirement, a tower in considered to be "approved" when a tower permit has been issued pursuant to this article and the tower structure has been constructed or any building permit issued thereunder remains in effect. The building official shall promulgate rules and procedures for establishing precedent to the extent of conflict between two (2) or more tower structures. 
(g)  Property uses and distances referred to in this section shall be determined as of the date and time that the completed tower permit application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-30. - Tower structure. 
Each antenna tower structure for which a permit is approved and issued shall be designed, engineered and constructed to accommodate the placement of a minimum of two (2) antenna arrays. This requirement shall not apply to a camouflage tower. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-31. - Security fence. 
(a)  The base of a tower shall be completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or barrier which limits climbing access to the tower and any supporting systems, lines, wires, buildings or other structures. 
(b)  The fence, wall or barrier required by subsection (a) shall not be less than eight feet in height with no openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches measured in any direction. Gates and doors opening directly into the area enclosed by a fence, wall or barrier, as required by this section, shall be equipped with a lock to keep and capable of keeping the doors or gates securely closed and locked at all times. 
(c)  The requirements of this section do not apply to existing tower sites having security fences at least six (6) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-32. - Screening fence. 
(a)  The base of a tower, including all mechanical equipment and accessory structures, shall be screened from view of residential lots by a wooden, substantially opaque screening fence designed and built to provide privacy with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
(b)  The screening fence may contain gates or doors allowing access to the tower and accessory structures for maintenance purposes, which shall be kept completely closed except for maintenance purposes and shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the public right-of-way. 
(c)  When both sections 21.1-31 and 21.1-32 of this article are applicable, a single fence conforming to all applicable requirements of both sections may be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-33. - Landscaping and drainage. 
(a)  If he deems it necessary to screen the tower or antenna, the building official may require a tower site to have landscaping maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times and in compliance with all applicable ordinances, deed restrictions and regulations. If so required the following subsections (b) through (f) shall control the landscaping. 
(b)  At a minimum, a tower site shall have one large shrub capable of reaching a minimum height of four (4) feet for each four (4) linear feet of required screening fence; provided that not less than eight (8) large shrubs shall be provided for each tower site. The shrubs required by this subsection shall be installed at the tower site along the exterior side of the screening fence required in section 21.1-32 of this article. 
(c)  At a minimum, a tower site shall have one street tree, with a minimum caliper of four (4) inches, for each fifty (50) linear feet of required screening fence; provided that not less than one street tree along each public right-of-way bordering the host tract shall be provided at each tower site. Hardwoods may be specified. 
(d)  The person or entity in whose name the tower permit is issued shall have complete responsibility for the maintenance of all landscaping required by this section. 
(e)  Any tower that is excluded from the screening requirements of subsection 21.1-32(c) of this article shall also be excluded from the landscaping requirements of this section for which any amount of linear footage of screening fence is required. 
(f)  A registered professional engineer shall certify that the structure shall not impact drainage of the lot in question or adjoining lands and that certificate and drainage plan shall accompany any permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-34. - Signs and lights. 
(a)  Lettering, signs, symbols, images or trademarks large enough to be legible to occupants of vehicular traffic on any adjacent roadway shall not be placed on or affixed to any part of a tower, antenna array or antenna, other than as required by FCC regulations regarding tower registration or other applicable law. 
(b)  A tower or tower structure shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required by law or regulations, a design that reasonably minimizes disturbance to any adjacent residence(s) or landmark shall be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-35. - Application procedures for a tower permit. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the department in the time and manner prescribed by the building official. The applicant shall, with the filing of the completed tower permit application, submit payment of a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) tower or antenna permit fee. 
(b)  The application shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by any drawing, descriptive data, filing fees, ownership information, and other pertinent data that may be required by the building official. Each application for a tower permit or for a waiver shall include envelopes addressed to the owners and a complete list of those owners, as is indicated by the most recently approved tax rolls, of all properties within the residential test area of the proposed tower site. The application shall include: 
(1)  Location and vicinity map including a boundary survey executed by a professional licensed surveyor in Texas. 
(2)  Topographical survey based on nearest FEMA benchmark and executed by a licensed professional surveyor in Texas. 
(3)  Proposed site plan and layout prepared and executed by a licensed professional engineer in Texas. 
(4)  Drainage plan and layout executed by a licensed professional engineer in Texas. 
(5)  Plans, drawings, details (to scale) of the project, site, tower, antenna, foundation (for tower or antenna), structures, platforms, other foundations, utilities, electrical wiring and equipment, paving, drive ways, drives, access roads, drainage (on site and off site), specifications and notes, and a required by the building official (including the city engineer). All drawings of foundations shall be accompanied by a geotechnical design/report also executed by a license professional engineer in Texas. 
(6)  If any portion of the tract in question is platted, owner shall replat the entire tract in question in a manner acceptable in the city, which must include the preparation of the re plat by a executed by a licensed professional surveyor in Texas. 
(7)  FCC permit and any other required permit or approvals by applicable regulatory agencies. 
(8)  FAA permits and approvals. 
(9)  The application form of the city shall specify that the applicant certifies that the communications tower or antenna shall not harm any citizen or the public generally and shall not cause interference with radios, television sets or any small appliances in the vicinity of the tower and antenna nor shall it interfere with police and EMS communication systems and radios, nor city personnel communications systems and radios, nor the city's sewer system SCADA communications system. 
(10)  A representation as to whether this application is a single or multi-user antenna or tower. Single user tower or antenna applications shall justify sole use as opposed to multi-user use, which city encourages. 
(11)  Any other pertinent data required by the building official (including the city engineer). Both the building inspector and the city engineer shall review and approve or reject all applications for towers and antennae. 
(c)  In the event that any of the required documentation, data, reports or drawing contain any false or erroneous information known to the applicant, then any permit issued pursuant to that false or erroneous information shall be void with the same force and effects as if it had never been issued. 
(d)  The building official shall issue a permit for construction, placement or alternation of a tower only if it meets the requirement of this article and if it has received approval of city council. 
(e)  On or before the thirty-sixth calendar day following the filing of the required application, the building official shall issue to the applicant a written notice of disapproval or preliminary approval of the tower or antenna permit. Any notice of disapproval of a tower or antenna permit application must include a written report explaining in detail the reasons for disapproval. From the sixth day of the application period until the last day of said period, the applicant shall maintain a sign that notifies the public that this site has pending an application to permit a tower or antenna. Any preliminary approval shall be subject to a protest to city council which must be filed within ten (10) days of written preliminary approval. If no protest is timely filed thereunder, it shall become a final approval on the business day next following the close of the protest period. The issuance of a written notice to the application shall be complete upon the deposit of the properly addressed notice in the United States mail, first class postage paid. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-36. - Notice of pending application. 
(a)  The notice requirements of this section apply only to applications for tower permits for the construction, placement or alteration of towers subject to the requirements of this article and for waivers from the requirements of this article. When an application for waiver is not filed as part of the original application for a tower permit, the notice requirements of this section apply separately to the waiver application. 
(b)  The applicant or a tower permit must post and use reasonable efforts to a sign on the subject tower or antenna site for the time required hereinabove. The sign shall be posted no more than fifteen (15) feet from the public right-of-way that is used as access to the tower site. The sign shall face each public right-of-way bordering the tower site and the lettering on the sign shall be legible from the public right-of-way. Each sign shall be a minimum of four (4) by eight (8) feet in size, with lettering that complies with specifications promulgated by the building official. The sign shall contain at a minimum the following items of information: 
(1)  That this is the proposed site of a tower; 
(2)  The proposed maximum height above grade of the proposed tower; 
(3)  The tower permit application number assigned to this project by the department; and 
(4)  The telephone number of the city where additional information concerning this project may be obtained. 
The applicant shall remove the sign from the subject tower site after (i) the permit is obtained or (ii) the appeals process is complete. 
(c)  If, in the opinion of the building official, compliance with the requirements of this section is insufficient to provide adequate notification of the pending tower permit application, the building official may require additional signs to be erected at locations as he deems advisable. 
(d)  Written notice of the filing of each application for a tower permit or an application for a waiver, as provided for herein, shall be given to all property owners within the boundaries of the residential area or setback area, as applicable, as is indicated by the most recently approved tax rolls. Notice shall also be given to any civic organization, property owners association, or any other interested group, with identifiable boundaries, provided that the organization, association or group is registered with the department in a manner prescribed by the building official. Notice to all owners of record and civic organizations registered with the department shall be deemed given if properly addressed and deposited in the United States mail, with first class postage paid. The required written notice shall be in a form prescribed by the building official and shall be mailed no later than the tenth calendar day following the filing of the required completed application. The written notice shall include a map showing the proposed tower site and the surrounding residential test area or setback area, as applicable. 
(e)  Written notice shall be published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation by the department not later than the seventh calendar day following the date of filing of the required completed application. The notice shall be published in the section of the newspaper in which other legal notices are commonly published, and shall be headed with the following words (or their reasonable equivalent), in conspicuous type: "NOTICE OF PROPOSED TOWER CONSTRUCTION." The notice shall state the height and location of the proposed tower site, describe the intended use of the tower, and advise that additional information may be obtained by writing or calling the office of the building official of the planning and development department. 
(f)  The "written notice" required in subsection (d) above shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity that will own the proposed tower structure; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant if different from the owner of the proposed tower; 
(3)  The approximate proposed location of the tower structure including the street address (or nearest street intersection) and the name of the subdivision or survey if there is no recorded subdivision; 
(4)  The proposed use of the tower structure and site; 
(5)  The proposed maximum height above grade of the proposed tower structure; and 
(6)  That additional information may be obtained by writing or calling the office of the building official. 
(g)  The applicant shall be responsible for paying all costs associated with the giving of notice under this article. 
If the city receives more than ten (10) written protests of the antenna or tower, a public hearing shall be scheduled and noticed and the issuance of the permit sought shall be delayed until the hearing with appropriate notice has been completed and the council has approved the permit issuance. The cost of notice and hearing shall be paid by applicant. Cost shall include all postage, newspaper advertisements, legal fees incurred by city and administrative costs at the rate permitted for open record requests by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-37. - Waiver. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall not be approved for a tower that is not in conformance with the regulations prescribed in this article unless a written application for a waiver has been submitted to and approved by the council. 
(b)  An applicant for a tower permit who receive written disapproval from the building official may elect to submit a written application for a waiver to the council or may appeal the denial of the permit to council. An application for a waiver from the requirements of this article may be filed simultaneously with the filing of the application for a tower permit. An application for a waiver made after the disapproval of the tower permit by the building official shall be submitted not later than 2:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day following issuance of the notice of disapproval. The building official shall waive this deadline upon a finding of good cause. 
(c)  An application for a waiver shall be submitted in the manner prescribed by the building official citing the specific provision(s) of this article from which a waiver is desired, the extent of the waiver sought, and the specific facts or reasons why the waiver is necessary along with all supporting information or documentation. 
(d)  The council is authorized to consider and grant a waiver from the provisions of this article, following a public hearing, when the council finds that each of these conditions exist: 
(1)  That a literal application of this article will result in undue and unnecessary hardship to the applicant, taking into account any federal or state licenses the applicant may have received to conduct its business; 
(2)  The waiver, if granted, will not be contrary to the public interest as implemented in this article; 
(3)  Consistent with the city's police power authority over towers, the waiver, if granted, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in a violation of any other applicable ordinance, regulation or statute enforceable by the city; and 
(5)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in the violation of any applicable deed restriction or zoning regulation or the location of a tower in a park. 
(e)  A waiver from the requirements of this article for an antenna tower shall not be granted unless, in addition to finding that each of the conditions expressed in subsection (d) above is satisfied, council, after public hearing, finds that no existing previously approved antenna or tower or tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna because the applicant has demonstrated any of the following: 
(1)  The approved tower or tower structure located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower will not meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
(2)  The approved tower or tower structure located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower is not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's specific engineering requirements; 
(3)  The approved tower or tower structure located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower does not have sufficient structural strength and cannot reasonably be reinforced to provide sufficient structural strength; 
(4)  The antenna array of the approved tower or tower structure located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna array of the proposed tower, or the antenna on the proposed tower or tower structure to be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the approved tower would cause interference with the antenna array of the approved tower; 
(5)  The approved tower or tower structure located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower is not adaptable to accommodate additional antenna arrays or the costs required to share or adapt the approved tower or tower structure are unreasonable; 
(6)  The approved tower or tower structure located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower is not available for co-location because the owner of the approved tower or tower structure or the owner of the tract on which the approved tower or tower structure is located refuses to agree to reasonable terms necessary to accommodate the requirements for the proposed antenna; or 
(7)  The approved tower or tower structure located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower is not suitable for the specific requirements for the proposed antenna due to other factors as demonstrated by the applicant, taking into account any federal or state licenses the applicant may have received to conduct its business. 
(f)  The procedures prescribed in subsections (c) and (d) of section 21.1-38 of this article shall govern the hearing required on an application for a waiver. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-38. - Protest and appeal; hearing procedures. 
(a)  Any property owner, association or group within the residential area or setback area, as applicable, who has reasonable grounds to believe that approval of an application for a tower permit, the granting of a waiver, or the proposed construction will violate any applicable restriction, rule, regulation or ordinance may request a hearing before the council to protest and present evidence establishing their allegations. The hearing request must state the specific grounds relied upon and be presented to the office of the building official no later that 2:00 p.m. on the thirty-seventh calendar day following the date of filing of the required completed application for a tower permit or waiver, as applicable. Copies of all supporting documents, instruments, or other materials that are to be presented to the council shall accompany the hearing request and shall be available for inspection and photocopying. 
(b)  An applicant for a tower permit that has been denied by the building official has until 2:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day following the issuance of a notice of disapproval to file a written notice of appeal in the manner prescribed by the building official. The building official shall waive this requirement upon a finding a good cause. 
(c)  Notice of the time, place and location of the public hearing at which the protest or appeal is to be presented must be given by the city secretary before the tenth day before the date of the hearing by: 
(1)  Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and county in which the land that is the subject of the waiver is located; 
(2)  By written notice delivered to the applicant, which shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Mail, first class postage; and 
(3)  By written notice delivered to each property owner, association or group registered with the department in the manner prescribed by the building official, within the setback area. The written notice shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail, first class postage. 
(d)  All properly filed appeals and protests concerning the approval or disapproval of an application for a tower permit or the granting or refusal of an application for a waiver for a particular project shall be considered by the council in a single public hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled by the building official at the next available council meeting, assuming that proper notice has been given. 
(e)  The council, following a public hearing, is authorized to deny a tower permit that is the subject of a protest under subsection (a) upon finding, based on substantial evidence, any of the following: 
(1)  The tower permit, if granted, will result in the violation of an applicable rule, regulation or ordinance enforceable by the city; 
(2)  The tower permit, if granted, will result in the violation of an applicable deed restriction or zoning regulation; or 
(3)  The information contained in the application is erroneous or the department's analysis of the permit application is based on erroneous information. 
(f)  The council, following a public hearing, is authorized to deny a tower permit that is the subject of an appeal under subsection (b) upon finding, based on substantial evidence, that the decision of the building official to deny the tower permit is erroneous or the department's analysis of the tower permit application or information therein is erroneous. 
(g)  If the council denies the appeal of the denial of an application for a tower permit, a waiver or otherwise refuses to approve a tower permit as a result of a protest, the secretary of the council shall issue a written report explaining in detail the reasons for the rejection, disapproval or refusal. The written report shall be issued not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the decision was made. 
(h)  The decision of the council concerning the issuance or denial of a tower permit or the granting or refusal of a waiver shall be the final administrative determination of the issue presented. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-39. - Building permit requirement and plan review. 
(a)  A tower permit obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become invalid after the passage of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of final approval of the tower permit unless any required building permit for the construction or alteration of the tower has been obtained before the expiration of that one hundred eighty-day period. 
(b)  The construction, placement or alteration of a tower is subject to any plan review, permitting requirement or hearing process applicable to commercial construction in general which is required either by ordinance or by the rules promulgated by the building official, provided that the regulation or rules are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  A building permit and plan review will be subject to both the building inspector and city engineer's review (including approval or rejection) for towers or antennae and in accordance with section 21.1-35 herein. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec 21.1-40. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, supporting structures, wires, fences or ground areas used in connection with a tower shall be maintained in a safe condition and in good working order. All equipment or machinery required by the building code, the fire code or any other applicable regulation or ordinance for a building or structure or supporting structure or device shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or operator of a tower shall be responsible for the maintenance of the tower, supporting structures, buildings, fences and ground areas. 
(b)  By applying for a tower permit under this article, the applicant specifically grants permission to the city, its duly authorized agents, officials and employees, to enter upon the property for which a permit or waiver is sought, after first providing reasonable notice, for the purpose of making all inspections required or authorized to be made under this article, the fire code, the building code, this article or any other applicable local or state regulation, rule or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-41. - Removal of towers. 
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of the antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the building official notifying the owner of the abandonment. If the antenna or tower is not removed within the ninety (90) days, the city may remove the antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the antenna or tower. The city attorney is hereby authorized to pursue all necessary legal remedies to implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-42. - Deed restriction affidavit. 
(a)  Every applicant for a tower permit or a waiver shall furnish to the building official an affidavit setting forth that the applicant is familiar with the title to the real property to which the requested permit appertains and that the intended use will not violate any applicable deed restrictions. The affidavit shall be accompanied with a certified copy of the instruments containing the deed restrictions, the instrument of revocation or termination, the declaratory judgment or any other recorded document containing restrictions that affect the use of the property. 
(b)  A tower permit shall not be used until the requested affidavit and supporting documentation has been produced. Any permit issued on the basis of erroneous documentation known to the applicant or an affidavit which contains false information known to the applicant is void with the same force and effect as if it had never been issued and without the necessity of any action by the city or any other person or agency. A tower permit shall not be issued for the construction or alteration of a tower if the use or the intended use will be in violation of the recorded deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-43. - Permitted hours for construction and maintenance. 
Construction, placement, removal and maintenance of, and alterations or modifications to, a tower or equipment storage facility for a tower shall not be performed except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day, except in a bona fide emergency; provided however, that the owner, operator or his agents may perform regular maintenance between the hours of 9:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. as long as it does not create an unreasonable noise. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-44. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Violation of this article is unlawful. Failure of any person to comply with any provision of this article shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. All authority granted to the city attorney and the building official and their designees under this article shall be exercised uniformly on behalf of and against all citizens and property of the city. Prior to the issuance of a citation under this article, the director shall furnish notice to the last known address of the tower owner of the alleged violation and shall afford the owner a reasonable opportunity to cure the violation, consistent with the risks posed by the violation and the efforts that would be required to cure it. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-45. - Cumulative effect. 
This article is cumulative of other requirements imposed by ordinances and regulations of the city. To the extent of any inconsistency, the more restrictive provision shall govern. Without limitation, the issuance of a permit under this article shall not excuse compliance with the building code, including permits required thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-46. - City attorney authorized to file suit to abate violation. 
The city attorney is hereby authorized to file suit on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or abate a violation of this article. All authority granted to the city attorney under this article shall be exercised uniformly on behalf of and against all citizens and property in the city. This authorization shall be cumulative and in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty provisions. The city, acting through the city attorney or any other attorney representing the city, may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover damages from the owner or the agent of the owner of a tower or tower structure in an amount adequate for the city to undertake any activity necessary to bring about compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Sec. 21.1-47. - Transitional provision. 
(a)  Permitted towers in place or under a valid permit or pursuing a permit under an unexpired application for permit filed before the effective date of this ordinance are excepted herefrom and are grandfathered hereunder. The provisions of this article shall apply only to towers permitted, constructed, placed, or altered after the effective date of this article or amendments thereto, as applicable, unless permitted hereafter pursuant to an unexpired application for permit that predates the effective date of this article. 
(b)  If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void or invalid, the invalidity of the remaining portions of this article or their application to other persons or set of circumstances shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of city council on adopting this article that no portion hereof or provision or regulation contained herein shall be operative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality, voidness or invalidity of any other portion hereof, and all provisions of this article are declared to be severable for that purpose. 
(c)  There exists a public emergency requiring that this article be passed finally on the date of its introduction as requested in writing by the mayor, therefore, this article shall be passed finally on such date and shall take effect immediately upon its passage and approved by the mayor. 
(d)  Reference is here made to the zoning ordinance of the city (Ordinance No. 514). The issuance of a permit under this article shall be equivalent to the issuance of a "special use permit" under the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 4-11-00)  
Secs. 21.1-48—21.1-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SMALL NODE INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE CITY'S RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 21.1-71. - Definitions. 
City council means the municipal governing body of the City of South Houston, Texas. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in the public rights-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Decorative pole means a street-light pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signs or temporary holiday or special events attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to the nondiscriminatory city Code of Ordinances. 
Design manual means the city's rules and guidelines for the installation and construction of micro-network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and other related ground equipment. 
Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administration Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulations on a national level. 
Highway right-of-way means the right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Local means within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
Location means the city approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by Texas Local Government Code Section 284.103 011d that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
Mayor means the mayor of the City of South Houston, Texas, or designee. 
Micro-network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipality owned utility, as defined by Texas Utilities Code Section ll.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  Pole; or 
c.  Macro tower. 
Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider. 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public rights-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
Pole means a service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Private easement means an easement or other real property right-of-way that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
Provider has the same meaning as "network provider". 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in the public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within the public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than thirty-four and one-half (34.5) kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Texas Utilities Code Section 51.002. 
Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 284. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-72. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and network support poles described in the Code in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on the public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(3)  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; 
(4)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA); or 
(5)  Encroach within five (5) feet of any public water or sanitary sewer lines. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 2, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-73. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, transport facility, and any other related ground equipment in the city public right-of-way. 
(b)  As required by Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services for the city for which the permit is sought. 
(c)  A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than thirty (30) network nodes and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. 
(d)  Application requirements: The permit application shall be made by the network provider or its duly authorized representative and shall contain the required application requirements in the design manual. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 3, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-74. - Installation in design districts. 
A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city council before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a Design District. The network provider shall be required to comply with the general aesthetic requirements designated by the city. The city has the authority to designate new historic districts and design districts at a future date. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 3, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-75. - Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. 
A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is in a municipal park; or 
(2)  Is adjacent to a street that is: 
a.  Not more than fifty (50) feet wide; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(3)  In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in the public right-of-way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(4)  The network provider shall be further required to comply with all guidelines set by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 4, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-76. - New, modified, or replacement utility poles or node support poles installed in the public right-of-way. 
New, modified, or replacement utility poles or node support poles installed in the public right-of-way in relation to which the network provider received approval of a permit application: 
(1)  Shall not exceed the lesser of: 
a.  Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within five hundred (500) linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or 
b.  Fifty-five (55) feet above ground level. 
(2)  Node support poles shall not be closer than three hundred (300) linear feet from a node support pole within the same block. 
(3)  Node support poles and ground equipment or network nodes shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way. If a node support pole and ground equipment or network node is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the city and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise renders the right-of-way noncompliant with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall remove the node support poles, ground equipment or network nodes at their sole expense. 
a.  Fiber connection. Network providers shall be responsible for obtaining lawful access and connection to fiber optic lines or other backhaul solutions that may be required for its node support poles, network nodes, micro-nodes, and all related ground equipment. 
b.  Generators. Providers shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way. 
c.  Undergrounding provisions. Network providers shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions that prohibit installing above ground structures in the public rights-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. This requirement or restriction shall not be interpreted to prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing structure. 
(4)  Design Districts. Providers shall not collocate new network nodes, micro network nodes, node support poles, or any other related ground equipment in an area designated as a Design District or area with decorative poles as designated by the city without approval from the city. The city requires that new network nodes and/or new node support poles in such districts, utilize concealment mechanisms to protect such district's character and aesthetics as stipulated in state law. The network provider shall be further required to comply with all guidelines set by the city. 
(5)  Network provider, its contractors, and agents shall obtain written permission from the city before trimming trees hanging over its node support poles and network nodes to prevent branches of such trees from contacting node support poles and network nodes. When directed by the city, the network provider shall trim under the supervision and direction of the city's parks department supervisor. The network provider shall be solely liable and responsible for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from the network provider's actions under this section. 
(6)  Provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the node support poles and network nodes that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four inches by six inches (4" x 6"), unless otherwise required by law (e.g., RF ground notification signs) or the city. Except as required by laws or by the utility pole owner, the network provider shall not post any other signage or advertising on the node support poles and network nodes, or utility poles. 
(7)  Electrical supply: The network provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the network provider's wireless facilities. Network provider's electrical supply shall be separately metered from the city and must match city infrastructure voltage. The city shall not be liable to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the wireless facilities, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the wireless facility structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network provider of the wireless facility structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. 
(8)  Insurance: Any person required under this chapter to obtain the city's consent to make use of the public rights-of-way or any person required by this chapter to obtain a permit to perform construction in the public right-of-way must, during the period of the use or work, obtain and keep in effect insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property arising from or in connection with the use or performance of the work-comprehensive general liability and property damage insurance with minimum limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the injury or the death of any one (1) person, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence of damage to or destruction of property. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 5, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-77. - Municipal review process by the city. 
(a)  Determination of application completeness: The city shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination: 
(1)  For network nodes and node support poles: No later than thirty (30) days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(2)  For a transport facility: No later than ten (10) days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of application: The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the city: 
(1)  For network nodes: No later than sixty (60) days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(2)  For network support poles: No later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(3)  For transport facilities: No later than twenty-one (21) days after the city receives the complete application. 
(c)  Basis for denial of application: If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable city Code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the application. 
(d)  Resubmission of denied application: The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial application. 
(1)  The applicant has thirty (30) days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city. 
(2)  The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application, after a denial not later than the ninetieth (90 th ) day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(e)  Nondiscriminatory review: Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 6, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-78. - Expiration of permit. 
A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six (6) months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The chief building official may in his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 7, 3-27-18)  
Sec. 21.1-79. - Required fees. 
All fees related to network nodes, node support poles, transfer facilities, micro network nodes, collocation, and utilizing city owned municipal utility poles shall be as set by city council, as reflected by the fee schedule maintained in the office of the city secretary. This fee schedule includes yearly rental fees to the city. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 8, 3-27-18)  
Secs. 21.1-80—21.1-100. - Reserved.  
Chapter 22 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Auto wreckers, Ch. 5; limitation on use of vehicle horns, § 12-3(1); use of loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles, § 12-3(6); streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; taxicabs, Ch. 21; vehicle dealers, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 541 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, being article 6701d of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in such act.  
Sec. 22-2. - Interfering with vision of drivers approaching railroad crossing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any improvement or place or maintain any personal property for storage or any other purpose within twenty-five (25) feet of the street property line of any lot within one block of a railroad crossing on a public street in the city, when such improvement or personal property would interfere with the vision of the drivers of vehicles approaching such railroad crossing. 
(Ord. No. 598, §§ 1, 2, 5-2-72)  
Sec. 22-3. - Sale of accident reports filed by police officers and official accident photographs. 
(a)  Any traffic accident report filed by a city police officer may, after final disposition of any criminal offense charged and arising from the reported accident, and after such report has been duly classified for public release by the police department, be sold to any person at a total cost of two dollars ($2.00) per report copy. 
(b)  Any city official traffic accident photograph may, after final disposition of any criminal offense charged and arising from such accident, and after such photograph has been duly classified for release by the police department, be sold to any person at the total cost of ten dollars ($10.00) per print, subject to the agreement, as an express condition of sale by the city, of the person purchasing such photograph to pay, for the city officer taking such photograph, such officer's base pay per diem for each day such officer may be subpoenaed or required to attend court or other legal proceedings, for the purpose of establishing the authenticity of such photograph in evidence in any civil suit, the same to be payable prior to each day such attendance may be thus required. 
(c)  All monies received from sales made under this section shall be promptly paid into the city's general fund.  
Sec. 22-4. - Fee for defensive driving course. 
A person granted a defensive driving course by the Municipal Court of the City of South Houston pursuant to the provisions of Section 143A of article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes is required to pay a ten dollar ($10.00) fee to the city treasury to cover administrative costs for such course. 
(Ord. No. 759, § 1, 9-15-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 759, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 1987, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as § 22-4.  
Sec. 22-5. - Permit required for operator of motor vehicle in parade. 
(a)  The City Secretary of South Houston is hereby authorized and instructed to draft and prepare a standard permit application form for each owner or operator of a motor vehicle to fill out prior to any parade or procession in the City of South Houston. No permit shall be required for persons on foot in a parade or procession. No permit shall be required for the Christmas Parade, Fiestas Patrias Parade, Veterans Parade, Little League Parade, funeral processions or any other parade designated by city council. The city secretary shall charge a processing fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each automobile. 
(b)  Each applicant, prior to any parade or procession, shall provide all relevant information to the City of South Houston in the standard permit application form, including but not limited to, the make of the applicant's motor vehicle, the style of the applicant's motor vehicle, the license plate number of the applicant's motor vehicle, the VIN number of the applicant's motor vehicle, and the applicant's drivers license number. Each applicant shall sign the application. 
(c)  Each applicant shall present a copy of the permit to any law enforcement officer upon demand. 
(d)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or procession, in a motor vehicle, on a public street in the city limits of South Houston unless that person has and produces a parade or procession permit for that parade or procession in which he/she is participating. 
(Ord. No. 99-026, §§ 2—5, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 99-032, §§ 2—5, 10-26-99)  
Secs. 22-6—22-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-16. - Turning at intersections generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at an intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 3-21-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.101.  
Sec. 22-17. - Stopping and turning signals—Generally. 
(a)  When any other traffic may be affected by such movement, no person shall turn any vehicle without giving a signal of his intention to turn right or left. Such signal shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(b)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(c)  A stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or mechanical signal device of a type approved by the state department of public safety; provided, however, that under the conditions prescribed in section 69(b), article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, the vehicle must be equipped with and the signals must be given by such turn-indicating lamp or device. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 3-21-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.104 et seq.  
Sec. 22-18. - Same—Manner of giving with hand and arm. 
All signals required by section 22-17, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 3-21-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.107.  
Sec. 22-19. - Right-of-way at intersections generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection in obedience to any stop sign, yield right-of-way sign or traffic-control device erected by public authority, as required by this article. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle on a single lane street or roadway, or a street or roadway consisting of only two (2) traffic lanes, upon approaching the intersection, not otherwise controlled by traffic signs or signals, of a divided street or roadway, or of a street or roadway divided into three (3) or more marked traffic lanes, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to vehicles on such other street which are within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle on an unpaved street or roadway approaching the intersection of a paved roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any vehicle on such paved roadway which is within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such paved street or roadway. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway, not otherwise regulated herein or controlled by traffic-control signs or signals, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any other vehicle which has entered the intersection from such driver's right or is approaching such intersection from such driver's right in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter such intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(e)  A driver obligated to stop and yield the right-of-way in accord with this section, who is involved in a collision or interference with other traffic at such intersection, is presumed not to have yielded the right-of-way as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 2, 3-21-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.151.  
Sec. 22-20. - Duty to yield right-of-way when turning left. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.152.  
Sec. 22-21. - Stop intersections designated. 
Stop signs shall be erected on the following streets at the indicated intersections to govern traffic moving in the indicated directions: 
Stop Sign On 	At Its 
Intersection 	To Govern With 
Traffic Moving 
Avenue A 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue A 	Perez 	East 
Avenue A 	Volney 	East & West 
Avenue B 	Fourth 	East & West 
Avenue B 	Fifth 	East & West 
Avenue B 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue B 	Ninth 	East & West 
Avenue B 	Tenth 	East & West 
Avenue B 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue D 	First 	East & West 
Avenue D 	Fourth 	East & West 
Avenue D 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue D 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue D 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue D 	Texas 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Fourth 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Fifth 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Sixth 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Ninth 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Tenth 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Twelfth 	East & West 
Avenue E 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue F 	Fourth 	East & West 
Avenue F 	Fifth 	East & West 
Avenue F 	Seventh 	East & West 
Avenue F 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue F 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue F 	Twelfth 	East & West 
Avenue F 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue G 	Fourth 	East & West 
Avenue G 	Sixth 	East & West 
Avenue G 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue G 	Tenth 	East & West 
Avenue G 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue G 	Thirteenth 	East & West 
Avenue G 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue H 	Sixth 	East & West 
Avenue H 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue H 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue H 	Thirteenth 	East & West 
Avenue H 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue H 	Texas 	West 
Avenue I 	Fifth 	East & West 
Avenue I 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue I 	Ninth 	East & West 
Avenue I 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue I 	Twelfth 	West & East 
Avenue I 	Thirteenth 	East & West 
Avenue I 	Fourteenth 	East & West 
Avenue I 	Allen-Genoa 	East & West 
Avenue I 	Texas 	West 
Avenue J 	Sixth 	East & West 
Avenue J 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue J 	Tenth 	East & West 
Avenue J 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue J 	Twelfth 	East & West 
Avenue J 	Thirteenth 	East & West 
Avenue J 	Fourteenth 	East & West 
Avenue J 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue J 	Texas 	West 
Avenue K 	Sixth 	East & West 
Avenue K 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue K 	Ninth 	East & West 
Avenue K 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue K 	Thirteenth 	East & West 
Avenue K 	Fifteenth 	East & West 
Avenue K 	Fifteenth 	North & South 
Avenue K 	Sixteenth 	East & West 
Avenue K 	Allen-Genoa 	East & West 
Avenue K 	S. Shaver 	East 
Avenue K 	Texas 	West 
Avenue L 	Seventh 	East & West 
Avenue L 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue L 	Tenth 	East & West 
Avenue L 	Twelfth 	East & West 
Avenue L 	Fourteenth 	East & West 
Avenue L 	Fifteenth 	East & West 
Avenue L 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Avenue L 	Texas 	West 
Avenue M 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue M 	Ninth 	East & West 
Avenue M 	Tenth 	East & West 
Avenue M 	Eleventh 	East & West 
Avenue M 	Thirteenth 	East & West 
Avenue M 	Fifteenth 	East & West 
Avenue M 	S. Shaver 	East 
Avenue N 	Eighth 	East & West 
Avenue N 	Eighth 	South 
Avenue N 	Ninth 	East & West 
Avenue N 	Eighth 	South 
Avenue N 	Tenth 	East & West 
Avenue N 	Twelfth 	East & West 
Avenue N 	Thirteenth 	East & West 
Avenue N 	Fourteenth 	East & West 
Avenue N 	S. Shaver 	East 
Avenue N 	Texas 	West 
First 	Pennsylvania 	West 
First 	Spencer 	North 
First 	Texas 	South 
Second 	Spencer 	North 
Third 	Avenue A 	North & South 
Third 	Avenue G 	South 
Third 	Kolb 	North 
Third 	Spencer 	North & South 
Third 	Weldon 	North & South 
Fourth 	Avenue A 	North 
Fourth 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Fourth 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Fourth 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Fourth 	Spencer 	North & South 
Fourth 	Texas 	South 
Fifth 	Avenue B 	North & South 
Fifth 	Avenue D 	North & South 
Fifth 	Avenue G 	North & South 
Fifth 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Fifth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Fifth 	Spencer 	North & South 
Fifth 	Texas 	South 
Sixth 	Avenue A 	North 
Sixth 	Avenue B 	North & South 
Sixth 	Avenue D 	North & South 
Sixth 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Sixth 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Sixth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Sixth 	Avenue L 	North & South 
Sixth 	Spencer 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue A 	North 
Seventh 	Avenue B 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue D 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue E 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue G 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue K 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue L 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue M 	North & South 
Seventh 	Avenue N 	South 
Seventh 	Spencer 	North & South 
Eighth 	Avenue A 	North & South 
Eighth 	Avenue E 	North & South 
Eighth 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Eighth 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Eighth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Eighth 	Avenue N 	South 
Ninth 	Avenue A 	North 
Ninth 	Avenue B 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue D 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue G 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue L 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue M 	North & South 
Ninth 	Avenue N 	South 
Ninth 	Spencer 	North & South 
Tenth 	Avenue A 	North 
Tenth 	Avenue B 	North & South 
Tenth 	Avenue D 	North & South 
Tenth 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Tenth 	Avenue G 	North 
Tenth 	Avenue H 	South 
Tenth 	Avenue I 	North 
Tenth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Tenth 	Avenue K 	North & South 
Tenth 	Avenue N 	North & South 
Tenth 	Spencer 	North & South 
Eleventh 	Avenue A 	North 
Eleventh 	Avenue B 	North & South 
Eleventh 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Eleventh 	Avenue L 	North & South 
Eleventh 	Avenue N 	South 
Eleventh 	Spencer 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue B 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue D 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue E 	South & North 
Twelfth 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue G 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue K 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue M 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Avenue N 	North & South 
Twelfth 	Spencer 	North 
Thirteenth 	Avenue E 	North & South 
Thirteenth 	Avenue F 	North & South 
Thirteenth 	Avenue G 	North & South 
Thirteenth 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Thirteenth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Thirteenth 	Avenue L 	North & South 
Thirteenth 	Avenue N 	North & South 
Thirteenth 	Allen-Genoa 	North 
Fourteenth 	Avenue H 	North & South 
Fourteenth 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Fourteenth 	Avenue K 	North & South 
Fourteenth 	Avenue M 	North & South 
Fourteenth 	Avenue N 	North & South 
Fourteenth 	Allen-Genoa 	North 
Fifteenth 	Avenue I 	North & South 
Fifteenth 	Avenue J 	North & South 
Fifteenth 	Avenue M 	North & South 
Fifteenth 	Avenue N 	South 
Fifteenth 	Allen-Genoa 	North 
Fifteenth 	Forty (40) feet east and three (3) feet south of the southeast corner of Tract 3, and ten (10) feet west of the west line of Tract 7, South Houston Gardens No. 3, lying in the fifty-foot right-of-way of Fifteenth Street 	North 
Sixteenth 	Avenue L 	North & South 
Sixteenth 	Avenue M 	North & South 
Sixteenth 	Avenue N 	North & South 
Sixteenth 	Allen-Genoa 	North 
Alabama 	College 	North & South 
Alabama 	Indiana 	North 
Amarillo 	Georgia 	North & South 
Amarillo 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Amarillo 	Spencer 	South 
Amarillo 	Virginia 	North & South 
Amarillo 	York 	North & South 
Ammons 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Ammons 	Eight 	East & West 
Ammons 	Perez 	West 
Arizona 	Dallas 	East & West 
Arkansas 	Beaumont 	East & West 
Arkansas 	Houston 	East 
Arkansas 	Main 	East & West 
Arkansas 	State 	East & West 
Austin 	College 	North & South 
Austin 	Genoa 	North 
Austin 	Georgia 	North & South 
Austin 	Indiana 	North & South 
Austin 	Iowa 	North & South 
Austin 	Michigan 	North & South 
Austin 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Austin 	Pennsylvania 	South & North 
Austin 	Washington 	North & South 
Beaumont 	College 	North 
Beaumont 	Georgia 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Indiana 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Kansas 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Kentucky 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Louisiana 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Michigan 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Mississippi 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Missouri 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Nebraska 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Nevada 	South 
Beaumont 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Virginia 	North & South 
Beaumont 	Virginia 	East & West 
Beaumont 	Wisconsin 	North & South 
Betty 	Edwards 	South 
Bonnie 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Bonnie 	Eighth 	West 
Christa 	Perez 	West 
Clara 	Edwards 	South 
Dallas 	Arkansas 	North & South 
Dallas 	College 	North & South 
Dallas 	Georgia 	North & South 
Dallas 	Illinois 	North & South 
Dallas 	Indiana 	North & South 
Dallas 	Iowa 	North & South 
Dallas 	Kansas 	North & South 
Dallas 	Kentucky 	North & South 
Dallas 	Louisiana 	North & South 
Dallas 	Minnesota 	North & South 
Dallas 	Missouri 	North & South 
Dallas 	Nebraska 	North & South 
Dallas 	Nevada 	North & South 
Dallas 	Virginia 	North & South 
Dallas 	Washington 	North & South 
Dallas 	Winkler 	North 
Dumont 	Kentucky 	North & South 
Dumont 	Pennsylvania 	West 
Dumont 	Richey 	North 
Dumont 	Virginia 	North & South 
Edwards 	Halkies 	West 
Edwards 	Oaks 	East & West 
Edwards 	Perez 	East 
El Paso 	Georgia 	North & South 
El Paso 	Kentucky 	North & South 
El Paso 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
El Paso 	Spencer 	South 
El Paso 	Virginia 	North & South 
El Paso 	York 	East & West 
El Paso 	York 	North & South 
Freda 	Edwards 	South 
Galveston 	College 	North & South 
Galveston 	Georgia 	North & South 
Galveston 	Indiana 	North & South 
Galveston 	Kentucky 	North & South 
Galveston 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Galveston 	Virginia 	North & South 
Genoa 	Austin 	East & West 
Georgia 	Amarillo 	East & West 
Georgia 	Dumont 	West 
Georgia 	El Paso 	East & West 
Georgia 	Houston 	East 
Georgia 	Main 	East & West 
Georgia 	Palestine 	East & West 
Georgia 	State 	East & West 
Georgia 	State Hwy. 3 (Houston Blvd.) 	East & West 
Halkies 	Avenue A 	South 
Halkies 	Kolb 	North 
Illinois 	Alabama 	West 
Illinois 	Austin 	East 
Illinois 	Galveston 	East & West 
Illinois 	Houston 	East 
Illinois 	State 	East & West 
Indiana 	Amarillo 	East & West 
Indiana 	Beaumont 	West & East 
Indiana 	Dallas 	East & West 
Indiana 	Dumont 	West 
Indiana 	El Paso 	East & West 
Indiana 	Houston 	East 
Indiana 	Main 	East & West 
Indiana 	Palestine 	East & West 
Indiana 	State 	East & West 
Iowa 	Austin 	West 
Iowa 	Beaumont 	East & West 
Iowa 	Houston 	East 
Iowa 	Main 	East & West 
Iowa 	State 	East & West 
Iowa 	Waco 	East & West 
Jackson 	College 	North & South 
Jackson 	Illinois 	North & South 
Jackson 	Indiana 	North & South 
Jackson 	Iowa 	South 
Jackson 	Missouri 	North & South 
Jackson 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Jackson 	Washington 	North & South 
Kansas 	Houston 	East 
Kansas 	Main 	East & West 
Kansas 	State 	East & West 
Kansas 	Sherman 	West 
Kentucky 	Austin 	East & West 
Kentucky 	Dumont 	East & West 
Kentucky 	El Paso 	East 
Kentucky 	Houston 	East & West 
Kentucky 	Main 	West 
Kentucky 	Palestine 	East & West 
Kentucky 	Waco 	East 
Kolb 	Allen-Genoa 	East & West 
Kolb 	Eighth 	East & West 
Kolb 	Perez 	East & West 
Kolb 	Virgil 	East & West 
Longley 	Allen-Genoa 	East 
Longley 	Eighth 	West 
Louisiana 	Main 	East & West 
Louisiana 	State 	East & West 
Louisiana 	Waco 	East & West 
Lynn 	Virgil 	East & West 
Main 	Georgia 	North & South 
Main 	Kansas 	South & North 
Main 	Kentucky 	North & South 
Main 	Michigan 	North & South 
Main 	Minnesota 	South & North 
Main 	Mississippi 	North & South 
Main 	Nebraska 	South & North 
Main 	Nevada 	North & South 
Main 	Washington 	North & South 
Main 	Winkler 	North & South 
Main 	Wisconsin 	North & South 
Merrilane 	Avenue A 	South 
Michigan 	Dallas 	East & West 
Michigan 	Dumont 	West 
Michigan 	Houston 	East 
Michigan 	Main 	East & West 
Michigan 	Palestine 	East & West 
Michigan 	State 	East & West 
Michigan 	Sherman 	East & West 
Minnesota 	Austin 	East & West 
Minnesota 	Beaumont 	East & West 
Minnesota 	Main 	East & West 
Minnesota 	State 	East & West 
Minnesota 	Waco 	East & West 
Mississippi 	Austin 	West 
Mississippi 	Dallas 	East & West 
Mississippi 	Houston 	East 
Mississippi 	Main 	East & West 
Mississippi 	Waco 	East & West 
Missouri 	Austin 	East & West 
Missouri 	Galveston 	East & West 
Missouri 	Houston 	East 
Missouri 	Main 	East & West 
Missouri 	State 	East & West 
Missouri 	Waco 	East & West 
Montana 	Main 	East & West 
Montana 	State 	East & West 
Nebraska 	Austin 	North & South 
Nebraska 	Austin 	East & West 
Nebraska 	Dumont 	West 
Nebraska 	Houston 	East & West 
Nebraska 	Main 	East & West 
Nebraska 	Palestine 	East & West 
Nebraska 	Sherman 	East & West 
Nebraska 	State 	East & West 
Nevada 	Dallas 	East & West 
Nevada 	Main 	East & West 
Nevada 	State 	East & West 
Nevada 	Texas 	East 
Oaks 	Edwards 	South 
Oaks 	Kolb 	North 
Oregon 	Houston 	East 
Palestine 	Georgia 	North & South 
Palestine 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Palestine 	Richey 	North 
Palestine 	York 	South 
Pampa 	Allen-Genoa 	West 
Pampa 	S. Shaver 	East 
Pecan 	Nevada 	North & South 
Pecan 	Texas 	North 
Pennsylvania 	Alabama 	West 
Pennsylvania 	Austin 	East & West 
Pennsylvania 	Dallas 	East & West 
Pennsylvania 	Dumont 	West 
Pennsylvania 	Houston 	East & West 
Pennsylvania 	Jackson 	East & West 
Pennsylvania 	Main 	East & West 
Pennsylvania 	Palestine 	East & West 
Pennsylvania 	State 	East & West 
Sherman 	College 	South 
Sherman 	Georgia 	North & South 
Sherman 	Indiana 	North & South 
Sherman 	Iowa 	North & South 
Sherman 	Minnesota 	North & South 
Sherman 	Mississippi 	North & South 
Sherman 	Missouri 	North & South 
Sherman 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Sherman 	Virginia 	North & South 
Sherman 	Washington 	North 
State 	College 	North & South 
State 	Georgia 	North & South 
State 	Kansas 	North & South 
State 	Kentucky 	North & South 
State 	Mississippi 	North & South 
State 	Missouri 	North & South 
State 	Nevada 	North & South 
State 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
State 	Virginia 	North & South 
State 	Wisconsin 	North & South 
Texas 	Nevada 	North & South 
Texas 	Pecan 	North & South 
Vale 	Avenue A 	South 
Virgil 	Avenue A 	South 
Virgil 	Bonnie 	North & South 
Virgil 	Kolb 	North 
Virginia 	Austin 	East & West 
Virginia 	Dumont 	East & West 
Virginia 	Houston 	East & West 
Virginia 	Main 	East & West 
Virginia 	Palestine 	East & West 
Virginia 	State Hwy. 3 (Houston Blvd.) 	East & West 
Volney 	Avenue A 	South 
Waco 	Arkansas 	South 
Waco 	College 	South 
Waco 	Georgia 	North & South 
Waco 	Indiana 	North & South 
Waco 	Iowa 	North & South 
Waco 	Kansas 	North & South 
Waco 	Michigan 	North & South 
Waco 	Minnesota 	North & South 
Waco 	Missouri 	North & South 
Waco 	Nebraska 	North & South 
Waco 	Pennsylvania 	North & South 
Waco 	Virginia 	North & South 
Waco 	Virginia 	East & West 
Waco 	Washington 	North 
Washington 	Alabama 	West 
Washington 	Austin 	East & West 
Washington 	Beaumont 	East & West 
Washington 	Galveston 	East & West 
Washington 	Houston 	East 
Washington 	Main 	East & West 
Washington 	State 	East & West 
Weldon 	Avenue A 	South 
Weldon 	Third 	East & West 
Winston 	Spencer 	West 
Wisconsin 	Beaumont 	West & East 
Wisconsin 	Dallas 	East & West 
Wisconsin 	Houston 	East 
Wisconsin 	Main 	East & West 
Wisconsin 	Waco 	East & West 
 
(Ord. No. 696, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 709, §§ 1, 2, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 710, § 1, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 742, 9-16-86; Ord. No. 805, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 832, § 1, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 836, § 1, 5-9-89; Ord. No. 98-005, § 1, 4-22-98; Ord. No. 99-007, § 1, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 99-012, § 1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 2003-23, § 1, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 2005-48, § 1, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 1, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2007-20, § 1, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 2007-24, § 1, 12-4-07; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 1, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 3-23-10; Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 1, 4-11-17; Ord. No. 2017-20 , § 1, 4-25-17; Ord. No. 2017-21 , § 1, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 2017-24 , § 1, 6-27-17; Ord. No. 2017-25 , § 1, 6-27-17; Ord. No. 2017-26 , § 1, 6-27-17; Ord. No. 2017-27 , § 1, 7-25-17; Ord. No. 2017-42 , § 1, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 1-22-19; Ord. No. 2018-17 , § 1, 10-23-18; Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 1-22-19) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to designate stop intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 542.202, 542.203, 544.003.  
Sec. 22-22. - Duty of driver approaching stop or yield sign. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign at an intersection shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection. If required for safety, such driver shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. If a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 4, 3-21-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 544.010, 545.153.  
Sec. 22-23. - Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 5, 3-21-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.156.  
Sec. 22-24. - Procedure upon approaching stopped school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway, upon meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus, when there is in operation on such school bus, when there is in operation on such school bus a visual signal as specified in section 124, article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, and such driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or he is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1, 10-7-58) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.066.  
Sec. 22-25. - Corner cutting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any sidewalk area or through any driveway, parking lot or business or residential entrance without bringing the vehicle to a complete stop. No person driving a vehicle shall cross or drive in or on any such sidewalk, driveway, parking lot or entrance at an intersection for the purpose of making either a right or left turn from one street to another street. 
(Ord. No. 451, § 1, 5-3-60) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.423.  
Sec. 22-26. - Restriction on operation of motorcycles. 
(a)  No person shall drive or operate a motorcycle upon or over any public or private property within the city, except upon public roadways, officially designated motorcycle trails, and areas designated for vehicular traffic. It shall be an affirmative defense in a prosecution under this section that the defendant was operating a motorcycle on private property with the prior written consent of the owner of such property or his agent. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "motorcycle" shall mean every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor and machinery for maintaining and cleaning streets. 
(Ord. No. 614, §§ 1, 2, 10-1-74)  
Sec. 22-27. - Operation of trucks restricted to certain streets; exceptions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, a "truck" is any motor vehicle with a rated carrying capacity of more than one (1) ton, other than a motor vehicle designed solely for the transportation of passengers. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck on any street in the city, except the following streets, which are hereby designated as truck routes, through their entire extension in the city: 
(1)  Allen-Genoa Road. 
(2)  Genoa Road. 
(3)  Main Street between College and Winkler. 
(4)  Michigan. 
(5)  Spencer Highway. 
(6)  State Highway No. 3, also known as Old Galveston Road and Houston Boulevard. 
(c)  The driver of a truck may depart from the truck routes designated above, where it is necessary to load or unload merchandise at locations situated off such routes; provided, however, such driver shall not leave a designated truck route until he has reached a turning off point that can be described as the shortest distance practical to the ultimate destination of the truck. Such driver may also depart from such designated truck routes for the purpose of traveling to and from a truck terminal, provided that he proceeds by the most direct route that is practical and consistent with the reasonable operation of the truck. 
(d)  Any person operating a truck upon any street or roadway which is not designated a truck route by this section shall have in his possession, for the inspection of police officers, his log book, delivery slips or other evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the truck on a street or roadway other than a designated truck route. 
(e)  The chief of police shall erect appropriate signs and markings advising motorists of the truck routes established by this section and of streets restricted to passenger vehicle traffic. 
(Ord. No. 610, §§ 1—6, 4-16-74; Ord. No. 861, § 1, 3-6-90)  
Sec. 22-28. - Weight limits for vehicles transporting ready-mix concrete. 
(a)  The city council hereby determines that the public streets, highways and roads located within the city are found insufficient to carry the maximum gross vehicle axle loads authorized in section 1 of article 6701d-12, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle to transport ready-mix concrete over the public streets and highways within the city, and maintained by the city, in excess of the following: A single axle load shall not exceed twelve thousand (12,000) pounds; a tandem axle load shall not exceed thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds; and the gross vehicle weight shall not exceed forty-eight thousand (48,000) pounds. 
(Ord. No. 636, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-77)  
Sec. 22-29. - Driving on sidewalks marked on paving of certain streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on the striped sidewalks marked on the paving of the following streets: 
(1)  Avenue A, north side, from Third Street to Perez Street. 
(2)  Avenue N, south side, from the 1600 block to Texas Avenue. 
(3)  Main Street, west side, from Washington Avenue to Nevada Avenue. 
This subsection shall be in effect from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days, and, notwithstanding the above provisions, a vehicle may be driven across such sidewalks at any time for the purpose of entering a private driveway, provided the driver brings such vehicle to a stop before crossing the striping, completely clear of the sidewalk, before entering and after passing over same. 
(b)  Stenciled lettering upon the concrete inside the sidewalks referred to in this section, warning that the walkway area is for pedestrians, especially children, shall be construed to be sufficient notice that vehicle traffic is forbidden thereon. 
(Ord. No. 479, §§ 1, 3, 4, 9-5-61) 
State Law reference— Driving on sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.422.  
Sec. 22-30. - Negligent collision. 
(a)  If any driver or operator of a vehicle upon any public street, highway or upon any drive in a public park or upon any privately owned access ways or parking areas provided by business establishments, without charge, for the convenience of their customers, clients or patrons, but not upon privately owned residential property or the property of any garage or parking lot for which a charge is made for storage or parking of motor vehicles, within the corporate limits of the city, shall, with negligence, which term is hereby defined as the doing of that which a person of ordinary prudence would not have done under the same or similar circumstances, cause damage to or collide with any other vehicle of any kind whatsoever, or with any other property, resulting in a total damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, he shall be guilty of negligent collision, and upon conviction, shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(b)  Proof of no intent on the part of any operator of any vehicle charged with an offense under this section to collide with any other vehicle or with any other property shall be no defense to any charge filed under the authority of this section. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall authorize the prosecution of any person for the violation of the same while such person is operating any fire department or police department vehicle of the city in the performance of his duty; provided, that it shall not be necessary in any complaint, action or proceeding under this section to negative any exception, but the same shall be proved by the defendant by way of defense. 
(Ord. No. 632, 6-21-77)  
Secs. 22-31—22-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 542.202, 542.203, 544.002. 
 
Sec. 22-41. - Conformity with manual and specifications of state highway department. 
All traffic-control devices erected and maintained in the city shall conform to the manual and specifications approved and adopted by the state highway department. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.002.  
Sec. 22-42. - Required obedience. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Ord. of 6-7-54, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.004.  
Sec. 22-43. - Traffic-control signal legend generally. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(a)  Green indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(2)  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(3)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(b)  Steady yellow indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(c)  Steady red indication: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and may then turn right or, if the intersecting streets are both one-way streets and left turns are permissible, may turn left, after standing until the intersection may be entered safely, yielding right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection, unless signs are in place indicating that such turns are prohibited, in which case vehicular traffic facing such red signal shall remain standing until the green signal is shown. Traffic not so turning shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown. 
(2)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable, except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Ord. of 6-7-54, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 544.007, 552.001.  
Sec. 22-44. - Flashing signals. 
Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway, before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through an intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Ord. of 6-7-54, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.008.  
Sec. 22-45. - Signal light intersections designated. 
The following intersections are hereby designated as "signal light" intersections: 
(1)  Houston Boulevard at College Avenue. 
(2)  Houston Boulevard at Nevada Avenue. 
(3)  Houston Boulevard at Spencer Highway. 
(4)  Houston Boulevard at Winkler Highway. 
(5)  College Avenue at Main Street. 
(6)  South Richey at Forest Oaks. 
(7)  Spencer Highway at Eighth Street. 
(8)  Spencer Highway at Allen-Genoa Road. 
(9)  Allen-Genoa Road at Avenue A. 
(10)  Spencer Highway at Perez Road. 
(11)  Spencer Highway at Texas Avenue. 
(12)  College Avenue at Austin Street. 
(13)  Main Street at Winkler Highway. 
(Ord. of 6-7-54, § 8; Ord. No. 709, § 3, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 720, § 1, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 10-30-84)  
Sec. 22-46. - Altering, damaging, etc., devices. 
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control sign, device or signal or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-7-54, § 4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.005.  
Secs. 22-47—22-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Speed of vehicles in cities and towns and authority of local authorities to alter prima facie speed limits established by state law, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 545.352, 545.356. 
 
Sec. 22-58. - Maximum limits generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle within the city at a rate of speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street or highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of paragraph (b), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 8-1-55; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 4-2-59)  
Sec. 22-59. - Signs for special speed zones. 
The special speed zones and speed limits established by this article shall be marked by appropriate signs indicating the speed limit in such zones. At least one (1) plainly readable sign shall be placed at the beginning of each such zone and as many other signs as may be practical shall be placed in the zone. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 2, 4-2-59)  
Sec. 22-60. - Speed limits enumerated. 
Enumerated. The speed limits for all motor vehicles operating on public streets and highways of the City of South Houston shall be as follows: 
(a)  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour on the following streets or portions thereof: 
(1)  On Winkler Drive from Main Street to State Highway 3 (Houston Boulevard). 
(2)  On State Highway 3 (Houston Boulevard) from the southern city limit to the northern city limit. 
(3)  On Spencer Highway from Shaver Street to State Highway 3 (Houston Boulevard). 
(4)  On College Avenue from Easthaven Boulevard to State Highway 3 (Houston Boulevard). 
(5)  Along State Highway 3 (Houston Boulevard) from west city limit to the south city limit. 
(6)  On South Richey from State Highway 3 (Houston Boulevard) to Allen Street. 
(7)  Along State Highway 3 from a point five hundred twelve (512) feet west of Beaumont Road to the centerline of Galveston Road, a distance of approximately 0.406 mile. 
(8)  Along State Highway 3 from the centerline of Richey Road to the southern limits of the City of South Houston, a distance of approximately 1.559 miles. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in any of the following designated school zones: 
(1)  On Avenue "A" from Perez Road to 11th Street. 
(2)  On Allen-Genoa from Avenue "A" to Kolb Road. 
(3)  On Perez Road from Avenue "A" to Edward Street. 
(4)  On Main Street from Michigan Avenue to College Avenue. 
(5)  On Waco Street from Michigan Avenue to Georgia Avenue. 
(6)  On Georgia Avenue from Main Street to Waco Street. 
(7)  On Main Street from College Avenue to Washington Avenue. 
(8)  On Washington Avenue from Main Street to Austin Street. 
(9)  On College Avenue from Beaumont Street to Galveston Street. 
(10)  On Austin Street from Washington Avenue to College Avenue. 
(11)  On Avenue "N" from 11 th Street to 14 th Street. 
(12)  On Kentucky Street from State Street to Main Street. 
(13)  On Georgia Street from State Street to Main Street. 
(14)  On Main Street from Nebraska Avenue to Missouri Avenue. 
(15)  On Austin Street from Missouri Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue. 
(16)  Along State Highway 3, a school zone, from the point eighty-five (85) feet to west of Galveston Road to the point one hundred ninety-five (195) feet to east of the centerline of Brook Road, a distance of approximately 0.291 mile, the speed limit shall be twenty (20) MPH when flashing. 
(c)  The speed limit established in subsection (b) shall be in effect between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m.; and between 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week from the first day of school of each and every school year, when the school zone is properly signed as a school zone (save and except the speed limit established specifically for Numbers 5, 8, 9, 14 and 15 [On Waco Street from Michigan Avenue to Georgia Avenue; on Washington Avenue from Main Street to Austin Street; on College Avenue from Beaumont Street to Galveston Street; on Main Street from Nebraska Avenue to Missouri Avenue; and on Austin Street from Missouri Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue] in subsection (b) shall be in effect between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m.; and between 2:00 p.m. and 4:15 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week from the first day of school of each and every school year, when the school zone is properly signed as a school zone). Timed flashing lights, as well as fixed signs, may be used to indicate the designation of a school zone. 
(d)  Thirty (30) miles per hour on all other public streets and highways in the City of South Houston. 
Signs. Drivers of motor vehicles are hereby notified of the speed zones and of the speed limits as set out [above] by signs erected on the right-hand shoulder of the roadways whereon said public streets and highways the speed is regulated and, said signs state the times when the speed is reduced if applicable. If there is no sign on the shoulder of the road, thirty (30) mile per hour speed limit applies to such street or highway. At least one (1) plainly readable sign shall be placed at the beginning of all speed zones and as many other signs as may be practical in the zone. 
Violation and penalty. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to drive and operate such vehicle on the public streets and highways in the City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas in excess of the speed limit hereinabove set for the area wherein said vehicle is being operated. Anyone who drives and operates a motor vehicle in excess of the lawful speed limit shall be committing a misdemeanor offense, and upon conviction, the offender shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
Emergency vehicles exempted. The provisions of this section do not apply to the drivers of police or fire-fighting vehicles, when said vehicles are being driven in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 1, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 640, §§ 1—4, 4-4-78; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 10-5-82; Ord. No. 709, §§ 4, 5, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 8-23-84; Ord. No. 736, § 1, 5-6-86; Ord. No. 821, § 1, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 909 (8-91), § 1, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 94-036, § 1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 97-023, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 98-010, § 1, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 99-015, § 1, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2001-13, § 1, 8-7-01; Ord. No. 2002-19, § 1, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2004-12, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-04; Ord. No. 2004-25, § 1, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 2005-49, § 1, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2019-05 , § 1, 2-12-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 640, adopted April 4, 1978, consolidated all speed limit enumeration and in § 5 repealed all ordinances in conflict therewith; hence §§ 22-60 and 22-61 have been effectively repealed. Section 22-60 pertained to school zone speeds and was derived from Ord. No. 440, § 1, adopted April 2, 1959, Ord. of May 16, 1961, § 1, and Ord. of Oct. 16, 1962, § 1; while § 6-21 pertained to thirty-five mile an hour speed zones and was derived from Ord. No. 466, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 1960 and Ord. No. 479, § 6, adopted Sept. 5, 1951. 
State Law reference— Authority to set speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.356.  
Sec. 22-61. - Reserved. 
Note— See editor's note following § 22-60.  
Sec. 22-62. - Construction speed zones. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance establishing speed limits for vehicles within the construction zones and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect, until the same expire under their own terms, to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Secs. 22-63—22-72. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Parking of wreckers at scene of accident, § 5-9; parking in fire lanes, § 9-51 et seq.; parking of mobile homes on streets, § 13-3; off-street parking requirements of zoning ordinance, App. A, §§ 5.1—5.3. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 
 
Sec. 22-73. - General prohibitions. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(a)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
(1)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(2)  On a sidewalk. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  On a crosswalk. 
(5)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
(6)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(7)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(8)  On any railroad track. 
(9)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
(1)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(2)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(3)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(4)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(5)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance (when properly sign-posted). 
(6)  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(c)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(2)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 1, 8-3-65) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.302.  
Sec. 22-74. - Method of parking—Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on the streets and highways within the city in any manner which is contrary to the usual parking procedure for the particular parking area. Where the painted lines on the street designate angle parking, vehicles must be parked at an angle between such lines. Where the painted lines designate parallel parking, vehicles must be parked parallel to the road and within such lines. 
(b)  Any irregular parking which is adjudged to be hazardous under the particular circumstances is hereby made unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 1, 9-6-55)  
Sec. 22-75. - Same—At least ten feet of roadway to be left available for vehicular traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 8-3-65) 
State Law reference— Parallel and angle parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.303.  
Sec. 22-76. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except such emergency repairs as may be necessary to enable such vehicle to be moved off of such roadway at the earliest possible moment. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 3, 8-3-65)  
Sec. 22-77. - Parking for more than forty-eight hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to remain parked upon any street or right-of-way within the City of South Houston for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 553, § 2, 8-2-66; Ord. No. 702, 6-7-83) 
State Law reference— Definitions pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001.  
Sec. 22-78. - Parking of truck or bus between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck larger than a three-quarter ton pickup truck or any bus on the city streets between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. In an emergency situation, where a truck or bus must remain on a city street between such hours for some reason, the operator of such vehicle shall notify the police department, as soon as he determines that such vehicle must remain on the street between such hours. The police department shall investigate the situation and, if necessary, place warning lights or barricades on the street to advise passing motorists of such parked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 1, 9-16-58)  
Sec. 22-79. - Prohibited parking on specific streets. 
When signs or markings are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any of the following streets or portions thereof: 
Avenue A from its intersection with Perez Road to its intersection with Berry Bayou. 
Avenue H, 900 and 1,000 blocks. 
Avenue J, 900 and 1,000 blocks. 
Avenue N from its intersection with Texas Avenue to its intersection with Shaver Street. 
Avenue N, within the 1400, 1500 and 1600 blocks. 
East side of Austin Street , in the 1400 and 1500 Blocks thereof, between Washington Avenue and College Avenue. 
Dallas Street from its intersection with Georgia Avenue to its intersection with Washington Avenue. 
First Avenue from its intersection with Spencer Highway to its intersection with Pennsylvania Avenue. 
Fourth Street from its intersection with Spencer Highway to its intersection with Avenue A. 
Illinois Avenue from its intersection with Dallas Street to its intersection with State Highway No. 3. 
Main Street from its intersection with Michigan Avenue to the south city limits. 
Nevada Avenue from its intersection with Texas Avenue to its intersection with Main Street. 
Palestine Street from its intersection with First Avenue to the north city limits. 
Pennsylvania Avenue from its intersection with Palestine Street to its intersection with State Highway No. 3. 
Perez Road from its intersection with Spencer Highway to the north city limits. 
Texas Avenue from its intersection with Spencer Highway to its intersection with Avenue N. 
Virginia Avenue from its intersection with Palestine Street to its intersection with Main Street. 
Washington Avenue from its intersection with Dallas Street to its intersection with State Highway No. 3. 
York Avenue from its intersection with Berry Bayou to its intersection with Spencer Highway. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-19-60; Ord. No. 593, § 1, 8-19-71; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, 1-18-05)  
Sec. 22-80. - Parking not to obstruct marked sidewalks on paving of certain streets of Avenue A. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the north side of the paving on Avenue A, from Third Street to Perez Street, on the south side of Avenue N, from the 1600 block to Texas Avenue, or on the west side of Main Street, from Washington Avenue to Neveda Avenue, in such manner as will necessitate crossing the sidewalk line marked on such paving, or to park a vehicle in such manner as to obstruct such sidewalks either in driveway intersections of elsewhere. This section shall be in effect from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 9-5-61)  
Sec. 22-81. - Removal of parked vehicles constituting traffic hazard. 
When any vehicle is parked on any street in such a manner as to become a hazard to traffic, the chief of police is hereby authorized to have such vehicle towed away immediately, if the owner is not available then and there to accept a notice from the police to remove such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 553, § 3, 8-2-66)  
Chapter 22.5 - TREES AND VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Insanitary, unsightly, etc., conditions on private premises, § 12-17 et seq.; accumulations of weeds, brush, or rubbish prohibited, § 12-19; trees and shrubs on public property, § 19-16 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22.5-1—22.5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 950 (8-92), § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 1992, repealed former Art. II, §§ 22.5-31—22.5-38, relative to the control of Pistillate Cottonwood trees, which derived from Ord. No. 902, §§ 1—8, adopted June 4, 1990. 
 
Secs. 22.5-31—22.5-38. - Reserved.  
Chapter 23 - MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2004-27, § 2, adopted August 17, 2004, repealed the former Ch. 23, and enacted a new Ch. 23 as set out herein. The former Ch. 23 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 607, 6-5-73; Ord. No. 935 (2-92), §§ 1, 2, 3-3-92. 
Cross reference— Auto wreckers, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide, by ordinance, for the licensing and regulation, of motor vehicle dealers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.002. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
City. The term "city" refers to the City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas. 
Dealer in new motor vehicles. The term "dealer in new motor vehicles" shall be construed to include and mean any person who, primarily or incidentally, wholly or part time, publicly engages in, conducts, or carries on the business of buying, selling, offering for sale to the public, consigning to be sold to the public, trading or otherwise dealing in new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle trailers, or both, with and to the public, under a franchise from either a manufacturer or authorized distributor of motor vehicles. 
Dealer in used motor vehicles. The term "dealer in used motor vehicles" shall be construed to include and mean any person who, primarily or incidentally, wholly or part time, publicly engages in, conducts, or carries on the business of buying, selling, offering for sale to the public, consigning to be sold to the public, trading or otherwise dealing in used motor vehicles or used motor vehicle trailers, or both, with and to the public. 
Demonstrator. The term "demonstrator" shall mean any motor vehicle which has been used by any dealer in new motor vehicles in effectuating sales and which has been driven more than one hundred fifty (150) miles. 
Existing nonconforming license location. The term "nonconforming license location" means the location identified by an applicant for a motor vehicle dealer's license under section 23-22(a)(5) and (6) at which a person will engage in the activities for which a license is required under section 23-21. Said location is also further defined as license location and was lawfully operating prior to December 31, 2004, but is not in conformance with all requirements of this amendment. 
Inoperable used motor vehicle. Any used motor vehicle not capable of spontaneous use and immediately independent propulsion. 
Itinerant dealer. The term "itinerant dealer" shall be construed to include and mean any person who engages in the temporary or transient public business of selling or offering for sale new or used motor vehicles, trailers, or any or all of the same, or publicly exhibiting any or all of the same for public sale, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such public business or conducting such public exhibits, either hires, rents, leases, or occupies any room or space in any building, structure, lot or enclosure in the city in, through or from which such article or articles are or may be sold, offered for sale, or exhibited for sale. The word "temporary," as used herein means and shall be construed to mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least three (3) months upon which such public business is to be operated or conducted. The word "established," as used herein, means and shall be construed to mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least three (3) months. The word "itinerant," as used above, means and shall be construed to mean such business as may be operated or conducted by a person who does not have a fixed place of business (other than a temporary place as herein defined) in the city or now has his principal place of business in a place other than the city, and moves stock or goods or articles into the city for public sale with the purpose or intention of removing the unsold portion thereof away from the city and ceasing to engage in business in the city before the expiration of three (3) months from the commencement of such business. It is specifically provided that the term "itinerant dealer" shall also include any person engaged in the business or businesses herein above mentioned, who associates himself temporarily with any local licensee under this chapter, by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of the business of any local licensee. 
License location. The term "license location" means the location identified by an applicant for a motor vehicle dealer's license under sections 23-22 (a)(5) and (6) at which a person will engage in the activities for which a license is required under section 23-21. 
Outside sales display. The term "outside sales display" shall relate to all non-enclosed portions of a licensed location except for those areas behind an opaque fence where inoperable, wrecked, dismantled, disabled, or junked vehicles are kept on site. 
Used motor vehicles. Any self-propelled, free-moving vehicle usually with four wheels constructed to transport passengers, licensed by a state agency as a vehicle, previously owned by a used and placed in service with an accumulation of mileage, not known as a new vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-2. - Identification of demonstrators. 
No motor vehicle which has been used as a demonstrator shall be sold or displayed for sale by any dealer unless the word "demonstrator" appears on a sticker of not fewer than three (3) inches in diameter attached to the windshield thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Secs. 23-3, 23-4. - Reserved.  
Sec. 23-5. - List of salesmen to be posted. 
Each licensed motor vehicle dealer who employs salesmen to assist him in the sale of motor vehicles or motor vehicle trailers shall keep posted in the showroom of his business, or in some other conspicuous place, a list of the names of all such salesmen and the number of their licenses issued under this chapter, which list shall be open to the inspection of the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-6. - Sale or exchange of improperly equipped vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle dealer to sell, barter, or exchange any motor vehicle or motor vehicle trailer in the city, unless the same is equipped with the safety equipment specified and required by the provisions of any safety equipment ordinance of the city now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted or any safety equipment specified and required by laws of the State of Texas. This section shall not apply to sales for dismantling or export from the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-7. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  Every person who, as a dealer, shall make any sale, purchase, transfer or exchange of either a new or used motor vehicle or new or used motor vehicle trailer in the city shall keep a written record of any and all transfers and assignments, if any, made by such person, or chattel mortgages, liens or notes covered by or secured by lien upon such motor vehicle trailers, such record to show the name and address of each transferee, description of the mortgage lien or note transferred and of the property affected thereby, including the VIN, model and license number of the motor vehicle or serial number of the trailer therein involved. 
(b)  Every licensee under this chapter who shall repossess any motor vehicle or trailer or foreclose any lien or mortgage upon any motor vehicle shall keep a written record thereof, and of each such repossession or foreclosure, stating the name of the mortgagor or mortgagors, the amount of indebtedness, principal, interest and other items, if any, separately, the date and manner of foreclosure, whether by suit or private sale, the description of the property repossessed or foreclosed upon, including the VIN, model and license number of the motor vehicle or serial number of the trailer therein involved, and the name and address of the purchaser thereof. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the records required to be kept under this chapter shall be retained for a period of not fewer than seven (7) years and shall at all times be available and open for inspection by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-8. - Report of purchases and sales to police. 
Every person who, as dealer, shall make a sale, transfer or exchange of a new motor vehicle or motor vehicle trailer, or a purchase, sale, transfer or exchange of a used motor vehicle or motor vehicle trailer, shall, when requested, immediately furnish to the chief of police or his duly authorized representative an instrument in writing in the following form: 
Year and Model 	Make and Style 
Motor No. 	License No. 
Name of Vendor: 		
Address of Vendor: 		
City 	County 	State 
Name of Transferee or Purchaser: 	
City 	County 	State 
 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-9. - Police records kept under chapter to be confidential. 
All records filed with or kept by the police department under and by virtue of this chapter shall be kept confidential by such department and shall not be made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-10. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any infraction of this chapter as determined by the appropriate enforcing officer of these regulations shall be subject to the fines as enumerated in the general penal provisions of section 1-7 of the South Houston Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Secs. 23-11—23-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEALER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 23-20. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful and a class C misdemeanor for any person, whether for himself or as agent or representative of another, to engage, primarily or incidentally, wholly or part time, in the business of buying, selling, or offering for sale, consigning to be sold, trading, bartering, or otherwise dealing in new or used motor vehicles or motor vehicle trailers, or either or both, within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license to do so or to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-21. - Separate license for each place of business and each person engaging in business. 
(a)  Every person who desires to maintain and operate more than one (1) place of business of branch office or substitute place of business for which a license is required by this article must designate in his application each and every such place of business, branch office or substitute place of business, giving each address, and pay a separate license fee and secure a separate license for each address. 
(b)  When more than one person desires to engage in a business for which a license is required by this article at the same place of business, each such person must obtain a separate license. 
(c)  It shall be a violation for any individual or entity to expand an existing licensed business by adding adjacent parking area(s) and/or adjoining properties without city approval. No expansion can occur without the express written permission of the City of South Houston, Texas, by the applicant applying for and obtaining approval by the city for any new permit and variance to the city's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2011-37, § 2, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 23-22. - Application generally. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license required by this article shall make application therefor upon a form to be furnished by the city building official or the code enforcement officer. Said application form shall be signed and sworn to and shall include, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address under which the business is to be conducted. 
(2)  Whether the applicant is the owner or lessee of the real property occupied. If the applicant is a lessee, he must provide the name and address of the landlord and attach a copy of the lease agreement to the application form. 
(3)  A description of the business. 
(4)  A statement of the method of distribution to be used. 
(5)  The address of the applicant's principal office or establishment. 
(6)  The number, name and location of branch establishments, if any. 
(7)  The trade name of any business or businesses that the applicant was engaged in during the preceding five (5) years of the application date. 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever been arrested, charged and/or convicted of the offence of theft or fraud, or for any felony in this or any state. If the applicant is a partnership, the answer shall be as to all members of the partnership and if a corporation, it shall be as to all officers of the corporation. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of its charter or permit to do business certified by the secretary of state and the names and addresses of the principal officers and of all officers of the corporation. 
(10)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all the partners. 
(11)  If the applicant is neither a partnership nor a corporation, the name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  If the application is by a corporation, the same shall be signed and sworn to by a duly authorized officer thereof; if by a partnership, then by all of the partners therein; and, if by an individual, then by such individual personally. 
(c)  All new license locations selling only used vehicles shall be required to comply with the following requirements as a condition of receiving a license under this article: 
(1)  The entire outside area of the commercial establishment including all motor vehicle display areas, driveways, and means of ingress and egress, and parking areas shall be paved with concrete or blacktop in accordance with city standards. Said paved areas shall be maintained in a good and operable condition. Paving shall be promptly replaced upon determination by the City of South Houston of any of the following conditions: failure of pavement, vegetative infiltration, excessive drainage slope failure, or any other associated pavement failure. 
(2)  There shall not be in excess of one motor vehicle per each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outside sales display area. 
(3)  No motor vehicle shall be placed on any city right-of-way or easement for display or storage for any amount of time. 
(4)  Each license location under this article, where inoperable vehicles will be kept on site, shall provide a fenced area to provide storage for inoperable, wrecked, dismantled, disabled or junk vehicles so that such vehicles are not visible to the general public. The fence shall be completely opaque and not extend lower than six (6) feet above grade. 
(5)  Upon receipt of an application, the building official shall cause an on-site inspection by himself or his duly authorized representative, fire marshal, and the health department, to investigate the property for compliance with all applicable city ordinances before the initial license shall be issued. The building official or his duly authorized representative shall cause such inspection annually thereafter before each renewal. 
(6)  All repair and service work shall be performed in an enclosed building that: 
a.  Has garage doors, which may remain open during business hours, but shall be closed thereafter; 
b.  Contains a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet; and 
c.  Is set back no fewer than fifty (50) feet from the front and rear property lines and no fewer than twenty-five (25) feet from any side property line. 
(7)  All exterior lighting shall be designed to prevent direct glare on adjoining properties and shall be generally situated to cast light away from perimeter areas of said used car lot. All lighting plans shall be submitted for approval to the City of South Houston electrical inspector. Such approval is not only a review of regulatory mandates, but also will signify the most practical solution to avoiding light pollution on adjacent properties by the following methods: location of lighting standards, direction and angle of lighting, height of fixtures, candle power of each light fixture, light spreading hardware. 
(8)  All license locations shall comply with applicable zoning restrictions and setback requirements. 
(9)  A transfer of business ownership shall not constitute a cessation of operations. Any license issued under article II of this chapter may be transferred upon such a change in business ownership; provided, that transferee satisfies the requirements of this chapter. Existing non-conforming status of the lot will continue regardless of business or property ownership as long as there is no discontinuation of the sales activities by a City of South Houston licensed motor vehicle dealer of more than sixty (60) days. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term "transfer of business ownership" shall mean a stock sale, an asset sale, or a transfer through probate upon the death of a legal owner of a dealership location. In the event of the death of an owner or part-owner of a dealership location, whereupon the transfer of such ownership interest passes through a probate court, any resulting cessation of business operations is tolled for a period of sixty (60) days following the termination of such judicial proceedings. In the event of a judicial determination of incompetence or a medical doctor's certification of disability or incompetence of the sole owner of dealership location, any resulting cessation of business operations is tolled, for purposes of this subparagraph, for a period of sixty (60) days following such determination or certification. 
(10)  For purposes of fire prevention and extinguishment, each license location shall be required to meet the following requirements, in addition to any other provisions of this chapter: 
a.  Each vehicle for sale must have direct access to a sixteen-foot wide drive aisle and be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from either: (a) the public right-of-way; or (b) a twenty-four-foot drive aisle capable of concurrent two-way traffic that extends to the public right-of-way; and 
b.  Each license location shall have a drive aisle at least eighteen (18) feet wide that extends from the public right-of-way into the property a distance adequate to allow the efficient and effective operation of fire apparatus, but in no event less than fifteen (15) feet into the property. Such lane design, which may overlap with any portion of the sixteen- or twenty-four-foot-wide drive aisle required by the preceding subparagraph, shall require approval of the fire marshal during the permit review process, and upon approval shall be plainly marked to prohibit parking thereon or obstruction thereof in any way. 
For purpose of this subparagraph, a vehicle has "direct access" to a drive aisle if it is either parked beside a drive aisle or parked immediately adjacent to a vehicle that is parked beside a drive aisle. 
(11)  All vehicles displayed for sale must maintain a minimum distance of twenty-four (24) inches from any point of any other vehicle displayed for sale. 
(12)  "Flag strings or pennant strings" shall be specifically prohibited for any license location, and any existing non-conforming license locations are required to remove such items by November 1, 2004. 
(13)  No person, firm or corporation or other business entity shall devote property to the use of a used motor vehicle sales location or allow the use of any property in the city to be used as a licensed used motor vehicle dealer location unless the new location is more than five thousand (5,000) feet, with the exception of a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet for any such business or entity abutting on either Spencer Highway, College Avenue, Allen-Genoa Road, Houston Boulevard (State Highway 3) or Winkler Drive; and the further exception of a distance of 700 feet for any such business or entity abutting on Shaver Street, (as measured from nearest property line to nearest property line) from any existing location of any licensed used motor vehicle dealer location even if the owner or tenant of the newly acquired or leased (or otherwise rightfully in possession) property whose use is to be changed to such a use, is the owner or tenant or one rightfully in possession of a location adjacent to or within the prohibited distance. The use of any other lot for automobile storage in conjunction with the dealer location for sales is a use as a dealer location and therefore is hereby prohibited unless it is more than five thousand (5,000) feet from any used motor vehicle dealer location (including the location it serves). 
No owner or tenant of a property devoted to used motor vehicle dealer sales lot use shall fence or barricade the area fronting a thoroughfare between the thoroughfare and the footprint of the first structure on the lot. 
(14)  All repair and service building shall: 
a.  Be set back no fewer than twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line and five (5) feet from rear property lines and no fewer than five (5) feet from any side property line, and 
b.  All exterior lighting shall be designed to prevent direct glare on adjoining properties and shall be generally situated to cast light away from perimeter areas of said used car lot. All lighting plans shall be submitted for approval to the City of South Houston's Electrical Inspector. Such approval is not only a review of regulatory mandates, but also will signify the most practical solution to avoiding light pollution on adjacent properties by the following methods: location of lighting standards, direction and angle of lighting, height of fixtures, candle power of each light fixture, and light spreading hardware. 
c.  Each new license location is required to be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing license location as measured from nearest property line to nearest property line. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2009-22, § 2, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 2011-37, § 4, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 2, 1-24-17)  
Sec. 23-23. - Temporary permit pending final action on application. 
Pending final action on an application for a license under this article, the city building official or his duly authorized representative may, in his discretion, grant the applicant a temporary permit authorizing him to engage in the business for which the license is sought for a period not exceeding ten (10) calendar days. Such permit shall not be granted to the same person more than once within any six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-24. - Applicant to have fixed place of business. 
No license shall be granted under this article to a person, including an itinerant dealer, who does not have or prove the bona fide intention to have forthwith upon the issuance of a license a regular established place of business, at a definite and fixed address in the city used to offer for sale motor vehicles by such licensee and which is open to reasonable inspection by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-25. - Applicant's bond. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  After a vehicle dealer has procured a license to operate a business within the city and has operated such business continuously for a period of one year, the bond required by this section may be waived by the city council, after due hearing to consider same. After the expiration of such one-year period, any vehicle dealer who desires to have the bond waived shall give written notice to the city secretary of such desire and thereupon the city council shall set a time and date for a hearing thereon. At such hearing the burden of establishing that such bond should be waived shall be on the dealer. At any time, after a bond is waived, the dealer may be required to reinstate the bond, upon a hearing held by the city council, after due notice is given to such dealer, if, in the judgment of the city council, the requirement of a bond is necessary for the protection of either the city or of any person or persons who have or may have dealings with such dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2004-30, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 5, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2011-43, § 2, 12-27-11)  
Sec. 23-26. - Action by city building official, chief of police or his duly authorized representative on application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license under this article, the city building official or his duly authorized representative shall forward said application to the chief of police or his duly authorized representative, who shall make or cause to be made such investigations as he may deem necessary, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Whether the applicant has failed to answer or has answered falsely or in a misleading manner any of the questions on the application form. 
(2)  Whether the applicant has been found guilty of misrepresentation or fraud within the meaning of the civil or criminal laws of this state. 
(3)  Whether the applicant bears a good reputation in the community or communities where he lives or maintains a place of business for honesty and fair dealing. 
The chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall also investigate the location of the applicant's proposed establishment with respect to the present uses made thereof and the spaces to be allocated for the display and storage of motor vehicles. 
(b)  After review of the application and upon completion of his investigation under this chapter, the chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall forward his findings to the city council and stamp the application as either "recommend approval" or "recommend denial." 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2009-22, § 4, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 7, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2011-43, § 4, 12-27-11)  
Sec. 23-27. - Review by city building official. 
(a)  In determining whether to approve or deny the granting of a license or renewal or amendment of a license, the city building official or his duly authorized representative shall consider each application for a license under this article, review the investigation made by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative and determine whether the applicant has complied with all of the terms of this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(b)  The city building official shall deny a license if he determines that the applicant gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city building official or the chief of police or his duly authorized representative during the application process. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-28. - Fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be non-refundable, payable to the City of South Houston before the license is issued in the amount enumerated, as follows, based upon the number of vehicles offered for sale on the license location premises: 
Fewer than 30 ..... $500.00 
30—70 ..... $650.00 
71 or more ..... $800.00 
(b)  The additional monthly fee shall be: Pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 215.002 and all other applicable law, the fee for any such license (new or renewal) required by this article shall be non-refundable, payable to the City of South Houston and will be paid monthly in the amount equal to ten dollars ($10.00) per car sold for inventory sales, fleet sales, and sub-sales; and five dollars ($5.00) per car sold for dealer sales, in the previous month, and no city license shall be renewed unless and until all past due amounts due the city for this fee are paid in full. The total monthly payment based on cars sold shall be verified by the dealer submitting to the city a copy of the dealer's sworn motor vehicle inventory tax statement it is required to forward to the State of Texas declaring the number of cars sold in the previous month. It shall also be accompanied by the appropriately calculated monthly payment. If the reporting period by the dealer to the State of Texas is a period other than on a monthly basis, then the calculations per cars sold and the corresponding fee to the city shall be calculated and reported by the Dealer to the city on an applicable basis. 
Such fee shall be placed in a special fund and shall be used by the city for the enforcement of this chapter and for the enforcement of all provisions of the law regulating the sale, theft, or exchange of motor vehicles, motor vehicle trailers, or parts or accessories thereto, and for no other purpose. 
In addition, the city shall assess a two hundred dollars ($200.00) late fee, if applicable, and shall assess a re-inspection fee totaling thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 9, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 4, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2, 4-6-16; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 2, 7-12-16)  
Sec. 23-29. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  When the city building official approves an application for a license under this article, he shall be authorized, upon payment of the proper license fees by the applicant, to issue the license. 
(b)  In all cases where the city building official refuses to issue the license applied for, the applicant thereof shall have the right to appeal to the city council, by giving written notice to the city secretary of such appeal within ten (10) days after the action of the city building official. In the case of any appeal to the city council, the council shall select a date for the hearing and notify the applicant thereof. The hearing before the council shall be de novo and the applicant shall have the burden of proving that he is entitled to the license. At such hearing, the council shall have the right and authority to consider the information obtained by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative when investigating the applicant and also any report or statement of facts prepared by the city building official in connection with the matter. All such reports and statements shall be open to inspection by the applicant upon request. After such hearing, the council shall decide, by motion, whether or not the license applied for shall be granted or refused. In the event the council grants such license, the applicant shall be entitled to the issuance thereof in the same manner as other licenses are issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-30. - Display. 
A license issued under this article shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous place in the office of each place of business maintained by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-31. - Term. 
Licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-32. - Amended licenses. 
Any license issued under this article shall apply to the premises described therein, but a licensee may, upon application therefor and the payment of the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to the inspection department for each such application and the turning in of the old license for cancellation, be issued an amended license showing a change of location of the place of business. Such amended license shall expire on the date of the expiration of the license it replaces and shall so state. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 11, 7-26-11)  
Sec. 23-33. - Certified copies. 
Any licensee who desires a certified copy of his license issued under this article shall make a written application therefor, addressed to the city building official, stating therein the number of certified copies desired by the applicant and over his signature, and upon payment made to the city building official in the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each such certified copy applied for, the city building official is hereby authorized and required to issue and deliver such copy or copies to the applicant and certify in his official capacity that each such copy is a true and correct copy of the original or amended license issued to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-34. - Licensee to engage only in specifically licensed business. 
No person having a license as provided for in this article shall engage in any business herein regulated except that for which such person has been specifically licensed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-35. - Does not grant vested right. 
No license granted under the terms of this article shall be construed as the grant of a vested right, but shall be subject to such other regulations or amendments as the city council may, from time to time, promulgate in the regulation of the business coming within the scope of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-36. - Suspension or revocation. 
If any licensee under this article is convicted of any theft, fraud, or felony, or gives false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city building official or chief of police or his duly authorized representative during the application process, the city building official shall have the right, power and authority to cancel, revoke, or suspend such license for any period of time after first giving to such licensee written notice of the violations complained of and after allowing for an informal meeting between the city building official and the licensee to discuss such suspension or revocation. In addition, if a licensee is convicted of any three violations of this ordinance within a two-year period as measured from infraction date of first violation to the infraction date of third violation, the city building official shall cause the indefinite revocation of license held by licensee. The licensee shall have the right to appeal any such action to the city council. Such appeal must be exercised by the licensee filing written notice thereof with the city secretary within ten (10) days after the city building official's decision. The hearing before the city council on such appeal shall be de novo and, after such hearing, the city council shall announce its decision by motion or other appropriate action. The licensee shall be permitted to continue operating his business pending final action by the city council. Upon license revocation, all rights to operate within city jurisdiction shall cease, regardless of number of locations in operation by licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 22-37. - Payment of taxes, liens, etc. prerequisite to issuance. 
No license shall be issued under this chapter unless all ad valorem taxes and other taxes, fees, liens, assessments, or charges on property, real, personal or mixed, situated at the proposed license address or location, including interest and penalty, which are due and owing the city are fully paid and proved to be so paid by valid, lawful receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-38. - Placing motor vehicles for sale without consent. 
(a)  In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence sell or offer for sale any motor vehicle on any premises other than a license location in the City of South Houston without the written consent of the owner of such premises. It shall also be unlawful to offer for sale more than one motor vehicle at one time on any premises other than a license location. Such written consent, to be effective, must be visibly displayed on dash of motor vehicle, and shall be on file with the city building official and the Chief of Police for the City of South Houston. 
(b)  Any vehicle found to be in violation of this section shall be deemed unlawful and immediately removed to a state-approved licensed storage facility. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Secs. 23-39—23-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALESMAN'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 23-47. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a class C misdemeanor for any person to engage as a salesman, full or part time, in the business of selling new or used motor vehicles or new or used motor vehicle trailers in the city unless such person shall first obtain a license to do so or to violate any other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful and a class C misdemeanor for any licensed motor vehicle dealer to allow any person to act as a salesman for his business who has not obtained a salesman's license and/or a current satisfactory criminal history report from the department of public safety as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 13, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 6, 8-25-15)  
Sec. 23-48. - Temporary license. 
Pending final action on an application for a salesman's license under this article, the city building official may, in his discretion, grant the applicant a temporary license for a period not exceeding ten (10) calendar days. Such temporary license shall not be granted to the applicant more than once within any six (6) months period. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-49. - Application generally. 
It shall be the duty of each applicant for a salesman's license to apply for the license required by this article in the same manner as prescribed in section 23-22, and to specifically furnish on the application form provided by the city building official the applicant's name, age, present address, former addresses and places of employment during the preceding five (5) years, and the handwritten signature of the applicant and of the dealer employing the applicant as well as any other information requested by the application form. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-50. - Action on application by the city building official and chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
Any application for a salesman's license shall be acted upon by the city building official and the chief of police or his duly authorized representative in the same manner and respect as is provided for in this chapter for applications for motor vehicle dealer's licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-51. - Fee. 
The fee for a salesman's license required by this article shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to the City of South Houston and delivered to the permit department prior to issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-52. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  After an application for a license under this article has been reviewed by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative he shall forward his findings to the city building official, and/or his duly authorized representative, and stamp the application as either "recommend approval" or "recommend denial." If the applicant has been convicted of any theft, fraud, or felony, or has been found guilty of misrepresentation or fraud within the meaning of the civil or criminal laws of this state, or has submitted an incomplete application, the city building official shall have the right to deny the issuance of such license. The city building official shall deny a license if he determines that the applicant gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city building official or to the chief of police or his duly authorized representative during the application process. 
(b)  In all cases where the city building official refuses to renew the salesman's license applied for, the applicant thereof shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the manner provided for in section 23-29(b). 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 2, 3-12-13)  
Sec. 23-53. - Contents. 
Each license issued under this article shall be numbered and shall contain the signature, social security number, and state driver's license number of the licensee as well as the signature of his employer. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-54. - Exhibition. 
The holder of any license issued under this article shall exhibit that license to any police officer or other authorized agent of the city showing proper identification. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-55. - Not transferable; endorsement if licensee changes employers. 
A salesman's license issued under this article shall not be transferrable. However, it shall be lawful for a salesman to use the same license after changing employment from one employer to another, providing the fact of such change of employment is endorsed on the license by the city building official and a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is paid for making the notation of such change and investigation incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 8, 8-25-15)  
Sec. 23-56. - Term; renewal. 
A salesman's license issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Such license may be renewed annually upon payment of the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 10, 8-25-15)  
Sec. 23-57. - Cancellation. 
If, after granting any salesman's license under this article, any such licensee is convicted of theft, fraud or any felony, or has been found guilty of misrepresentation or fraud within the meaning of either the civil or criminal laws of this state, or has misrepresented any answer on the application, such license may be cancelled by the city building official. Any licensee whose license is cancelled may appeal to the city council as provided for in section 23-36(a). 
(Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2(Att. 1), 8-17-04)  
Sec. 23-58. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided, and regardless of whether the person holds a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law; provided, however, that if the person is convicted of an offense under this article that is also a violation of the penal laws of the state, the person shall be subject to the penalties set out in the laws for the offense. 
A used-parts and accessories seller commits a separate offense for each sale of used parts and/or used accessories made without a valid salesman's license. The offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law for each transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, § 6. 8-25-15)  
Chapter 24 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 6; mobile homes permanently located outside mobile home parks to have water and sewer connections, § 13-50; waterlines and sewer connections in mobile home parks, §§ 13-77, 13-78; plumbing, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish and regulate water systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.015; municipal utilities generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code chs. 1501, 1502. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Permit for water and sewer connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tap or connection to any city sanitary sewer line or waterline, without first obtaining a permit so to do. The fee for such permit shall be set by the city council, either by resolution or motion. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 2, 5-18-71)  
Sec. 24-2. - Required material for new sanitary sewers. 
All sanitary sewer lines installed at any place within the city after December 15, 1970, shall be of the rubber gasket type of pipe. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 2, 12-15-70)  
Sec. 24-3. - Installation of storm sewers. 
(a)  Before any storm sewer pipe is installed within the city, the size of such pipe must first be passed upon and agreed to by the superintendent of streets or the building inspector, one of whom must sign the permit for such installation. 
(b)  No storm sewer pipe less than fifteen (15) inches in diameter may be installed in any ditch line. All pipe must be made of concrete, baked clay, asbestos fiber or steel. 
(c)  Every property owner desiring to install storm sewers outside his property must provide an opening drain with an iron grate, not less than fifteen (15) inches by twenty-three (23) inches, in line with the center of each fifty (50) foot lot and at each corner lot where such pipe is installed. The owner of the property must provide a drain box of concrete, not less than twenty-four (24) by twenty-four (24) inches, extending to the bottom of the pipe so installed and provided with an iron grating top, sufficiently strong to support heavy traffic. All installations and work governed by this subsection shall be subject to inspection and approval by the building inspector. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 516, §§ 1—3, 9-3-63; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 1, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-40, § 1, 11-1-05)  
Sec. 24-4. - Filling, interfering with, etc., drainage ditches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fill up, cover or in any manner impede the drainage or natural flow of water in any ditch on city property. 
(Ord. No. 516, § 4, 9-3-63)  
Sec. 24-5. - Damaging, tampering with, etc., sewage works property; repair of sewer breaks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works, as such works are defined in section 24-38. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any person who breaks into a sewer line in an emergency to relieve or prevent flooding of homes or other premises; provided, however, that such person shall repair such break with concrete within ten (10) hours after the break is made. In making such repairs, no concrete or other material shall be dropped or deposited in the main sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 578, §§ 4, 8, 5-19-70; Ord. No. 589, Art. VI, § 1, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-6. - Repair of sanitary sewer leaks on private property. 
(a)  Responsibility and application. 
(1)  Maintaining the integrity of the sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the director of utilities or his designee for the City of South Houston. 
(2)  This section applies to all customer sewer service lines on private property which flow into public lines in city streets, alleys, and easement (including but not limited to single family or duplex residences, mobile homes and/or trailer parks, apartments, places of business, schools, hospitals, churches, structures of any kind, vacant buildings or vacant land). 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Inflow (as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency): The water discharged into a sewer system and service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellars, swimming pool and/or spa drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, and street wastewaters or drainage. 
(2)  Infiltration (as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency): The water entering a sewer system and service connections from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. 
(3)  Storm sewer: A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage into which domestic waste water or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
(4)  Sanitary Sewer: A public sewer that conveys domestic waste water or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water, ground water and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
(c)  Inspection. Prior to original connection, reconnection or transfer of water and/or sewer service to a tenant or property owner, the city at its option shall inspect the customer's private sanitary sewer service line and verify the integrity thereof. Any defects discovered in the private line shall be repaired by the property owner or his agent prior to obtaining original connection, reconnection or transfer of city water and/or sewer service. The city has already surveyed and identified existing infiltration and inflow on private sanitary sewer lines and will continue to inspect private lines suspected of infiltration and inflow. 
(d)  Notification. 
(1)  The utilities department of the city will notify in writing by registered mail return receipt requested each property owner on whose property a source of inflow or infiltration of water into the city's sanitary sewer system exists, as well as the nature and location of the sources. The property owner shall within three (3) calendar months of date of notification have the sources repaired at his expense. 
(2)  A reminder notice will be sent in one (1) month if the repairs have not been satisfactorily completed. 
(3)  A cut off notice will be sent in two (2) months if the repairs have not been satisfactorily completed. 
(4)  Penalties provided for herein may be enforced at the end of the third calendar month from the original notice. 
(e)  Repairs. 
(1)  If line in question is vitreous clay pipe and cannot be satisfactorily repaired, the property owner may be required to replace the entire private clay sewer line with PVC pipe Schedule 40. 
(2)  All repairs must be made by a plumber licensed by the State of Texas or by a resident* property owner. Both the plumber or owner must have a valid city plumbing permit for these specific repairs prior to work commencing. 
*A homeowner may install or maintain plumbing and/or sewer equipment within his owner property boundaries, provided that the work is done by himself and used exclusively by him or his family. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate any provision of this code nor is it to be construed as exempting any such property owner from obtaining a permit and paying the required fees therefor. 
(3)  After the repair has been completed and before it has been covered, the city plumbing inspection department shall be notified to inspect and approve its adequacy and workmanship. If the city plumbing inspector leaves a green tag signifying a satisfactory repair, the plumber or owner may replace the cover. 
(4)  However, if the city plumbing inspector leaves a red tag, the plumber or owner must contact the designated city official on the red tag and correct the repairs as specified and then notify the city plumbing inspection department to reinspect the corrected repairs. No cover may be replaced until a green tag is attached to the repairs by the city plumbing inspection department. Otherwise owner and/or plumber shall be required to excavate and the city shall reinspect the repairs, and if still defective turn off water and/or sewer service. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  Should the property owner fail to make the necessary repairs within the three-month period as set out above, the city shall have the option of thereafter (1) assessing a surcharge fee to his monthly wastewater charge (the charge shall be determined by the city's existing formula for calculating domestic wastewater charges) or (2) terminating water and/or sewer service to the property. 
(2)  If after exercising reasonable diligence, the city is unable to locate the property owner or his agent or the property owner or his agent refuses to make the necessary repairs, the city or its agent shall have the right to go on the land or property upon which the source of inflow or infiltration exists and make such repairs and inspection as above provided. The owner of the property shall be liable to the city for the cost of such work and shall pay such cost upon demand, which cost may be included upon the property owner's next monthly wastewater charge with a reasonable service charge added for each month the bill remains unpaid or the city may cut off the water and/or sewer upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the customer. 
(3)  Within thirty (30) days after notification that the water and/or sewer will be cut off, the customer may: 
a.  Arrange with the utility department to extend his payout period without interest up to sixty (60) months with said monthly payment added to his regular water/sewer bill; or 
b.  Appeal to the city council for a hardship variance. Said appeal shall be submitted in writing to the mayor's office for hearing at a regular scheduled council meeting. 
(4)  If the property owner is unknown or does not pay the charge, the city shall file a lien upon the land for the cost of the repair and a fine for the extraneous water disposed of through the city's sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment plant. 
(g)  Appeals. Appeals shall be to the city council. Said appeal shall be within ten (10) days of the expiration of the thirty-day notification. The burden of proof shall be on the customer to prove that he has complied with this section. 
(Ord. No. 876, §§ 1-7, 8-7-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 876, §§ 1—7, adopted Aug. 7, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been codified as superseding the provisions of former § 24-6 which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 586, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1970.  
Sec. 24-7. - Water usage during water emergencies. 
(a)  Discharge outside building unlawful during certain times; exceptions. During a water emergency period, it shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally discharge water outside of a building or enclosed structure except between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. (local time). It shall be a defense to a prosecution under this section that water was discharged only as follows: 
(1)  Onto grass or plants which have been planted or transplanted on the same calendar day on which such discharge occurs; 
(2)  Onto trees or plants (other than grass) between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. (local time), if such discharge is accomplished through a hose held at all times in a person's hand; 
(3)  For sanitary purposes within the city limits; 
(4)  For the purposes of flushing waterlines to prevent or eliminate stagnation, contamination or discoloration of water in any water facility; 
(5)  For the suppression of fires; 
(6)  For the wetting of aggregate to be used in the manufacture of concrete; or 
(7)  For the wetting of any surface for the purpose of complying with the air pollution laws of the State of Texas or of the United States of America. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have meanings as set out below unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. 
(1)  "Water" shall mean treated water delivered directly to the ultimate retail purchaser thereof through any portion of the water distribution systems owned by the City of South Houston. 
(2)  To "discharge" water shall mean to allow, permit or cause water to be released through a sprinkler, faucet, hose or similar pressurized source. The pouring, releasing or sprinkling of water into or from a can, bucket, tank or similar container not connected to the city water distribution system shall not be a discharge of water for the purposes of this section. 
(3)  A "water emergency period" is a period of time which begins when the mayor: 
a.  Has found that 6,000,000 gallons of water or more have been pumped into the city's water distribution system during any seventy-two-hour period; and 
b.  Has declared the existence of a water emergency by filing a written declaration to that effect with the city secretary. 
A water emergency period ends when the mayor has declared that the water emergency has ended and has filed a written declaration to that effect with the city secretary. 
(c)  Violation, penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be assessed a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  Authority of mayor to enforce section. The mayor is authorized and directed to monitor the quantity of water pumped into the city's water distribution systems and to make the findings and declarations prescribed elsewhere in this section. 
(Ord. No. 680, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-80) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 680, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 1980, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 24-27. In order to keep related material together within the chapter, these provisions have been redesignated as § 24-7. Section 2 of Ord. No. 680 has been included herein as § 24-7(d) at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 24-8. - Adoption of drought contingency plan. 
(a)  Approval of the plan. The city council hereby approves and adopts the Drought Contingency Plan attached hereto as Exhibit A to be included in full as a part of this section as if recited verbatim herein. The city commits to implement the program according to the procedures set forth in the adopted plan. 
(b)  Annual report. The city shall report to the Texas Water Development Board annually on the implementation and effectiveness of the plan in accordance with the outline set forth in the plan. 
(c)  Implementation and enforcement. In regards to implementation and enforcement of the drought contingency plan, the mayor is designated as the official responsible for implementation and enforcement, and the following guidelines are adopted: 
(1)  Mild conditions: At any time total city water production attains eighty (80) percent or more of the maximum capacity of the fresh water reserves for the city, the mayor shall be authorized to request voluntary compliance by all users and initiate other measures in accordance with the drought contingency plan as set out in the attached plan. 
(2)  Serious conditions: At any time total city water production attains ninety (90) percent or more of the maximum capacity of the fresh water reserves for the city, and/or the water pressure in the distribution system falls to forty (40) pounds per square inch as indicated by the primary water system pressure gauge located in the main city hall building, the mayor shall implement compulsory compliance by all users in accordance with the drought contingency plan as set out in the attached plan. 
(3)  Critical conditions: At any time total city water production attains one hundred (100) percent or more of the maximum capacity of the fresh water reserves for the city, and/or the water pressure in the distribution system falls to thirty-five (35) pounds per square inch as indicated by the primary water system pressure gauge located in the main city hall building, and excess usage penalty shall be imposed on all users not acting in compliance with the drought contingency plan attached hereto in accordance with the standards of usage outlined within the plan and with the penalties established therein. 
In the event critical conditions persists for an extended period of time, the city may ration water usage or terminate service to selected users of the system in accordance with the following sequence: 
First: 	Industrial users 
Second: 	Commercial users 
Third: 	Residential users 
Last: 	Public health and safety facilities 
 
(d)  Penalty. Users of city water, except for the city, that do not comply with section 24-8 shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a penalty and fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) per day nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day of noncompliance as established by city council and/or disconnection or discontinuance of water services to such users by the city. 
(e)  [Consistency with regional water plans.] City agrees to coordinate with regional water planning groups for the service area of Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission in order to assure consistency with the appropriate approved regional water plans. 
(f)  Variances. The mayor, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this section shall file a petition for variance with the city within five (5) days after the plan or a particular drought response state has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the mayor, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioners complies with this section. 
(5)  Description of the relief request. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the mayor or his/her designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirement. 
No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 755, §§ 1—4, 8-4-87; Ord. No. 2000-09, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 2007-16, §§ 1—11, 8-21-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 755, §§ 1—4, adopted Aug. 4, 1987, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as § 24-8. Exhibit A, the Drought Contingency Plan, has not been set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the officer of the city. 
Cross reference— Water usage during water emergencies, § 24-7.  
Sec. 24-9. - Supervisor of sanitation department. 
(a)  Position created. There is hereby created the job position of supervisor of sanitation department. 
(b)  Appointment. The supervisor shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, and may be discharged by the mayor with the consent of city council. 
(c)  Salary. The salary of the supervisor shall be set by the city council. 
(d)  Duties. The supervisor of the sanitation department shall have supervision of all employees of that department and employees temporarily assigned to that department while they are performing work for sanitation. He shall perform all other duties as prescribed by the mayor and city council. He shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper administration and operation of the sanitation department and affairs, and shall make frequent reports to the mayor and city council. 
(e)  [Budget provisions.] The budget provisions for salary of superintendent of sanitation are hereby transferred to supervisor of sanitation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, §§ 3, 5, 11-6-01) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2001-22, § 3, 5, adopted November 6, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, § 24-9 was added at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 24-10. - Certificate pay for state-mandated certification. 
That water and wastewater employees shall receive the following monthly certificate pay structure for each respective certificate, earned by the employee, which consists of a maximum of four (4): 
Class A certificate (only) is worth: 	$200.00 
Class B certificate is worth: 	$75.00 
Class C certificate—Surface water is worth: 	$50.00 
Class C certificate—Ground water is worth: 	$50.00 
Class C certificate—Wastewater is worth: 	$50.00 
Class D certificate—Water is worth: 	$25.00 
Class D certificate—Wastewater is worth: 	$25.00 
 
These payments shall be based on the number of certificates held by the water and wastewater employees at the beginning of the fiscal year, e.g., October 1, 2005. Payments shall be made retroactive from October 1, 2005, for those certificates earned by the water and wastewater employees. 
(Ord. No. 2003-15A, § 2, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 2-7-06) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2003-15A, § 2, adopted September 30, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 24-10 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 24-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-07, adopted March 1, 2005, repealed § 24-11, which pertained to advisory committee to city council on city utilities and derived from Ord. No. 2004-43, §§ 1—5, 12-21-04.  
Secs. 24-12—24-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Charges for garbage collection to be included on bill for water and sewer service, § 10-3. 
 
Sec. 24-21. - Classification and definition of water users. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, all users of city water are classified as residential, commercial residential, commercial, outside-city residential and outside-city commercial. 
(b)  The definition of the following users is as follows: 
(1)  Residential user shall be defined as a single-family unit. 
(2)  Outside-city residential shall be defined as a single-family unit outside the city limits of the City of South Houston, Texas, which meets the definition of a residential user. 
(3)  Commercial residential user shall be defined as all multi-family units containing two (2) or more living units including trailer parks and apartment projects. 
(4)  Outside-city commercial residential user shall be defined as all multi-family units containing two (2) or more living units including trailer parks and apartment projects located outside the city limits of the City of South Houston, Texas, which meet the definition of "commercial residential user." 
(5)  Commercial user shall be defined as any water user who is a business for-profit or non-profit. 
(6)  Outside-city commercial user shall be defined as a commercial business located outside the city limits of the City of South Houston, Texas, which meets the definition of commercial user. 
(Ord. No. 595, §§ 1, 2, 11-16-71; Ord. No. 634, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 823, § 1, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 1, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 2005-06, § 1, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2005-09, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 1-6-09)  
Sec. 24-22. - Water rates. 
The monthly charge for water furnished by the City of South Houston, Texas, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential and outside-city residential user rates are as follows: The minimum base rate for water is twelve dollars ($12.00) per month. In addition to the base minimum charge, all water used will be charged at the following rate: 
Residential commodity rate per 1,000 gallons 
0—6,000 gallons 	$1.91 per 1,000 gallons 
6,001—12,000 gallons 	$2.30 per 1,000 gallons 
12,001 gallons and over 	$2.50 per 1,000 gallons 
 
(2)  Commercial residential user rates are as follows: The minimum base rate per month for water is the number of units multiplied by sixty-two (62) percent and multiplied by the minimum base rate of twelve dollars ($12.00). 
Commercial residential and outside-city commercial user commodity rate per 1,000 gallons 
0—6,000 gallons 	$1.91 per 1,000 gallons 
6,001—12,000 gallons 	$2.30 per 1,000 gallons 
12,001 gallons and over 	$2.50 per 1,000 gallons 
 
(3)  Commercial and outside-city commercial user rates are as follows: The minimum base rate per month for water for commercial and outside-city commercial rates shall be as follows: 
	Per month 
(a)  5/8 ? water meter 	$12.00 
(b) 1? water meter 	$18.00 
(c) 1½? water meter 	$32.40 
(d) 2? water meter 	$57.60 
(e) 3? water meter 	$126.00 
(f) 4? water meter 	$216.00 
 
Commercial user commodity rate per 1,000 gallons 
0—6,000 gallons 	$1.91 per 1,000 gallons 
6,001—12,000 gallons 	$2.30 per 1,000 gallons 
12,001 gallons and over 	$2.50 per 1,000 gallons 
 
(4)  There shall be set up a bond sinking fund for the debt service of the water bonds, for the purpose of the water system improvements. Said procedure shall be reviewed by the mayor and council every six (6) months to determine whether the fees which have been set are adequate for the retirement of the bonds. 
(5)  There shall be added to the regular monthly minimum water charge per month an amount of forty-seven cents ($0.47) per one thousand (1,000) gallons used, beginning on the third day of December, 1996, which shall be the pass-through variable rate collected to offset the city's cost of surface water purchased from the city's suppliers. These pass-through charges shall be shown as a separate item on the utility bill and will represent the city's cost of water both as to amount and timing. Only changes in the cost of water purchases shall be passed through. This variable rate shall remain set as the municipal pass through rate until revised by council to reflect subsequent changes in water costs, thereby recognizing its variability as costs vary, but affording predictability in the billing process. All variable pass-through rates billed and charged to date are hereby ratified as reasonably related to the cost of water and the previously reasonable rate of sixty-one cents ($0.61) per one thousand (1,000) gallons used shall remain in effect until the commencement of the reduced rate as specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 595, §§ 3—5, 11-16-71; Ord. No. 634, §§ 3, 4, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 705, § 2, 7-1-83; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 823, § 1, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 878, § 1, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 994 (2-94), § 1, 2-1-94; Ord. No. 96-027, § 1, 12-3-96; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 2, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 2005-09, § 2, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 2, 1-6-09)  
Sec. 24-23. - Sewer rates. 
Each water user connected to the sewer shall pay to the city sewer charge based upon water usage, as follows: 
(1)  Residential and outside-city residential sewer user rates shall be as follows: The minimum base rate per month for sewer services is fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40). In addition to the minimum monthly base rate, an additional sewer service charge fee of two dollars and thirty-five cents ($2.35) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used will be charged to the residential and outside-city residential sewer user. 
(2)  Commercial residential user and outside-city commercial residential rates shall be as follows: The minimum base rate per month for sewer services is the number of units multiplied by sixty-two (62) percent and multiplied by the minimum base rate of fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40). In addition to the minimum monthly base rate, a sewer service charge of two dollars and thirty-five cents ($2.35) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used will be assessed. 
(3)  Commercial and outside-city commercial user rates shall be as follows: The minimum base rate per month for sewer services for commercial and outside-city commercial users shall be as follows: The rates shall be charged according to the size of the water meter, whether those units are occupied or vacant, as follows: 
	Per month 
(a)  5/8 ? water meter 	$14.40 
(b) 1? water meter 	$21.60 
(c) 1? water meter 	$38.88 
(d) 2? water meter 	$69.12 
(e) 3? water meter 	$151.20 
(f) 4? water meter 	$259.20 
 
In addition to the minimum monthly base rate, a sewer service charge of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used will be assessed. 
(4)  There shall be set up a bond sinking fund for the debt service of the sewer bonds which were passed for the purpose of improvement(s) to the sewer system. Said procedure shall be reviewed by the mayor and council every six (6) months to determine whether the fees which have been set are adequate for the retirement of the sewer bonds. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 6, 11-16-71; Ord. No. 634, § 5, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 705, § 3, 7-1-83; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 752, § 1, 7-7-87; Ord. No. 823, § 1, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 994 (2-94), § 1, 2-1-94; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 3, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 2005-09, § 3, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3, 1-6-09)  
Sec. 24-24. - When due and payable; late payment charge. 
Bills for charges prescribed by this article shall be due and payable on the date shown on the bill. A late payment charge of two dollars ($2.00), or ten (10) percent of the amount of such bill, whichever is higher, will be added to an account, if payment is not received by the due date on bill. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 7, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 705, § 4, 7-1-83)  
Sec. 24-25. - Discontinuing service to delinquent customer. 
An account for charges prescribed by this article shall be deemed delinquent if payment is not received by the due date. Water service will be disconnected ten (10) days after the delinquency date and a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be charged to restore water. An additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be added to the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee if the water service is restored after normal working hours, for a total fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). The following fees will be charged for damage to the water meters: 
a.  Charge for broken cutoff valve will be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
b.  Charge for broken meter or meter register will be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
c.  Charge for a broken or missing lock will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
d.  Charge for illegal hook-up to a fire hydrant and/or flush valve will be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
e.  Minimum charge for water consumed due to illegal hook-up to a fire hydrant and/or flush valve will be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
f.  Charge for a broken meter box and/or lid will be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 634, § 8, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 1, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2011-38, § 2, 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2011-41, § 2, 12-27-11; Ord. No. 2014-22, § 2, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 2, 10-9-18)  
Sec. 24-26. - Deposit to assure payment. 
(a)  The following shall be required from each customer served by the city's water/sewer systems: 
Class 	Deposit 
(1) Residences with water connection prior to August 13, 2014 	The deposit on file shall be continued. 
(2) Residences connected or reconnected to water services on or subsequent to August 13, 2014 	$150.00 with the exception of customers with previous Bad Debts with the City—Deposits are doubled to $300.00 because they are "high risk" accounts. (Bad debts are to be paid in full prior to any new service with the City.) 
(3) Multi-family living units 	An amount equal to six (6) months normal average bills. 
(4) Service stations, car lots, washaterias, car washes, restaurants, and all other water and sewer customers, other than residences or multi-family living units 	$250.00 
 
(b)  The deposit required by this section shall be paid to the city secretary and shall be retained by the city to be used as an offset against any unpaid charge for water, garbage and sewer service furnished to the customer. Such deposit shall be returned to the customer on the termination of his service and the payment in full of all such charges due and owning by such customer. 
(c)  No interest will be due and payable by the city on deposits made under this section. 
(d)  One form of the following identification shall be required from each customer opening an account for water/sewer service with the City of South Houston: 
(1)  Texas driver's license. 
(2)  Texas ID card (government issued). 
(3)  Consoler ID. 
(4)  Out-of-state driver's license in extreme cases. 
(5)  Passport. 
All types of identification need to be valid and not expired. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 3-15-66; Ord. No. 613, §§ 1, 2, 9-3-74; Ord. No. 705, § 5, 7-1-83; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 2009-23, § 1, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 2009-24, § 1, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-24, § 1, 8-26-14)  
Sec. 24-27. - Water taps, meters, and tap fees. 
(a)  All water taps shall be made by the city after application is made for a meter and the same is fully paid for by the applicant. Where the applicant is a property owner or the property owner is the agent, the meter shall remain the property of the city but the owner shall be responsible for its protection. The city shall, in all cases, decide on the size of the meter which can be set and the location of same. 
(b)  In case any person shall move into any premises, he shall file an application for water service before using any water for the service connection for such premises. 
(c)  There shall be collected by the city the following fees for water meter installation within the city: 
Meter Size 	Total 
¾" ..... 	$182.00 
1" ..... 	292.00 
1 ½" ..... 	438.00 
2" ..... 	742.00 
 
The water meters and taps for sizes three (3) inches and larger are based upon the actual itemized cost to the City of South Houston and determined by the city engineer. 
(d)  The applicant for water service shall be liable for the cost of any repair or replacement of any water meter.  
Sec. 24-28. - Costs incurred in crossing streets to connect to water lines. 
All costs and expenses incident to boring or cutting a street in order to connect to a water line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall, upon filing an application for the necessary permit, deposit with the city, in addition to any permit fees that may be payable, the sum of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) as a security deposit for the payment of such expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2001-25, § 1, 12-4-01)  
Secs. 24-29—24-37. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-38. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of water and sewers or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. I, §§ 1—22, 2-16-71; Ord. No. 98-001, § 1(B), 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-39. - Unlawful disposal generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. II, § 1, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-40. - Unlawful discharge to natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. II, § 2, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-41. - When connection to public sewer required. 
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. II, § 4, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-001, § 1(C), adopted February 24, 1998, repealed § 24-42 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to prohibited sewer deposits generally and derived from Ord. No. 589, Art. V, § 3, 2-16-71.  
Sec. 24-43. - Disposal of unpolluted drainage and industrial cooling or process waters. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. V, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-001, § 1(C), adopted February 24, 1998, repealed § 24-44 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to exclusion from sewers or pretreatment, control, etc., of certain wastes and derived from Ord. No. 589, Art. V, §§ 4, 5, 2-16-71.  
Sec. 24-45. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, flammable wastes, and or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. V, § 6, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-001, § 1(C), adopted February 24, 1998, repealed § 24-46 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to maintenance of preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing facilities and derived from Ord. No. 589, Art. V, § 7, 2-16-71.  
Sec. 24-47. - Control manhole for observation, sampling and measurement of industrial wastes. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. 589, Art. V, § 8, 2-16-71)  
Secs. 24-48—24-58. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-001, § 1(C), adopted February 24, 1998, repealed §§ 24-48—24-51 in their entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to method of measuring, testing, etc., wastes; special agreements or arrangements concerning industrial wastes; right of entry to enforce article or inspect, repair, etc., sewage works property; violations of article and derived from Ord. No. 589, Art. V, § 9, 10, Art. VII, §§ 1, 2, Art. VIII, §§ 1—3, 2-16-71.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS 
 
Sec. 24-59. - Installation permit. 
(a)  No person shall install any building sewer or uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, in connection with the installation of a building sewer, without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: One for residential and commercial service and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-60. - Costs to be borne by owner; indemnification of city from damages caused by installation. 
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer, including, when necessary, the costs of street boring or sawing. The owner shall, upon filing application for the necessary permit, deposit with the city, in addition to any permit fees that may be payable, the sum of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) as a security deposit for the payment of such expenses. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, § 3, 2-16-71; Ord. No. 2001-26, § 1, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 24-61. - Separate sewer required for each building; exceptions. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that, where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, § 4, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-62. - Use of old sewers for new buildings. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, § 5, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-63. - Size, slope, materials, etc. 
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, § 6, 2-16-71) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 6-17 et seq.; plumbing, Ch. 17.  
Sec. 24-64. - Elevation; lifting facilities. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, § 7, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-65. - Guarding of excavations during installation; restoration of public property disturbed during installation. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, § 11, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-66. - Notice when installation complete; connection to public sewer. 
(a)  The person to whom a building sewer permit is issued shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(b)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and/or other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, §§ 9, 10, 2-16-71) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 6-17 et seq.; plumbing, Ch. 17.  
Sec. 24-67. - Certain connections to building sewer prohibited. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. IV, § 8, 2-16-71)  
Secs. 24-68—24-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 24-76. - General prohibition. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tanks, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage within the city. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. II, § 3, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-77. - When required. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 24-41, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 1, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-78. - Compliance with recommendations of state health department. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 4, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-79. - Permit generally. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 2, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-80. - When permit effective; inspection of work. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the holder of the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 3, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-81. - Minimum lot area for subsurface soil absorption facilities. 
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 4, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-82. - Discharge to natural outlet prohibited. 
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 4, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-83. - To be maintained in sanitary manner at no expense to city. 
The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 6, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-84. - Abandonment when public sewer becomes available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 24-41, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with said section, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, §§ 5, 8, 2-16-71)  
Sec. 24-85. - Additional requirements of health officer. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 589, Art. III, § 7, 2-16-71)  
Secs. 24-86—24-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE THROUGH SEWER SYSTEM (PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 98-001, adopted February 24, 1998, § 1(A) amended the title of article IV to read as herein setout. Section 2 of said ordinance amended the provisions of article IV to read as herein set out. Formerly, such article pertained to discharge regulations and derived from Ord. No. 703, §§ 1—25, 6-14-83; Ord. No. 704, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-83; Ord. No. 745, 11-4-86. 
 
Sec. 24-91. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of South Houston and enables the City of South Houston to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the City of South Houston to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-92. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the pollution abatement officer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the pollution abatement officer may be delegated by the pollution abatement officer to other City of South Houston personnel. 
The pollution abatement officer as defined in section 24-94 of this article is the person designated to be responsible for the day to day implementation and operation of the pretreatment program including but not limited to enforcement of this article, all inspections, sampling and enforcement in accordance with the city's EPA approved pretreatment program. The pollution abatement officer shall consult with and receive approval from the "city engineer" on those matters designated in subsection 24-92(b) as requiring review, concurrence or approval by the city engineer. 
(b)  The city engineer as defined in section 24-94 of this article is designated as the person responsible to review pretreatment system engineering plans for new or modified pretreatment systems and their construction or modification, review and approval of permits required by this article, review and concurrence with the pollution abatement officer that enforcement actions taken are consistent with the requirements of this article and the city's EPA approved pretreatment program. The city engineer shall at least thirty (30) days prior to the city's fiscal year, provide the mayor and city council concurrently, a written report on the status of the implementation of the EPA approved pretreatment program, the adequacy of staffing and funding for the continued implementation and operation of the program. The city engineer shall be provided copies of all correspondence which relates to the city's pretreatment program either to or from regulatory agencies within two (2) business days after receipt or transmittal by city officials. The city engineer shall review and approve the city's annual pretreatment performance report to EPA. If the city engineer determines that the city's responsibility under the EPA approved pretreatment program is deficient, the city engineer shall provide a written report concurrently to the mayor and city council requesting a review by the city attorney. The city attorney shall notify the mayor and city council within ten (10) business days of the actions and time frame if any that is required by the city to correct the deficiencies. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-93. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
COD - Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd - Gallons per day 
mg/l - Milligrams per liter 
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC - Standard industrial classification 
TSS - Total suspended solids 
U.S.C. - United States Code 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-94. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. Regional Administrator of EPA Region VI. 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00)(in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City of South Houston. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20°) centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
City. The City of South Houston or the City Council of the City of South Houston. 
City engineer. The person or private engineering firm licensed to practice as a professional engineer in the State of Texas and who has been designated by the City of South Houston to hold the position and title of "city engineer" to review, recommend and report to the mayor and city council regarding the proper implementation and operation of the City of South Houston's Pretreatment Program, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. 
CFR. The Code of Federal Regulations. 
Composite sample. A sample of effluent collected in several portions during a normal operating day. 
Control authority. The publicly owned treatment works (POTW), which is owned by the City of South Houston and more specifically the meaning established in 40 CFR 403.12(a). 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Quality Protection Division, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City of South Houston's NPDES or state discharge permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
May. Permissive or discretionary. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of South Houston's NPDES or State discharge permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pollution abatement officer. The person designated by the City of South Houston to hold the position and title of "pollution abatement officer" to supervise the implementation and day to day operations of the City of South Houston's Pretreatment Program, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this ordinance, or a duly authorized representative. 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 24-95 of this article. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the City of South Houston. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the City of South Houston on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City of South Houston may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 24-95 of this article. 
Shall. Mandatory. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-95. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-half (½) inches or 1.27 centimeters (1.27 cm) in any dimension; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140°F (60°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the pollution abatement officer in accordance with section 24-103 of this article; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City of South Houston's NPDES or state discharge permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the City of South Houston; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the City of South Houston in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than two hundred (200) mg/l; 
(18)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than fifteen (15) percent on any single reading of the Lower Explosive Limit of the meter. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-96. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the pollution abatement officer may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the pollution abatement officer shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-97. - Local limits. 
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 
Pollutant 	Daily Maximum Limits Concentration (mg/l) 
Arsenic 	6.2 
BOD 5 	250 
Cadmium 	1.7 
Chromium 	5.4 
Copper 	3.3 
Cyanide (total) 	3.0 
Lead 	3.1 
Mercury 	0.0005 
Nickel 	5.0 
Oil and grease 	200 
Silver 	5.3 
Total suspended solids 	275 
Zinc 	4.4 
 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal, unless indicated otherwise. The pollution abatement officer may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. BOD and TSS discharges above these limits may be allowed by the pollution abatement officer, providing adequate capacity exists at the POTW and appropriate surcharges are imposed to treat the high strength waste. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 2-1-05)  
Sec. 24-98. - City's right of revision. 
The City of South Houston reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-99. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The pollution abatement officer may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-100. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 24-95 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the pollution abatement officer, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the pollution abatement officer for review, and shall be acceptable to the pollution abatement officer before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City of South Houston under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-101. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the pollution abatement officer may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The pollution abatement officer may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the pollution abatement officer they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the pollution abatement officer and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-102. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
At least once every two (2) years, the pollution abatement officer shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The pollution abatement officer may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the pollution abatement officer may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the pollution abatement officer of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 24-124 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-103. - Hauled wastewater. 
Septic tank waste generated from within the City of South Houston city limits may be introduced into the POTW with the concurrence by the city engineer that the POTW has the capacity to adequately treat the waste, at locations designated by the pollution abatement officer, and at such times as are established by the pollution abatement officer. Such waste shall not violate sections 24-95 through 24-99 of this article or any other requirements established by the City of South Houston. The pollution abatement officer may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-104. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the pollution abatement officer, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The pollution abatement officer is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-105. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the pollution abatement officer, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 24-106 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The pollution abatement officer may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 24-136 through 24-139 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-106. - Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within thirty (30) days after said date, apply to the pollution abatement officer for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 24-108 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the pollution abatement officer. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-107. - Same—New connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 24-108 of this article, must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-108. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The Pollution Abatement Officer may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by subsection 24-119(b) of this article; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the pollution abatement officer to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-109. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-110. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The pollution abatement officer will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the pollution abatement will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The pollution abatement officer may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-111. - Same—Duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed one year from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than one year, at the discretion of the pollution abatement officer. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-112. - Same—Contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the pollution abatement officer to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed one year; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the City of South Houston in accordance with section 24-115 of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the pollution abatement officer to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-113. - Same—Appeals. 
The pollution abatement officer shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the pollution abatement officer to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the pollution abatement officer fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the appropriate court having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-114. - Same—Modification. 
The pollution abatement officer may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City of South Houston POTW, City of South Houston personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-115. - Same—Transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the pollution abatement officer and the pollution abatement officer approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the pollution abatement officer must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-116. - Same—Revocation. 
The pollution abatement officer may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the pollution abatement officer of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the pollution abatement officer of changed conditions pursuant to section 24-123 of this article; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the pollution abatement officer timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater inspection or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-117. - Same—Reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 24-108 of this article, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-118. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the pollution abatement officer shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a), above, the pollution abatement officer shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the Pollution Abatement Officer may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 24-97 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City of South Houston ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the pollution abatement officer; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the pollution abatement officer; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the pollution abatement officer with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the pollution abatement officer access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the pollution abatement officer; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-119. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the pollution abatement officer a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the pollution abatement officer a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the pollution abatement officer, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 24-128 of this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 24-129 of this article. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 24-120 of this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 24-109 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-120. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 24-119(b)(7) of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the pollution abatement officer no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the pollution abatement officer. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-121. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the pollution abatement officer a report containing the information described in subsection 24-119(b)(4)—(6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 24-109 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-122. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the pollution abatement officer but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 24-109 of this article. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the pollution abatement officer, using the procedures prescribed in section 24-129 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-123. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the pollution abatement officer of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least sixty (60) days before the change. 
(1)  The pollution abatement officer may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 24-108 of this article. 
(2)  The pollution abatement officer may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 24-110 of this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 24-114 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-124. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the pollution abatement officer of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the pollution abatement officer, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-125. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the pollution abatement officer as the pollution abatement officer may require. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-126. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the pollution abatement officer within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the pollution abatement officer within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the pollution abatement officer monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the pollution abatement officer samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-127. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 24-123 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 24-119, 24-121, and 24-122 of this article. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the pollution abatement officer, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-128. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-129. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in section (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the pollution abatement officer may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-130. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-131. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City of South Houston, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the pollution abatement officer. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-132. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
The pollution abatement officer shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the pollution abatement officer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the pollution abatement officer will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The pollution abatement officer shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The pollution abatement officer may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum of one time per year to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the pollution abatement officer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the pollution abatement officer access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-133. - Search warrants. 
If the pollution abatement officer has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City of South Houston designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the pollution abatement officer may seek issuance of a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-134. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, inspections, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the pollution abatement officer inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the pollution abatement officer, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. Any such information deemed to be confidential shall be stamped with the words "confidential business information" on each page. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2005-34, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 24-135. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The pollution abatement officer shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the pollution abatement officer believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the pollution abatement officer exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the pollution abatement officer determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-136. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the pollution abatement officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pollution abatement officer may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the pollution abatement officer. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the pollution abatement officer to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The pollution abatement officer may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections 24-136(d) and (e) of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The pollution abatement officer may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the pollution abatement officer and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the pollution abatement officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pollution abatement officer may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the pollution abatement officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the pollution abatement officer may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the pollution abatement officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pollution abatement officer may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of seven (7) percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the pollution abatement officer to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the pollution abatement officer may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The pollution abatement officer may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. The pollution abatement officer may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The pollution abatement officer may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the pollution abatement officer may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The pollution abatement officer may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the pollution abatement officer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection 24-136(h) of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the pollution abatement officer prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections 24-136(c) or 24-136(h) of this article. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 24-116 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 24-95 through 24-99 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 24-136(c) of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the pollution abatement officer shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-137. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the pollution abatement officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pollution abatement officer may petition the through the City of South Houston's City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The pollution abatement officer may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City of South Houston for a maximum civil penalty of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The pollution abatement officer may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City of South Houston. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit; or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day per violation. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The pollution abatement officer may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City of South Houston enforcement response plan. However, the pollution abatement officer may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the pollution abatement officer is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-138. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The pollution abatement officer may decline to issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City of South Houston, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the pollution abatement officer to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-139. - Act of God defense. 
(a)  The act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense [V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 7.251] in an action brought in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit. 
(b)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through relevant evidence, that: 
(1)  An event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the sole cause of the event was an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe; and 
(2)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days); and 
a.  A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the event; 
b.  The time period of the event, including exact dates and times or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the event. 
(c)  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2005-34, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 24-140. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 24-95(a) of this article or the specific prohibitions in subsection 24-95(b) of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City of South Houston was regularly in compliance with its NPDES or state discharge permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-141. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the pollution abatement officer, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the pollution abatement officer of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The pollution abatement officer may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the pollution abatement officer may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The pollution abatement officer may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the pollution abatement officer determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-142. - Industrial wastewater treatment rates. 
[Reserved] 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 24-143. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
The City of South Houston may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City South Houston's Pretreatment Program which may include: 
(1)  A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee shall be charged for a pretreatment program permit. This fee shall apply at the time original permits are issued, when permits are amended at the request of the industry and when the permit is renewed annually; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the City of South Houston may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City of South Houston. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 99-002, § 1, 2-9-99)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 514 
An Ordinance Replacing the Existing Zoning Ordinance and Dividing the City of South Houston, Texas, into Districts, and Within Said Districts Regulating and Restricting the Size of Buildings and Other Structures, the Size of Yards, Courts and Other Open Spaces, the Density of Population, the Location and Use of Buildings, Structures, Land for Trade, Industry, Residence, and Other Purposes: Establishing a Board of Adjustment and Prescribing its Powers and Duties: Providing the Penalties for the Violation of the Ordinance: and Repealing all Ordinances in Conflict Therewith. 
WHEREAS the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, has heretofore deemed the existing zoning ordinance to be in need of corrections and has appointed a zoning commission to recommend boundaries of various districts, appropriate regulations to be enforced therein and any changes thereto as the existing ordinance may require and such zoning commission having held public hearings after giving due notice thereof, as required by law, and having submitted its final report, after having held such hearings, to the City Council, and such report being before the City Council, who is fully advised thereon, and the City Council being aware of the need for amendment to the existing zoning ordinance; THEREFORE 
Be It Ordained By the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 514 is set out herein as adopted by the council on September 3, 1963. Amendments have been added and are indicated by a history note appearing in parentheses at the end of the amended section or paragraph. 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-4(8); zoning commission, § 2-17; restrictions on locations for sale of alcoholic beverages, §§ 3-3, 3-4; restrictions on location of dog kennels, § 4-37; restriction on location of enclosures used for keeping of livestock, § 4-50; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 6; buildings with exposed corrugated metal or galvanized iron prohibited in residential districts, § 6-3; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 13; oil and gas wells, Ch. 14; signs, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 19; traffic, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Zoning regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211. 
 
PART ONE. - DISTRICTS 
 
Section 1.1. 
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the City. They have [been] designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the over-crowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration among other things, for the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses; and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.  
Section 1.2. - Districts are established. 
1.201 Zoning districts and regulations as herein set forth are established. The City is hereby divided into three types of districts: 
R 	Districts—Residential 
C 	Districts—Commercial 
M 	Districts—Industrial 
 
1.202 The three types of districts are further divided into the following specific districts: 
District 	Minimum Living Area 
R1A 	Single Family Dwellings 	1500 sq. ft. 
R1B 	Single Family Dwellings 	920 sq. ft. 
R2 	Two Family Dwellings 	920 sq. ft. (Single Dwelling) 
		550 sq. ft. (Each living unit) 
R-3 	Four Family Dwellings 	920 sq. ft. (Single Dwelling) 
		550 sq. ft. (Each living unit) 
R-4 	Multi-Family Dwelling 	920 sq. ft. (Single Dwelling) 
		550 sq. ft. (Each living unit) 
R5C 	Oil Field-Combination 	720 sq. ft. (Single Dwelling) 
		550 sq. ft. (Each living unit) 
 
Residential and commercial. 
See Section 2.105 
C1 	Commercial 	Same as R4 
C2 	Commercial 	Same as R4 
M 	Industrial 	Same as R4 
 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 977 (3-93) adopted March 16, 1993 provided that Council declares that it was the legislative intent and is the legislative intent that "two family dwellings" in a R-2 District as used in Sec. 1.202 and Sec. 12.17 of the Zoning Ordinance is a building that contains only two living units, and it means that the lot contains one building commonly called "a duplex." 
1.203 The various districts include the following tracts, blocks, and/or parcels of land, as follows: All undesignated tracts, blocks, lots or parcels are as shown in the map or plat of the townsite of South Houston recorded in Volume 2, Page 42 of the Map Records of Harris County, Texas and all other property designated in specific sub-division are as per maps or plats of such subdivisions as follows: Pecan Terrace recorded in Vol. 23, Pages 20 and 21 of the Map Records; Merilyn Place #1 and #2 recorded in Vol. 28, Pg. 72 of the Map Records; Merilyn Place #3 recorded in Vol. 31, Pg. 56 of the Map Records; Merilyn Place #4 recorded in Vol. 34, Pg. 14 of the Map Records; Merilyn Place #5 recorded in Vol. 45, Pg. 32 of the Map Records; South Houston Terrace being an unrecorded subdivision; Merilyn Plaza #1 recorded in Vol. 58, Pg. 13 of the Map Records; Merilyn Plaza #2 recorded in Vol. 58, Pg. 37 of the Map Records; Alta Vista Acres #1 recorded in Vol. 8, Pg. 68 of the Map Records; Alta Vista Acres #3 recorded in Vol. 11, Pg. 53 of the Map Records; College Park being an unrecorded subdivision; South Houston Gardens #1 recorded in Vol. 2, Pg. 59 of the Map Records; South Houston Gardens #3 recorded in Vol. 2, Pg. 63 of the Map Records and Wofford Homesites recorded in Vol. 29, Pg. 43 of the Map Records. All property being as further shown in the plat of the City of South Houston Recorded in Vol. 94, Pg. 64 of the Map Records of Harris County, Texas. 
District R1A Shall Include: Blocks 186, 190, 191, 209, 210, 213, 214, 234, 235, 238, and lots 2, 3, and 4, Block 260. 
District R1B Shall Include: Blocks B & C in Pecan Terrace, blocks 45, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, lots 9 thru 16, block 123, blocks 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, lots 9 thru 16 block 144, blocks 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 239, 340, 241, 242, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, 256, 257, 258, 259, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, lots 2 thru 15, block 286, lots 2 thru 6 block 288, blocks 289, 290, 291, 292, lots 1 thru 7 and lots 9 thru 16 block 293, blocks 295, 296, 297, 298, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, lots 2 thru 15 block 312, lots 9 thru 16 in blocks 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, and 323. Lots 1 thru 10 block 359, lots 1 thru 8 in blocks 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365 and 366, blocks 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375, 376; All of Merilyn Place #1, 2, 4 and 5; All of Merilyn Place #3 Except lots 35, 36, 75, 76, and 124; Tracts 79, 87, 98, 99, 103 and 104 South Houston Gardens #1; Wofford Homesites, being all of Tracts 88, 113, and 114 South Houston Gardens #1; South Houston Terrace, being all of Block 100 South Houston Gardens #1; All of Merilyn Plaza except Reserve A, Block 4, Section 2 and Reserve B, Block 3, Section 2. (Ord. No. 547, 5-17-66) 
R2: Block 95, lots 9 thru 16 in blocks 96 and 122, lots 1 thru 8 block 123, blocks 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, lots 7, 8 & 9 block 299, block 300, lots 1 thru 8 and 10 thru 15 block 301, lots 6 thru 10 block 302, lots 7, 8, & 9 block 327, lots 7 thru 12 in block 328, 329, 330, 331, and 332, blocks 335, 336, 337, 338, lots 9 thru 16 block 342, blocks 343, 344, 345, 346, lots 1 thru 5 block 347, lots 1 thru 8 in blocks 348 and 349, block 354, lots 1 thru 8 and 11 thru 16 block 355; lots 2, 3, and 6, tract 83 South Houston Gardens #1 and lots 2 thru 16, tract 92 South Houston Gardens #1. 
R3: Lots 9 thru 16, block 18, block 19, lots 4 thru 13 in blocks 22 and 23, lots 9 thru 13 block 24; block E; block 275; lots 1 thru 5 and 11 thru 16, block 299; Lot 9, block 301; Lots 1 thru 5 and 12 thru 16, Block 302; block 339, 340; lots 1 thru 8 block 342; lots 6 thru 9, block 347; lots 9 thru 16, block 348; block 352 and 353. 
R4: Blocks 76, 77, 78; lots 1 thru 8 in blocks 79, and 97; blocks 98, 99, 100, 101, 102; lots 1 thru 12, block 118; blocks 119 and 120; lots 1 thru 8 blocks 121 and 145; blocks 146 and 147; lots 17 thru 32, block 149; lots 11 thru 22, block 162; lots 7 thru 14 in blocks 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176 & 177. Tracts 82 and 93 South Houston Gardens #1. 
R5C: Lots 1 thru 9, block 5; blocks 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14; lots 1 thru 8 in blocks 15 and 27; blocks 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117; lots 13 thru 32 block 118; lots 1 thru 16, block 149; blocks 150, 151, 152, 153, and 154. 
C1: Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4; lots 10 thru 18, block 5; lots 9 thru 16, block 15, Blocks 16 & 17, lots 1 thru 8, block 18; blocks 20, 21; lots 1, 2, 3, 14, 15, 16 in blocks 22 and 23; lots 1 thru 8 and 14 thru 16, block 24; blocks 25 and 26; lots 9 thru 16, blocks 27 & 79; blocks 43, 44, 49, 50, 56, 57, 86, 87; lots 1 thru 8, block 96; lots 9 thru 16, block 97; blocks 109, 110; lots 9 thru 16, block 121; lots 1 thru 8, block 122; blocks 132 & 133; lots 1 thru 8, block 144; lots 9 thru 16, block 145; blocks 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161; lots 1 thru 10 and 23 thru 32, block 162; blocks 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168; lots 1 thru 6 in blocks 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, and 177; block 178; blocks 8 & 9, tract D; blocks 187, 188, 189, 211, 212, 236, 237; lot 1, block 260; blocks 261, 262; lots 1, block 286; block 287; lots 1 & 7, block 288; lot 1, block 312; blocks 313 & 314; lots 1 thru 8 blocks 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323; blocks 324, 325, 326, lots 1 thru 6 and 10 thru 12, block 327; lots 1 thru 6 in blocks 328, 329, 330, 331 & 332; blocks 333, 334, 341; lots 9 thru 16 block 349, blocks 350, 351, lots 9 & 10, block 355; blocks 356, 357, 358; lots 11 thru 19 block 359; lots 9 thru 16 in blocks 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366; blocks 367 and 368; lots 35, 36, 75, 76, & 124 in Merilyn Place, Section #3. Lots 117 in Tract 92; lots 1, 4, & 5, Tract 83; Tracts 84, 91, 110, 111, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, all being in South Houston Gardens #1. Tracts 24, 25, 26, 27, & 28 in Alta Vista Section #1. Lots 1 thru 5, Tract 23, Alta Vista Section #1. Tracts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, & 18 in South Houston Gardens #3. Blocks 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 in College Park Subdivision. Reserve A, Block 4, section 2 and Reserve B, block 3, section 2 in Merilyn Plaza, Blocks 251, 252, 253, 270, 271, &, 272 in Alta Vista Section #3. (Ord. No. 547, 5-17-66) 
District C2 shall include: Blocks 1 & 2 in College Park Subdivision. 
District M shall include: Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, & 7 in Tract D. 
1.204 Whenever Council vacates a street or alley, the adjacent districts shall extend to the center line of the vacation.  
Section 1.3. - Effect of the Ordinance. 
1.301 Use of premises and all buildings in the City shall be in accordance with the minimum standards herein established. 
1.302 Yards, parking space, or lot area required for one building cannot be used for another building; nor can the size of a lot be reduced below the requirements of this ordinance.  
Section 1.4 - Rezoning. 
Filing fee for application to rezone property is $400.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-15, § 1, 6-4-02) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-15, § 1, adopted June 4, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 1.4 to the zoning appendix per city's request.  
PART TWO. - USE OF PREMISES 
 
Section 2.1. - Premises in the City Shall Be Used For the Following Purposes: 
2.101 In the R1A and R1B Districts only for: 
Single family dwellings. 
Public parks, public libraries, public elementary and high schools and public community buildings. Private schools with a curriculum similar to public elementary and secondary schools, Churches. Fire Station, police station, artesian well, pumping station, water supply reservoir, filter bed, water tank, tower, or standpipe. 
2.102 In the R2 District there may also be: 
Two-family dwellings. 
2.103 In the R3 District there may also be: 
Three and four-family dwellings. 
2.104 In the R4 District there may also be: 
Multiple dwellings 
Lodging Houses 
Trailer parks, but no individual trailer houses. 
Hospitals. 
Religious, educational, and philanthropic institutions—but not animal care. 
Fraternities and sororities having non-profit charters under the laws of this State and where the chief activity is not a business. 
Apartment Hotels. 
Office Buildings. 
Personal service shops such as beauty shops and barber shops. 
Studios of artists and photographers. 
Move-in area, i.e. buildings from other areas may be moved into this area so long as the building passes the building code and is a conforming use for the area, EXCEPT that there shall be no move-ins allowed on lots 1 thru 12 block 118, lots 17 thru 32 block 149, lots 11 thru 22 block 162, and lots 1 thru 16 block 147. 
Professions, occupations and activities carried on by resident members of families where (a) there is no sign other than one sign, (non-illuminated) no larger than one square foot in area, (b) nothing is done to make the building appear as other than a dwelling, (c) no products but those made on the premises are sold, (d) no mechanical equipment other than that normally used in a dwelling is used, and (e) only one person other than a member of the family is employed. 
2.105 In the R5C District there may also be allowed: 
Trailers, by obtaining a permit and Council approval. Move-in buildings will be allowed with 500 sq. ft. floor area minimum on the 25' width lots, but each such building must be approved by Council before a permit is issued. New buildings with 720 sq. ft. floor area will not require Council action to obtain a permit, but they must comply with the building Code. New buildings less than 720 sq. ft., but not less than 500 sq. ft. may be constructed in some sections (such as 25' lots), but a special permit by City Council is required on each. No trailers permitted within one block of College, Galveston Highway, and Winkler Drive other than in trailer courts. Plus all business places enumerated in C1. 
2.106 In the C1 District there may also be allowed: 
No trailer houses or move-ins. 
Sale of goods and products at retail. 
Shops for repair and servicing of bicycles, electrical, radio, and television appliances, keys and similar articles. 
Dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, shoe repair, laundry, dry cleaning and similar trade. 
Banks. 
Animal hospitals and clinics where there are no open kennels. 
Commercial schools. 
Undertaking establishments. 
Parking lots. 
Garages, including storage garages. 
Public cold storage lockers. 
Theaters, but not drive-ins. 
Print, furnace, heating, air-conditioning, typewriter, sheet metal, plumbing, tire, and car washing establishments, and similar shops. 
Motels. 
Hotels. 
Used car lots. 
Bowling alleys. 
Soft drink bottling. 
New car sales. 
2.107 In the C2 District there may also be allowed: 
Any legal business, as long as the uses are not obnoxious or offensive due to emission of noise, odor, dust, gas, vibration, or those requiring special permission as outlined in Section 2.108(c). 
2.108 In the M Districts there may be any use except that: 
(a)  There may be no building for residential use and no trailers, except quarters for caretakers and similar personnel. 
(b)  Junkyards must be surrounded by a solid fence at least six feet high located within building lines and the junk not piled higher than the fence. [2] 
(c)  The following uses must be given separate Council approval before a building or occupancy permit is issued: 
Acid manufacturing. 
Cement, lime gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacturing. 
Dairy products, processing and manufacturing. 
Distillation of bond. 
Explosives manufacturing or storage. 
Fat rendering. 
Fertilizer manufacturing. 
Gas manufacturing. 
Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping. 
Glue manufacturing. 
Petroleum, or its products, refining of. 
Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores. 
Stockyards, or slaughter of animals. 
Stables. 
Before granting such separate approval, Council shall refer application to the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, Building Inspector and Board of Adjustment for study and investigation and report. If no report is received in 30 days, Council may act on application. 
(Ord. No. 99-024, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2001-16, 8-14-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Similar provisions relating to junkyard fences, § 11-21. 
 
Section 2.2. - Certain Uses May Be Located By Special Permit. 
2.201 Uses listed in 2.202 may locate in certain zones under certain conditions by a special permit granted by Council after public hearing and report by the Board of Adjustment. Board of Adjustment shall have 45 days to submit report upon effect of proposed use upon neighborhood character, traffic, public utilities, public hearing, public safety, and general welfare. If no report is made in 45 days, it may be assumed that the Board of Adjustment approved the application. 
2.202 Uses for which special permits may be secured, conditions that must be observed, and districts in which use will be allowed are: 
Use 	Specific Conditions 	Districts 
Nursery, prekindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other private schools 		Any 
Heliport 	Must have prior approval of Civil Aeronautics Administration 	Any 
Greenhouses and nurseries not primarily engaged in retail trade 	None 	Any 
Trailer camps 	Water, sewerage, required, concrete slabs, run-way slabs for each trailer 	Any except R1A, R1B, R2 & R3 
Motels and hotels 	None 	Any except R1A, R1B, R2, R3, M 
Drive-in theatres 	Must be approved by State Highway Department when on or near a State Highway 	Any except R1A, R1B, R2, R3 only 
Private recreational activities 	None 	C, M and R5C only 
Clubs, semi-public buildings 	None 	Any except R1A, R1B, R2, R3 
  
Section 2.3. - Nonconforming Uses are Regulated. 
2.301 Nonconforming uses are those lawful uses of premises that do not conform with the requirements of this ordinance on the effective date of the ordinance or any governing amendment thereto, and may be continued after the adoption of this ordinance, subject to the provisions hereof. 
2.302 If a nonconforming use is stopped for two years or more, it then must conform to the use regulations. 
2.303 A nonconforming use cannot be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless changed to a conforming use. 
2.304 Nonconforming light industrial uses in the C Districts and nonconforming industrial uses in the M District may [be] rebuilt, reconstructed, structurally altered or enlarged if the enlargements do not total more than a 50 per cent increase in cubical contents of buildings existing on the date of the passage of this ordinance. 
2.305 If a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than 60 per cent of its fair market value by a fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy, then any restoration must be for a permitted use. 
2.306 Where a premises in an R District was used only for open storage such uses must be discontinued and the stored material removed within two years after the effective date of this ordinance. Where such premises were used only for signs and billboards such uses must be discontinued and the signs and billboards removed within ten (10) years from the date such signs were erected or five (5) years after the effective date of this ordinance, whichever is longer. All junkyards shall conform with the requirements of Section 2.108(b), within two years after the effective date of this ordinance. 
2.307 Passage of this ordinance in no way legalizes any illegal uses existing at the time of its adoption. 
2.308 Existing uses of types eligible for special permits in Section 2.202 shall not be nonconforming uses and shall receive a special permit for existing use from the Building Inspector upon request, but shall require special permit for any enlargement or addition. 
2.309 If any person entitled to possession and use of any property subject to any non-conforming use shall sell, convey or divest themselves of their said interest in such property subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance, then such property will not be subject to any such non-conforming use after such sale, conveyance, or divestment, but must comply with the conforming uses as herein set out.  
PART THREE. - MINIMUM YARDS ARE ESTABLISHED 
 
Section 3.1. 
Except as provided in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 and Part Six, Yards shall be provided for buildings as shown in the following tabulation: 
District 	One Front yard of: 	Two Side Yards of: 	One Rear Yard of: 
R1A 	25 Ft. 	5 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
R1B 	25 Ft. 	5 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
R2 	25 Ft. 	5 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
R3 	25 Ft. 	5 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
R4 	25 Ft. 	0 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
C1 	25 Ft. 	0 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
C2 	25 Ft. 	0 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
M 	0* Ft. 	0 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
R5C 	25 Ft. 	0 Ft. 	0 Sq. Ft. 
*0 indicates two (2) side yards of five (5) feet anywhere unless specified otherwise. 
 
(Ord. No. 2005-27, § 1, 8-9-05; Ord. No. 2005-30, § 4, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 2005-45, § 1, 12-6-05; Ord. No. 2017-40 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Section 3.2. - These general rules for Yards must also be observed: 
3.201 On lots fronting on two non-intersecting streets a front yard must be provided on both streets. 
3.202 On corner lots in the R District of intersecting streets the front yard of the corner lot shall be the same as the front yard of the interior lots within the same block, but where all lots in a block are corner lots of intersecting streets there must be a front yard on both streets. 
3.203 On corner lots in the C and M Districts that rear upon an R District a ten foot yard must be provided along the side street side. 
3.204 Where a block frontage is divided among districts with different front yard requirements, that deepest front yard required shall apply to the entire frontage. 
3.205 Where a lot is in a C or M District and is next to an R District the side or rear yard required in that R District must be provided along the boundary line. 
3.206 In the C and M Districts there may be more than one commercial or industrial building on a lot provided that the required yards be maintained around the group of buildings. 
3.207 Dwelling uses, except hotels, located in C and M Districts must provide the yards required in the R4 District. 
3.208 There may be two or more related multi-family, hotel, motel, or institutional buildings on a lot; provided that (a) the required yards be maintained around the group of buildings, and (b) buildings that are parallel, or that are within 45 degrees of being parallel, be separated by a horizontal distance that is at least 10 feet. 
3.209 Those parts of existing buildings that violate yard regulations may be repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered, except as provided in Part Seven. 
3.210 In the C2 and M Districts where an individual property has an area of two acres or more, the yard regulations shall be the same as the C1 District. 
3.211 Churches, public buildings and institutions when located in or abutting an R1A, R1B or R2 District shall provide front and rear yards of 25 feet and side yards of 10 feet.  
Section 3.3. 
The following exceptions may be made in Yard Regulations: 
3.301 On separate tracts the side may be reduced to ten per cent of the tract width. 
3.302 On separate tracts the rear yard may be reduced to twenty per cent of the tract depth. 
3.303 Where, on the effective date of this ordinance, 40 per cent or more of a block frontage was occupied by two or more buildings, then the front yard is established in the following manner: 
(a)  Where the building furthers from the street provides a front yard not more than 10 feet deeper than the building closest to the street, then the front yard for the frontage is and remains an average of the then existing front yards. 
(b)  Where this (a) is not the case and a lot is within 100 feet of a building on each side, then the front yard is a line drawn from the closest front corners of these two adjacent buildings. 
(c)  Where neither (a) nor (b) is the case and the lot is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, then the front yard is the same as that of the existing adjacent building. 
3.304 Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard for a distance of not more than 3.5 feet when so placed as to not obstruct light and ventilation may be permitted by the Building Inspector.  
PART FOUR. - MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTHS 
 
Section 4.1. 
Minimum lot width, minimum lot area and minimum lot area per family:

Zone standards 
District Minimum Lot Width 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Area Per Family 
R1A 	60 	6,600 	6,600 
R1B 	50 	5,000 	5,000 	
R2 	50 	5,000 	2,000 	
R3 	50 	5,000 	750 
R4 	50 	5,000 	2,000 	
C1 	None 	None 	None 	
C2 	None 	None 	None 	
M 	None 	None 	None 	
Notes:
*Indicates not permitted in district. 
  
Section 4.2. 
Residential lots platted before the effective date of this ordinance shall not be considered nonconforming if not less than 5,000 square feet in area or less than 50 feet in width.  
PART SIX. - ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS ARE REGULATED 
 
Section 6.1. 
The following accessory uses are permitted: 
6.101 In the R1A, R1B and R2 Districts: 
Private garages. 
Home occupations. 
Vegetable and flower gardens. 
Raising and keeping of pets, small animals and fowl insofar as keeping them complies with other ordinances of this city. 
Tennis courts, swimming pools, garden houses, and similar uses customarily accessory to residential use. 
6.102 In the R3 District there may also be storage garages and parking lots for use solely of occupants of the premises. 
6.103 In the C2 and M Districts there may be any accessory use. 
6.104 Temporary buildings for construction purposes are permitted in any district as accessory buildings during the course of construction. 
6.105 Accessory buildings may not be used for dwelling purposes.  
Section 6.2. 
The following regulations regarding Signs shall be observed: 
6.201 Churches, public and semi-public buildings, hospitals and institutions in R Districts may have bulletin boards not more than 24 square feet in area in a front yard. 
6.202 Temporary signs of not more than 16 square feet pertaining to lease or sale of premises are permitted, and name plates when non-illuminated and not greater in area than one square foot, are allowed in an R District. 
6.203 Advertising signs or billboards may be erected in any C or M District under the same regulations governing other structures, but with the following additional regulations: No sign may be located nearer to an R District lot line than is permitted for other business or commercial structures. If located nearer than 50 feet and facing into an R District they shall not be flashing signs and shall be designed so as not to shine or reflect light into adjacent residences. 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 18.  
Section 6.3. 
Accessory buildings shall be located in accordance with the following rules. 
6.301 Accessory buildings and swimming pools may be located in a rear yard but may not occupy more than 50 per cent of a rear yard. 
6.302 Any accessory building closer than 5 feet to a main building shall be considered as part of the main unit and shall be provided with the side and rear yards required for the main building. 
6.303 An accessory building more than 5 feet from a main building may be erected within 3 feet of a side or rear lot line but must be located at least 60 feet from the front street line. 
6.304 Where a garage is entered from an alley it must be kept 10 feet from an alley line. 
6.305 On corner lots the maximum buildable width of 35 feet for main buildings is reduced to 25 feet for accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2005-14, § 1, 4-5-05)  
Section 6.4. - [Fences.] 
6.401 No fence or other obstruction more than 30 per cent solid or more than three feet high may be located within 25 feet of a street intersection. 
6.402 Except as provided in 6.401 fences less than four feet high may be located on any part of a lot. 
6.403 Except as provided in 6.401 fences less than six feet high may be erected on these parts of a lot that are as far back or further back from a street than the main building.  
Section 6.5. - Carports. 
6.501. Generally. A carport may be erected in the front yard space of lots in Zones R1, R2, R3, R4, R5C, and C1, unless prohibited by a subdivision deed restriction. It is the duty of the applicant for the permit to determine if there exists any subdivision deed restrictions which prohibit the erection of the carport and by applying for the permit certifies to the city that such a prohibition does not exist. 
6.502. A carport defined. A carport is defined as an open-sided structure supported by poles or decorative posts. A carport is to be used for temporary parking of motor vehicles used on a day-to-day basis. No carport is allowed to substitute for a garage as defined, or required by any existing ordinances. A carport, although considered a permanent structure, cannot be used for any purpose other than motor vehicle or trailer parking. 
6.503. Setback requirements. No carport shall be erected nearer than five feet to the front property line when measured from the longest projection of the roof line, eave, or decorative overhang; except when there is a 20-foot setback line, the five-foot requirement shall not apply. In such case, the carport shall not be extended nearer than one foot of the property line. 
6.504. Building requirements. A carport shall be erected in compliance with the requirements for such structures in the Building Code for the City of South Houston. The purpose of this subsection is to allow the erection of carports in the front of a building, projecting toward the front-lot line. This section is not intended to restrict the erection of a carport or accessory structure, in accordance with existing sections, on any side or rear lot. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 3-22-05)  
PART SEVEN. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
 
Section 7.1. - [Established.] 
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of Article 1011g of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes of Texas with the powers and duties as provided in said statutes, together with the amendments thereto. The word Board when used in this ordinance shall be construed to mean the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor with the approval of the City Council, each to be appointed for a term of two years, and removable for causes by the Mayor upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. There may be two alternate members of the Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by the Mayor. The alternate members when appointed shall serve for the same period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as the regular members. All cases to be heard by the Board of Adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of four members. 
(Ord. No. 96-032, 11-5-96)  
Section 7.2. - Jurisdiction. 
When in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize and shall have the power to grant the following special exceptions to the regulations herein established: 
7.201 Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a non-conforming use, provided such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such property to a conforming use. 
7.202 Permit such modification of the yard, open space, lot area or width regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned at the time of the passage of this ordinance and is of such restricted area and shape of the lot that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
7.203 Permit the use of a lot or lots in an R1A, R1B, R2, R3 or R4 District adjacent to a C District even if separated therefrom by an alley, for the parking of passenger cars, provided no fee is charged, and under such safeguards and conditions as the Board may require for the adequate protection of the more restricted property. 
7.204 To hear and to decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
7.205 To permit any use of public building to be erected or used by the City, County, State or Federal Government. 
7.206 Permit any Radio Broadcasting Station to locate. 
7.207 Permit any installation of a public utility either privately or publicly owned with area regulations of the C Districts to apply. 
7.208 All applications for special exceptions shall be by appeal to the Board. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of South Houston affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken with the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
7.209 An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application of notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
7.210 The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing or the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At least ten days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the official publication of the City of South Houston. Upon hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The notice provided for in this section shall be given by publication one time in the official publication of the City of South Houston, stating the time and place of such hearing, which will not be earlier than ten days from the date of such publication, and in addition thereto the Board shall cause the City Secretary to mail notices of such hearing to the petitioner and to the owners of property lying within 200 feet of any point of the lot or portion thereof, on which a variation is desired, and to all other persons deemed by the Board to be affected thereby. Such owners and persons shall be determined according to the current tax rolls of the City of South Houston, and substantial compliance therewith shall be deemed sufficient and provided, however, that the depositing of such written notice in the mail by the City Secretary shall be deemed sufficient compliance with purpose of this notice. 
7.211 In exercising the above mentioned powers, such Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
7.212 Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any recommendation of the Board, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of South Houston, may present to the Board a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such recommendation is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the Board within fifteen days after the filing of the recommendation in the office of the Board. 
7.213 The Board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or such portions thereof as may be called for by a writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the recommendation appealed from and shall be verified. 
7.214 If, upon hearing it shall appear to the Board that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter it may take evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the Board with his finding of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the Board shall be made. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review.  
Section 7.3. - Filing fee for variance. 
Filing fee for application for a variance is $400.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-15, § 1, 6-4-02) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2002-15, § 1, adopted June 4, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new section 7.3 to the zoning appendix per city's request.  
PART EIGHT. - BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS 
 
Section 8.1. - Rules where uncertainty may arise: 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, the following rules apply: 
8.101 The district boundaries are street, alley, and property lines unless otherwise shown, and where the districts are bounded approximately by street, alley or property line, the street, alley, or property line shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
8.102 Where the district boundaries are otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be property lines, and where the districts designated are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated. 
8.103 In subdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map or plat thereof. 
8.104 In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two parts the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the less restricted district.  
PART NINE. - ENFORCEMENT 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building Inspector of the City of South Houston. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the use of the property and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of such applications and plat shall be kept in the office of the Building Inspector.  
PART TEN. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 
 
Section 10.1. 
This zoning ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed, as provided for in Article 1011, et seq., of the Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes of Texas.  
PART ELEVEN. - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detailed statement or plat submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation with and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. A violator of these rules and regulations shall not plead failure to ask for a variance from the Board or a change in the Zoning Ordinance from the City Council as a reason for a continuation of a case in court.  
PART TWELVE. - DEFINITIONS 
12.1 Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular number includes the plural and plural the singular. "Building" includes "structure", "Shall" and "Must" are mandatory. 
12.2 Accessory Building —A separate building or a part of the main building devoted to an accessory use. 
12.3 Accessory Use —A use subordinate to and incidental to the primary use of the main building or to the primary use of the premises. 
12.4 Alley —Land devoted to secondary access to lots. 
12.5 Basement —The part of a building from one floor to the next floor above which has part of, but less than one-half its height below grade. If a basement is subdivided and used for dwelling purposes, it is counted as a story; a cellar is not. 
12.6 Build —To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or structurally alter a building or structure. 
12.7 Buildable Width —The width of a lot left to be built upon after the side yards are provided. 
12.8 Building —Any structure built for use of persons or animals. 
12.9 Cellar —The part of a building from one floor to the next above which has more than one-half its height below grade. If a basement is subdivided and used for dwelling purposes it is counted as a story; a cellar is not. 
12.10 City —City of South Houston, Texas. 
12.11 City Manager —The chief City Administrator. 
12.12 Commission —City Plat Commission of South Houston, Texas. 
12.13 Council —City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
12.14 District —A part of the city wherein regulations of this ordinance are uniform. 
12.15 Dwelling —A building used entirely for residential purposes. 
12.16 Single-family dwelling —A building that contains only one living unit. 
12.17 Two-family dwelling —A building that contains only two living units. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 977 (3-93) adopted March 16, 1993 provided that Council declares that it was the legislative intent and is the legislative intent that "two family dwellings" in a R-2 District as used in Sec. 1.202 and Sec. 12.17 of the Zoning Ordinance is a building that contains only two living units, and it means that the lot contains one building commonly called a "duplex." 
12.18 Multiple dwelling —A building that contains more than two living units. 
12.19 Family —One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption occupying a living unit as an individual housekeeping organization. A family may include not more than four persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
12.20 Floor area —The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls and including the total of all space on all floors of a building. It does not include porches, garages, or space in a basement or cellar not used for dwelling purposes. 
12.21 Home Occupation —An accessory use; an activity carried on only by a resident member of a family meeting these conditions: 
(a)  Only one non-illuminated sign no larger than one square foot in area is used. 
(b)  Nothing is done to make the building appear in any way as anything but a dwelling. 
(c)  If some product is made as part of the activity, it and only it may be sold. Nothing else can be sold. 
(d)  No one is employed from outside the resident family. 
(e)  Mechanical equipment used is only that normally used in, or found in, a single-family dwelling. 
12.22 Hotel —A dwelling not consisting of living units and occupied by more than twenty (20) persons. Apartment hotel is a multiple dwelling under resident supervision which maintains an inner lobby through which all tenants must pass to gain access to the apartments and which may furnish services ordinarily furnished by hotels, such as drugstore, barbershop, cosmetologist's shop, cigar stand or newsstand, when such uses are located entirely within a building with no entrance from the street nor visible from any sidewalk and having no sign or display visible from the outside of the building indicating the existence of such use. 
12.23 Living unit —The room or rooms occupied by a family. The living unit must include a kitchen. 
12.24 Lodging house —A dwelling consisting of not more than one living unit occupied by not more than 20 persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption. This term includes rooming house, boarding house, tourist home, and nursing home. 
12.25 Lot —A parcel of land adequate for occupancy by a use herein permitted, providing the yards, area, and off-street parking herein required and fronting directly upon a street. 
12.26 Lot width —The width of a lot at the front yard line. 
12.27 Main building —The building occupied by the primary use. 
12.28 Motel —An inn or group of cabins designed for occupancy by paying guests. 
12.29 Office building —A building designed for or used as the offices of professional, commercial, industrial, religious, public or semi-public persons or organizations provided that no goods, wares or merchandise shall be prepared or sold on the premises. 
12.30 Parking space —An area on a lot sufficient in size to store one automobile (not less than nine feet wide and twenty feet long) connected to a public street or alley by a driveway not less than ten feet wide and so arranged as to permit ingress and egress of the automobile at all times without moving any other automobile parked adjacent to the parking space. The parking space and connecting driveways shall be a hard, level surface on which vegetation cannot grow. 
12.31 Premises —Land together with any buildings or structures occupying it. 
12.32 Private garages —An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main building. Where vehicles used by persons other than occupants are housed, the building is a storage garage. 
12.33 Separate tract —A parcel of land or a group of contiguous parcels of land under one ownership on the effective date of this ordinance. 
12.34 Sign —Any outdoor advertising that is a structure or that is attached or painted on a building or that is leaned against a structure or displayed on a premises. 
12.35 Street —Property dedicated for and accepted by the City for primary public access to lots. 
12.36 Structure —Anything built that requires permanent location. 
12.37 Structural alteration —Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. 
12.38 Trailer —A vehicle equipped for use as a dwelling and designed to be hauled along a highway. 
12.39 Yard —An open space on the same lot as a building; except as provided herein it is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure. Yard width or depth is the shortest horizontal distance from a lot to the main building. 
12.40 Front yard —The area from one side lot line to the other side lot line and between the main building and the street on which the lot fronts. On corner lots (lots abutting on two or more streets at their intersections) the front yard shall face the shortest street dimension of the lot except that if the lot is square or almost square, i.e. has dimensions in a ratio of from 3:2 to 3:3, then the front yard may face either street. 
12.41 Rear yard —The area from one side lot line to the other side lot line and from the main building to the rear lot line. The rear yard is always on the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
12.42 Side yard —The area from the front yard line to the rear yard line and from the main building to a side lot line.  
PART THIRTEEN. - SAVINGS CLAUSE CONFLICTION WITH OTHER ORDINANCES AND EMERGENCY 
 
Section 13.1. 
In case any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, provision, sentence or part of this ordinance or the application of the same to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction such shall not effect, impair or invalidate this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.  
Section 13.2. 
In case any section, paragraph, sub-division, clause, phrase, provision, sentence or part of this ordinance or the application of the same to any person or circumstance controls the same subject matter as any other ordinance of this City, the ordinance which has the highest regulation and control and imposing the greatest penalty shall be the controlling ordinance and the ordinance enforced. 
PASSED AND APPROVED on First Reading this 6th day of August, 1963. 
PASSED AND APPROVED on Second Reading this 20th day of August, 1963. 
PASSED AND APPROVED on Third and Final Reading this 3rd day of September, 1963. 
      Mayor 	
 	 
ATTEST: 
      City Secretary 	
 	 
Seal  
APPENDIX B - FRANCHISES  
ARTICLE I. - CATV FRANCHISE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 2004-04 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, GRANTING TO TEXAS CABLE PARTNERS, L.P., D/B/A TIME WARNER CABLE, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE, AND FRANCHISE FOR THE TERM OF FIFTEEN YEARS TO ERECT, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; TO ERECT, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE ITS CABLE SYSTEM IN, OVER, UNDER, ALONG, AND ACROSS THE BRIDGES, EASEMENTS, AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES IN THE CITY; PRESCRIBING COMPENSATION FOR THE RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND FRANCHISE CONFERRED HEREUNDER; PRESCRIBING THE CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE OPERATION OF THE BUSINESS INSOFAR AS IT AFFECTS THE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUCH BUSINESS; INSTALLATION, UPGRADE AND OPERATION OF SAID SYSTEM AND BUSINESS; CONTAINING OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE SUBJECT; AND PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
ARTICLE I 
ENACTMENT 
1.01.  Recitals. The facts and recitations set forth in the preamble of this Franchise Ordinance are hereby adopted, ratified, and confirmed. 
ARTICLE II 
DEFINITIONS 
2.01.  General. The following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meanings hereafter set forth. Terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with the ordinances of the City or their customary usage and meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular shall include the plural, words in the plural shall include the singular, and words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or derivative forms. The headings contained in this Franchise Ordinance are to facilitate reference only, and do not form a part of this Franchise Ordinance, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation hereof. The words "shall," "will," and "must" are mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive or directory: 
A.  Anniversary Date. The date on which this Franchise Ordinance was passed and approved by the City Council of the City of South Houston. 
B.  Basic Cable Service. The lowest level of cable service offered by Grantee to all subscribers that includes, at a minimum, the retransmission of any local (Greater Houston Metropolitan Area) television broadcast signals. 
C.  Cable Act. Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
D.  Cable Service. The transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. Notwithstanding any provision of this Franchise Ordinance to the contrary, in the event a final ruling from a court of competent jurisdiction determines or federal or state legislation specifies that Cable Modem Service provided over a Cable System is a Cable Service or otherwise authorizes the City to regulate and to assess and collect a fee from Grantee for the right, the privilege, and the franchise to use the City's rights-of-way to provide Cable Modem Service over the Cable system, then the provision of cable modem service shall be considered as a cable service and revenues therefrom shall be included as part of Gross Revenues as herein defined. 
E.  Cable System. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; 
2.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
3.  A facility of common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Subchapter II of this chapter, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 621 (c) of Title 47 of the U. S. Code) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
4.  An open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title 47 of the U. S. Code; or 
5.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
F.  Channels. A frequency band capable of carrying a video programming service or other service on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis. 
G.  City. The City of South Houston, Texas, a municipal corporation of the State of Texas. 
H.  City Council. The present governing body of the City or any successor to the legislative powers of the present City Council. 
I.  Converter. An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber and which, by an appropriate Channel selector, also permits a Subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations. 
J.  Expanded Subscriber Service. The Basic Cable Service tier plus the addition of one or more clusters of cable programming services which may or may not be offered for an additional monthly charge. 
K.  Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress or any successor agency with jurisdiction over cable matters. 
L.  Franchise Year. Any twelve-month period commencing on an Anniversary Date and extending to the day immediately preceding the next subsequent Anniversary Date. 
M.  Franchise Area. The incorporated area of the City and such additional areas as may be included in the corporate limits of the City during the term of this franchise. 
N.  Grantee. Texas Cable Partners, L.P., d/b/a Time Warner Communications or any person who succeeds Texas Cable Partners, L.P. in accordance with the provisions of this franchise. 
O.  Gross Revenues. All revenues collected by the Grantee from or as a result of the operation of its Cable System to provide cable services including, but not limited to, Basic Cable Service revenues, Standard/Expanded Tier revenue, Pay Television revenues, advertising revenues, revenues resulting from the lease of channels, and installation fees. If it is determined in the future that cable modem service is a cable service, Grantee shall include revenue received from cable modem service in its calculation of Gross Revenues for the purposes of paying franchise fees to the City. Gross revenues shall not include: 
1.  Any taxes which are imposed on any Subscriber or user of the system by any governmental unit and collected by the Grantee for such governmental unit; 
2.  Revenues resulting from the sale of Cable system equipment which are available from retail providers; 
3.  Revenues resulting from the studio production of programming used on the Public, Educational, and Government Access Channels; or 
4.  Franchise fees paid to the City pursuant to this Franchise Ordinance. 
P.  Interconnect. When a Cable system is connected to an adjacent Cable System or Systems by coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, microwave, or other means and provides the capacity for simultaneous carriage of signals, such as access programming. 
Q.  Pay Television. The delivery over the Cable system of Programming to Subscribers for a fee or charge over and above the charge for Basic Cable Service or Expanded Subscriber Service on a per-program or per-channel basis. 
R.  Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
S.  Public Utility Commission of Texas. The agency as presently constituted by the laws of the State of Texas or any successor agency. 
T.  "State-of-the-Art". State-of-the-Art shall mean Cable System equipment that is readily available with reasonable delivery schedules from two (2) or more sources of supply with the capability to perform the intended functions demonstrated in the field under actual operating conditions by several unrelated operators for purposes other than test or experimentation and implementation by the Grantee is technically and economically feasible to both the Grantee and subscribers. 
U.  Street. The surface and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, alley, bridge, sidewalk, or other public place or way now or hereafter held by the City for the purpose of public travel or purposes compatible with the installation of utility lines and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now held or hereafter held by City which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle City and Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting Cable System transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, conduits, manholes, amplifiers, appurtenances, attachments, and other structures, equipment and facilities as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a Cable System. 
V.  Subscriber. Any person who lawfully receives any cable service delivered by the Cable System. 
ARTICLE III 
GRANT OF AUTHORITY 
3.01.  Use of Public Streets. There is hereby granted to Time Warner the right, privilege, and franchise to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use, and operate in the City a Cable system, and to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use, and operate in, over, under, and along the present and future streets of the city as well as other easements and rights-of-way held by the City all necessary or desirable poles, towers, anchors, wires, cables, electronic conductors, underground conduits, manholes, and other structures and appurtenances necessary for the construction, maintenance, and operation of a Cable system in the City. 
3.02  Use, Rental, or Lease of Utility Poles and Facilities. There is hereby granted to Grantee the authority to contract with the City or with the holder or owner of any utility franchise in the City for the use, rental, or lease of its or their poles, underground conduits, and other structures and facilities for the purpose of extending, carrying, or laying Grantee's wires, cables, electronic conductors, and other facilities and appurtenances necessary or desirable in conjunction with the operation of its Cable System. The City agrees that any public utility owning or controlling such poles or underground conduits may, without amendment to its franchise, allow, and is encouraged to allow, Grantee to make such use thereof pursuant to any agreement reached between such utility and Grantee. 
ARTICLE IV 
TERM, EVALUATION, AND RENEWAL 
4.01.  Term of Franchise. Upon the filing with the City by Grantee of the written acceptance required herein, this franchise shall be in full force and effect for a term and period of fifteen (15) years commencing thirty (30) days after final passage and approval of this Franchise Ordinance. 
4.02.  Public Hearings. At least thirty (30) days prior to any public hearing on this franchise, the City Secretary shall notify the Grantee of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the Grantee shall be entitled to all the rights of due process consistent with the City proceedings, including but not limited to, the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. 
1.  Upon request of the City and within sixty (60) days from receipt of such request, the Grantee shall file a report with the City secretary, in reasonable detail, specifically addressing, at a minimum the following areas or any other topic deemed material or relevant by the City occasioned by advances in technology; 
(i)  compliance with the requirements regarding technical performance and testing, as provided in '11.02 of this franchise including a review of the most recent review of the most recent proof of performance testing and signal leakage testing (which includes the City service area); 
(ii)  compliance with any plans or specifications submitted by the Grantee in connection with the System Replacement and Upgrade and sequence and system characteristics, as provided in Article X of this franchise; 
(iii)  a summary of all service interruptions during the preceding calendar year (other than scheduled interruptions or interruptions of a duration less than two (2) hours for all Subscribers or any interruptions which affected fewer than ten percent (10%) of all Subscribers); 
(iv)  a summary of written Subscriber complaints received during the latest twelve-month (12) period, the number of written Subscriber complaints received and the actions taken by the grantee in response thereto. For the purposes herein the term "complaints" shall mean a written inquiry from a subscriber which requires or results in subsequent corrective action on the part of the Grantee or any written communication from a subscriber received by the Grantee objecting to the rates, programming or other practices of the Grantee; 
(v)  compliance with the customer service standards, as provided in '11.03 and Exhibit A of this franchise; 
(vi)  written statement as to whether there has been any substantial change from information or plans previously provided to the City. 
2.  All reports to be prepared under this subsection and submitted by Grantee shall be based on information for at least a twelve-month (12) period ending with the most current quarter available, but not on information of twelve (12) months' data that ends more than six (6) months before the time of the performance evaluation hearing. 
3.  The Grantee shall make available to the City Council, or its designee, any records, documents, or other information as may be reasonably relevant to the City Council's review. 
4.  An audio recording of any public hearing regarding this franchise shall be made by the City and all records, minutes, and recordings thereof shall be retained by the City Secretary and be available for inspection throughout the term of this franchise. 
5.  The City Council shall hear any interested persons during such hearings and shall determine whether Grantee did reasonably comply with the terms and conditions imposed by this franchise. 
4.03.  Renewal. Grantee and City agree that the Cable Act or other law applicable at the time of renewal shall govern franchise renewal proceedings. 
ARTICLE V 
RECOUPMENT OF COSTS BY CITY 
5.01.  Publication Costs. Any and all costs of publication, which may be required by law or action of City Council shall be borne by Grantee. 
ARTICLE VI 
COMPLIANCE WITH CITY, STATE, AND FEDERAL LAWS 
6.01.  Compliance with Applicable Laws. Notwithstanding any other provision of this franchise to the contrary, the Grantee shall at all times comply with all lawful and generally applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the City, state and federal governments and any administrative agencies thereof. If any such state or federal law, rule, or regulation shall require or permit the Grantee to perform in conflict with this franchise or prohibit the performance of any service required by provisions of this franchise, then immediately following knowledge thereof, the Grantee shall notify the City Council or its designee in writing of the point of conflict believed to exist between such state or federal law, rule, or regulation and this franchise. If the City Council determines that a material provision of this franchise does in fact conflict with such state or federal law, rule, or regulation, the parties shall enter into good faith negotiations to modify any provision hereof to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this franchise. 
6.02.  Subject to Police Power of the City. The construction, maintenance, and operation of Grantee's Cable System and all property of Grantee subject to the provisions of this franchise shall be subject to all lawful police powers, rules, and regulations of the City. The City shall have the power at any time to order and require Grantee to remove or abate any pole, line, tower, wire, cable, guy, conduit, electric conductor, or any other structure or facility that is dangerous to life or property. In the event Grantee, after written notice, fails or refuses to act, City shall have the power to remove or abate the same at the expense of Grantee, all without compensation or liability for damages to Grantee, unless caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the City or its agents. 
6.03.  Modifications by FCC; Jurisdiction of FCC. It is specifically agreed by City and Grantee that any modification of the provisions of this franchise resulting from amendment of the rules and regulations of the FCC or other applicable state or federal governmental agency shall be automatically incorporated into this franchise unless: 
1.  Such modification provides for leniency in the provisions included in this franchise and such leniency is not required by law; or 
2.  The City Council specifically rejects such incorporation of said modifications within one (1) year of the adoption of such modification and such rejection is not in conflict with any City, state or federal laws, rules, or regulations. 
ARTICLE VII 
CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY 
7.01.  Use. All structures, wires, cables, equipment, and facilities erected or maintained by Grantee within the City shall be located as to cause minimum interference with the proper and intended use of the streets and with the rights or reasonable convenience of the owners or occupants of property which adjoins any of such streets. The location of all poles, towers, anchors, wires, cables, electronic conductors, conduits, manholes and other structures and appurtenances in, over, under, along, and across the present and future public streets, highways, alleys, bridges, easements, and other public ways and places in the City shall be fixed under the supervision of the City or an authorized agent appointed by the City. When the Grantee shall make or cause to be made excavations or shall place obstructions in any street, alley, or other public place, the public shall be protected by barriers and lights placed, erected, and maintained by the Grantee in accordance with any existing or future City, state, or federal requirements. 
7.02.  Restoration. The surface of any street disturbed by Grantee in laying, constructing, maintaining, operating, using, extending, removing, replacing, or repairing its Cable System shall be restored by Grantee immediately after the completion of the work, at its cost and expense, to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work and shall be maintained by Grantee to the satisfaction of the City for one (1) year from the date of completion of such restoration work. No street shall be encumbered by construction, maintenance, removal, restoration, or repair work by Grantee for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute such work. If there is an unreasonable delay by Grantee in restoring and maintaining streets after such excavations or repairs have been made, City shall have the right, following written notice to Grantee to which Grantee has forty-eight (48) hours in which to respond, to restore or repair the same and to require Grantee to pay to the city the reasonable cost of such restoration or repair, all without compensation or liability for damages to the Grantee unless the delay is due to the negligence or willful misconduct of the City or its agents. In the event City determines that Grantee's use of any of City's streets and rights-of-way as set forth in this agreement pose an immediate danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, City shall have the right to restore or repair same and shall require Grantee to pay to the City the reasonable costs incurred regarding same, all without compensation or liability for damages to the Grantee. 
7.03.  Relocation. Whenever by reason of the construction, repair, maintenance, relocation, widening, raising, or lowering of the grade of any street by the City or by the location or manner of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of any public property, structure, or facility by the City that is not to be used in competition with the facilities of the Grantee, it shall be deemed necessary by the City for Grantee to move, relocate, change, alter, or modify any of its facilities or structures, such change, relocation, alteration, or modification shall be promptly made by Grantee, at its cost and expense, when directed in writing to do so by the City, without claim for or right of reimbursement of cost or damages against the City. In the event Grantee, after such notice, fails or refuses to commence, pursue, or complete such relocation work within a reasonable time, the City shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to remove or abate such structures or facilities and to require Grantee to pay to the City the reasonable cost of such removal or abatement, all without compensation or liability for damages to Grantee. 
7.04.  Temporary Removal of Wire for Building Moving. Upon written request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, Grantee shall remove, raise, or lower its wires and cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses, buildings, or other bulky structures. The reasonable expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the benefitted person, and Grantee may require such payment in advance, Grantee being without obligation to remove, raise, or lower its wires and cables until such payment shall have been made. Grantee shall be given not fewer than seventy-two (72) hours advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire and cable adjustments. 
7.05.  Tree Trimming. From time to time, the City Council may pass ordinances regulating the trimming or removal of trees on or along City property, and Grantee shall comply with these ordinances. 
7.06.  Placement of Fixtures. Grantee shall not place poles, towers, or similar fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main, drainage facility, or sanitary sewer, and all such poles, towers, and similar facilities shall be placed as directed by the City and in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel, use, or visibility of the streets. 
7.07.  Approval of Plans and Specifications. Grantee shall provide complete plans and specifications for all construction within streets to the City for its review at least thirty (30) days prior to the start of construction unless otherwise allowed by general ordinance. Approval of plans and specifications shall not be unreasonably delayed or denied. In the event of rejection, Grantee shall submit revised plans and specifications for approval. This provision shall apply to each construction sequence if the construction is accomplished in phases. 
7.08.  Underground Installation. In those portions of the City having telephone lines and electric utility lines underground, whether required by ordinance or not, any and all of Grantee's lines, cables, and wires shall also be underground. It shall be the policy of the City that existing poles for electric and communications purposes be utilized whenever possible and that underground installation, even when not required, is preferable to the placing of additional poles. 
7.09.  Facilities Location. From time to time, the City or its representatives may request identification of the specific location of certain Grantee facilities. The Grantee agrees to respond in writing to such request within ten (10) days of the receipt of the request. If, in the event that Grantee fails to provide the necessary information, damage is caused to Grantee facilities as a direct result of withholding said information, the Grantee shall hold the City harmless from all liability, damage, cost or expense resulting from any City action in this regard. 
The City shall have the right to be informed as to matters in connection with or affecting the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operations, and repair of the facilities of the Grantee within the streets including, but not necessarily limited to, the identification and location of the Grantee's Facilities within the right-of-way and to periodical updates of such information as changes regarding same occur. 
Upon request from the City, the Grantee shall furnish the City information relevant to such matters, which is prepared, maintained, and available in the ordinary course of business. 
The Grantee does not warrant the accuracy of any information regarding the exact location or depth of its Facilities within the streets and disclaims any and all liability whatsoever based on the accuracy of such information. 
ARTICLE VIII 
INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY 
8.01.  Grantee's Obligation. Grantee shall pay, and by the acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees that it will pay, the following: 
A.  Damages and Penalties. All damages or penalties which the City, its officers, agents, employees, or contractors may legally be required to pay as a result of damages arising out of the Grantee's installation, maintenance, or operation of Cable System, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this franchise. 
B.  Expenses. If any action or proceeding is brought against the City or any of its officers, agents, employees, or contractors with respect to which payment may be sought for claims for damages or penalties described in this Article, the Grantee, upon written notice from the City, shall assume the investigation of defense and fully control any resolution or compromise thereof, including the employment of counsel and the payment of all expenses including the reasonable value of any services rendered by any officers, agents or employees of the City. 
C.  Separate Counsel. The City shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense thereof, and the Grantee shall pay the reasonable fees and expenses of such separate counsel if employed with the approval and consent of the Grantee or if representation of both the Grantee and the City by the same attorney would be inconsistent with accepted canons of professional ethics. 
ARTICLE IX 
INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS 
9.01.  Minimum Coverage. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this franchise, Grantee shall file with the City Secretary and shall maintain on file throughout the term of this franchise a certificate of insurance evidencing liability insurance policy issued by a company duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas insuring City and grantee with respect to the installation, maintenance, and operation of Grantee's Cable system in the following minimum amounts: 
A.  One Person: One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for bodily injury or death to any one person. 
B.  One Accident: One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident. 
C.  Property Damage: One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one occurrence. 
D.  All Other Types of Liability: One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for all other types of liability per occurrence. 
9.02.  Notice of Cancellation or Reduction. Such policy of liability insurance shall contain the provision that written notice of expiration, cancellation, or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the City Secretary and to Grantee at least thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. 
9.03.  Term. Such liability insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by Grantee during the existence of this franchise and thereafter until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of Grantee's Cable System, should such removal be required by City Council or undertaken by Grantee. 
9.04.  Worker's Compensation. The Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise, workers' compensation in the amount required by all applicable federal and state laws. 
ARTICLE X 
REPLACEMENT AND UPGRADE OF SYSTEM 
10.01.  Plan for Replacement and Upgrade of System. Grantee has upgraded the cable system in the City of South Houston to a 750 MGHZ two-way fiber optic system in conformance with the rest of the system serving the Houston metropolitan area. The City of South Houston now has a cable system that is comparable, if not more advanced, than the rest of the country. 
ARTICLE XI 
OPERATIONAL STANDARDS 
11.01.  Compliance with FCC Rules. Grantee shall comply with present and future rules and regulations of the FCC including, but not limited to, technical standards, testing requirements, consumer protection standards and consumer electronics compatibility regulations and all other present and future rules and regulations of the FCC in connection with and relating to the operation of Grantee's Cable System. 
11.02.  Technical Performance. Throughout the term of this Franchise Ordinance, the Grantee shall, at a minimum, operate and maintain the System in accordance with all applicable technical performance standards, regulations, and guidelines of the FCC. Grantee shall periodically test the technical performance of the system in accordance with all regulations and guidelines of the FCC. 
11.03.  Customer Service. The Grantee shall provide good customer service in accordance with all regulations and guidelines of the FCC and the City's customer service standards set forth in Exhibit A to this Franchise Ordinance, and any future requirements promulgated by the FCC, provided that such future requirements do not establish leniency with regard to those customer service standards identified in Exhibit A. 
11.04.  Interference with Reception. Grantee shall maintain and operate its Cable system in such a manner that it will not interfere with reception of television sets not connected to or served by such System, or other electronic devices, in accordance with any regulations promulgated by the FCC as amended from time to time related to cumulative leakage interference. 
11.05.  State-of-the-Art. Grantee shall undertake all construction and installation necessary to keep current with the latest developments in the state-of-the-art of Cable, as defined in this Franchise Ordinance whether with respect to increasing Channel capacity, developing and offering to Subscribers new services, instituting more extensive two-way service, or such other industry developments as may become available during the term of this franchise. 
11.06.  No Obscenity. Grantee shall comply in all regards with all federal, state and local laws regarding obscenity and shall not broadcast or transmit any picture, signal or sound or provide any service, which is obscene or otherwise, unprotected by the Constitution of the United States of America. 
11.07.  Quality of Service. Throughout the term of this franchise, the Grantee shall maintain the quality of service and meet operational standards in the maintenance and operation of its Cable system as are required herein. Should the City find that the Grantee has failed to maintain such quality of service or operational standards, the City shall notify the Grantee in writing following the procedures of Section 26.02 of this franchise. 
ARTICLE XII 
SIGNALS TO BE CARRIED 
12.01.  Required Programming Categories. Grantee's cable System shall carry at a minimum, a broad spectrum of programming comparable to other areas of the country and this spectrum of programming will conform to other communities served by Grantee's cable system. 
12.02.  Service for the Hearing Impaired. Grantee shall take any and all reasonable steps necessary to comply with any FCC or other federal or state requirements regarding altering or adapting programming for the hearing impaired. Grantee shall not take any action to remove or alter closed captioning provided for the hearing impaired as a part of any programming. Grantee shall deliver intact such closed captioning in the manner in which it arrives at the head-end or from another origination source to the Cable System. 
12.03.  Interconnection. Grantee's Cable system shall have the capability to interconnect with any other contiguous Cable Systems operated by Grantee. 
ARTICLE XIII 
PRIOR ORDINANCES 
13.01.  All Prior Ordinances: This Franchise Ordinance shall supersede all prior Ordinances enacted by the City. All prior Ordinances in conflict with this Franchise Ordinance are hereby expressly repealed. 
ARTICLE XIV 
EMERGENCY USE OF THE CABLE SYSTEM 
14.01.  Emergency or Disaster. Grantee shall comply with all FCC regulations with regard to its Emergency Alert System. 
ARTICLE XV 
EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS 
15.01.  Equal Opportunity in Employment. Grantee shall afford equal opportunity in employment to all qualified persons. No person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex. 
ARTICLE XVI 
PAYMENT TO CITY 
16.01.  Amount and Time. As compensation for the right, privilege, and franchise herein conferred, Grantee shall pay to City each year during the term of this franchise a sum equal to five percent (5%) of the Grantee's Gross Revenues for each year. Such payments shall be made quarterly. The payment shall be accompanied by a statement of gross revenues prepared according to accepted accounting practice showing in detail the Gross Revenues of Grantee during the preceding quarter of the calendar year. An authorized representative of the Grantee shall sign such statement. Upon the expiration of eight (8) years from the effective date of this franchise, the franchise fee percentage shall be adjusted to the maximum permitted by law at that time. 
16.02.  Right of Inspection of Records. The City shall have the right to inspect Grantee's records showing the Gross Revenues from which payments to the City are computed and to audit and re-compute any and all amounts paid under this franchise. No acceptance of payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable under this franchise or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder. 
16.03.  Other Payments to City. The franchise fee payable hereunder shall be exclusive of and in addition to all ad valorem taxes, special assessments for municipal improvements, and other lawful obligations of Grantee to City. 
ARTICLE XVII 
RECORDS AND REPORTS 
17.01.  Books of Account. Grantee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of its business and operations under and in connection with this franchise. All such books of accounts and records shall be maintained at Grantee's principal office for a period of three (3) years. 
17.02.  Access by City. The City, through its duly designated officers, agents, or representatives, upon thirty (30) days' written notice, shall be given access to Grantee's principal office location in order to inspect all books of accounts and records of Grantee for ascertaining the correctness of Grantee's Franchise Fee calculation. 
17.03.  False Entry. Any false entry in the books of accounts and records of Grantee or false statement in the reports to City or its duly designated officers, agents, or representatives as to a material fact knowingly made by Grantee shall constitute a violation of a material provision of this Franchise Ordinance. 
17.04.  FCC Filings. Upon written request of the City, Grantee shall file copies of any and all reports and filings made to the FCC by the grantee, which directly relate to the City with the City Secretary. 
ARTICLE XVIII 
GRANTEE'S RULES 
18.01.  Authority and Obligation. Grantee shall have the authority and obligation to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable Grantee to exercise its rights and to perform its obligations under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to all Subscribers; provided, however, such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall not be in conflict with any of the provisions of this franchise or any ordinance of City, the laws of the State of Texas and the United States of America, and the rules and regulations of the FCC and any other agency having jurisdiction. A copy of Grantee's rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall be filed with the City Secretary and shall thereafter be maintained current by Grantee. 
ARTICLE XIX 
REGULATION OF RATES 
19.01.  City Regulation of Grantee's Rates. The City Council shall be empowered to fix, alter, and regulate, by ordinance, the rates for any and all of those services, installations, and equipment, of Grantee subject to regulation by the City, consistent with FCC rules governing rate regulation. In such event the City Council shall first prescribe by ordinance the procedure and standards to be followed and the extent and scope of such rate regulations, all of which matters shall be consistent with due process and shall conform to any and all of those federal and state laws, rules, and regulations then applicable. 
ARTICLE XX 
DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE 
20.01.  Failure to Pay Bill. Grantee may disconnect installations and discontinue cable service to a Subscriber upon the Subscriber's failure to pay his/her bill within thirty (30) days of its rendition; provided, however, Grantee shall give the Subscriber at least eight (8) days written notice, delivered either by mail or served in person, that his/her service will be discontinued unless all monies due are paid to grantee before the expiration of such eight-day (8) period. 
ARTICLE XXI 
FREE SERVICE 
21.01.  Drops. Upon written request from the City, Grantee shall provide one (1) free drop to each of the facilities identified in Exhibit B and to any and all future public buildings or facilities located in the City and designated by such written request or requests. Grantee shall bear any and all costs pertaining to installation of such drop when the facility is within 300 feet for underground installation or within 500 feet for aerial installation of Grantee's existing system. Any costs associated with providing the free drop in excess of the aforesaid distances shall not be the responsibility of Grantee. In addition, the cost of maintaining the drop once the installation is completed shall be borne by the City whether or not it is located within the aforesaid distances. 
21.02.  Basic Cable Service. Upon written request, Grantee shall provide free Basic Cable Service and, if needed, one (1) free converter to the principal facility of any and all present public schools and City owned buildings. 
ARTICLE XXII 
PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATORY OR PREFERENTIAL PRACTICES 
22.01.  Rates, Charges, and Services. In its rates or charges, or in making available the services or facilities of the Cable System or in its rules or regulations, or in any other respect, Grantee shall not make or grant any illegal preference or advantage to any Subscriber or potential Subscriber and shall not subject any such person to any illegal prejudice or disadvantage. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to the Cable System. Notwithstanding the foregoing, wherever new construction is taking place, service shall be made available on a non-discriminatory basis with respect to each sequence of construction if the construction is accomplished in phases. 
ARTICLE XXIII 
NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE 
23.01.  Franchise Non-Exclusive. The rights, privileges, and franchise granted hereby are not exclusive and nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent City from granting any like or similar rights, privileges, and franchise to any other person within all of the City; provided, however, any such franchise shall not be on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those contained herein with respect to the following requirements: 
Upgraded Construction 
Service areas 
Franchise fees 
Insurance, performance bonds and similar instruments 
Customer service standards 
Reports and related record keeping 
ARTICLE XXIV 
MATERIAL BREACH OF 
FRANCHISE, NOTICE 
24.01.  Material Breach of Franchise. In addition to all rights and powers of the City by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, the City reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to take any of the actions described in '24.02 in accordance with the procedures specified therein if any of the following events occur or for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The Grantee, by act or omission, violates any term, condition, or provision of this franchise; 
2.  The Grantee knowingly or willingly attempts to evade any material provision of this Franchise Ordinance; 
3.  The occurrence of any event which may reasonably lead to the foreclosure or other similar judicial or non-judicial sale of all or any material part of the System; 
4.  In the event that the Grantee suspends or discontinues its business, fails to pay its debts due, becomes insolvent (howsoever such insolvency may be evidenced), is adjudicated insolvent, petitions, or applies to any tribunal for, or consents to, the appointment of, or taking possession by, a receiver, custodian, liquidator or trustee or similar official or a similar process is undertaken by any tribunal against all or a material part of the System; or 
5.  The Grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under this franchise with the City, Subscribers or potential Subscribers. 
24.02.  Notice of Default; Opportunity to Cure. 
A.  Notice of Default. The City Council shall exercise the right provided in '25.01 (D) hereof in accordance with the procedures set forth below: 
1.  The City shall notify the Grantee, in writing, of an alleged failure to comply with a material provision of this Franchise Ordinance, which notice shall specify the alleged failure with reasonable particularity. The Grantee shall within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice or such longer period of time as the City may specify in such notice, either cure such alleged failure or, in a written response to the City, either present facts and arguments in refutation or excuse of such alleged failure or state that such alleged failure will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. 
2.  The City shall determine (i) whether a failure to comply with a material provision has occurred, (ii) whether such failure is excusable, and (iii) whether such failure has been cured or will be cured by the Grantee. The Grantee shall make available to the City, if requested, any records, documents or other information necessary to make the determination. 
3.  If the City determines that a failure to comply with a material provision has occurred and that such failure is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by the Grantee in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the City, then the City may take any actions provided in '24.02 (B) hereof, provided that if the City Council acts on its own motion it shall follow the procedural steps set forth in '24.02 (A. 1-3) hereof. 
B.  City Council Action in Event of Breach. In the event that grounds exist which give the City reason to believe that the Grantee fails to comply with a material provision of this Franchise Ordinance, as provided in 24.01 hereof, then, in accordance with the procedures provided in 24.02 (A) hereof, the City Council may, at any time during the term of this Franchise Ordinance, to the extent lawful: (i) Seek monetary damages from the Grantee as compensation for such material breach; and/or (ii) In the event that the Grantee does not cure the breach of the franchise agreement, or the City council does not elect to seek monetary damages from the Grantee or the Grantee does not agree to pay such damages, then, as an alternative to taking the action referred to above, the City council may revoke the franchise granted pursuant to this Franchise Ordinance by termination of this Franchise Ordinance. 
ARTICLE XXV 
REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE 
25.01.  General. In addition to all other rights and powers of City by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, City reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate and cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of Grantee hereunder in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Violation of Provisions. Grantee shall by act or omission violate any term, condition, or provision of this franchise and shall fail or refuse to effect compliance within thirty (30) days following written demand by City to do so. 
B.  Insolvent or Bankrupt. Grantee becomes insolvent or is adjudged bankrupt or all or any part of Grantee's facilities are sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by Grantee within thirty (30) days from the date of such sale; provided, however, this shall not be an event of termination or cancellation in the event of bankruptcy proceeding and the trustee, receiver, or debtor in possession agrees in writing to be bound by the terms of this franchise. 
C.  Fraud or Deceit. Grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under this franchise with the City, Subscribers, or potential Subscribers. 
D.  Method of Termination and Cancellation. Any such termination and cancellation of this franchise shall be by ordinance adopted by City Council; provided, however, before any such ordinance is adopted, Grantee must be given at least sixty (60) days' advance written notice, which notice shall set forth the causes and reasons for the proposed termination and cancellation, shall advise Grantee that it will be provided an opportunity to be heard by City Council regarding such proposed action before any such action is taken, and shall set forth the time, date, and place of the hearing. In no event shall such hearing be held fewer than thirty (30) days following delivery of such notice to Grantee. At the hearing, the Grantee shall be entitled to all rights of due process consistent with the City procedures, including but not limited to the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. If the City Council adopts such ordinance to revoke, the ordinance will be sent to Grantee, who shall have the right to have the Council decision reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
E.  Force Majeure. Other than its failure, refusal, or inability to pay its debts and obligations, including, specifically, the payments to City required by this franchise, Grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this franchise in those cases in which performance of such provision is prevented by reasons beyond its control. 
ARTICLE XXVI 
ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE 
26.01.  City Approval of Assignment Required. The rights, privileges, and franchise granted hereunder may not be assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior consent of the City expressed by resolution or ordinance, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. No assignment in law or otherwise shall be effective until the assignee has filed with the City an instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such assignment, accepting the terms of this franchise, and agreeing to comply with all of the provisions hereof. A mortgage or other pledge of assets in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment. 
ARTICLE XXVII 
FAILURE OF CITY TO ENFORCE FRANCHISE 
27.01.  No Waiver of Terms. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with each and all of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this Franchise Ordinance even though the City should upon one or more occasions fail to insist upon, to require, or to seek compliance with any such term, condition, or provision. 
ARTICLE XXVIII 
SERVICE AVAILABILITY 
28.01.  Service Availability. The Grantee may provide cable service throughout the entire franchise area pursuant to the provisions of this franchise. 
28.02.  Annexations. Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend its Cable System to annexed areas, which are either already serviced by a cable operator or which are not contiguous to the existing franchise area. 
28.03.  Extension Policy. Grantee shall extend its Cable System upon request to any contiguous area where service is not provided at the time of the request when potential Subscribers can be serviced by extension of the Cable System past occupied dwelling units equivalent to a density of thirty-five (35) homes per mile of street. Extension shall be at Grantee's cost. Extensions made to a developing subdivision shall be complete to all requesting cable service within twelve (12) months from the time construction begins within the subdivision boundaries. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions within this Section, Grantee shall provide service upon request to potential subscribers in subdivisions that do not meet the foregoing provisions where the subscriber is willing to contribute to the cost of the system expansion. The Grantee shall incur at least the cost of providing the service as if the 35 homes per mile density were met. The City shall not assume any of the costs related to expansion of said service. 
ARTICLE XXIX 
VALUATION 
29.01.  City's Right to Purchase Cable System. In the event the Grantee forfeits or City terminates this franchise pursuant to the provision of this Franchise Ordinance, or at the normal expiration of the franchise term and at which time a franchise renewal is denied, the City shall have the right to purchase the Cable System. If City should elect to exercise its right to purchase such System, payment of a fair valuation, which shall be the then current fair market value, shall be required. Should the parties fail to agree upon the then current fair market value, the same shall be determined in an appropriate proceeding filed in any court having jurisdiction. 
ARTICLE XXX 
RECOURSE, UNDERSTANDING, AND CONSTRUCTION 
30.01.  Requirements and Enforcement. Except as expressly provided herein, Grantee shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against City of any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of this franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by City or because of the lack of City's authority to grant all or any part of this franchise. 
30.02.  Grantee's Understanding. Grantee expressly acknowledges that in accepting this franchise, it relied solely upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of City to grant this franchise and that Grantee was not induced to accept this franchise by any understanding, promise, or other statement, verbal or written, by or on behalf of City or by any third person concerning any term or condition not expressed herein. 
30.03.  Construction of Franchise. By acceptance of this franchise, Grantee acknowledges that it has carefully read the provisions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meanings of such provisions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity herein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against Grantee and in favor of City. 
30.04.  Non-waiver of Pass Through. Grantee shall have the right to pass through as an external cost any and all costs associated with meeting the requirements of its franchise to the extent provided in applicable laws and regulations. Nothing in this Franchise Ordinance shall be construed as a waiver of such right or requirement to waive such right. 
ARTICLE XXXI 
ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE 
31.01.  Method of Acceptance. Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this franchise, Grantee shall file with the City Secretary a written statement in the following form signed in its name and behalf: 
"To the Honorable Mayor and City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas: For itself, its successors, and assigns, Texas Cable Partners, L.P., d/b/a Time Warner Communications, a limited partnership duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas, hereby accepts the attached franchise and agrees to be bound by all of its terms, conditions, and provisions." 
TEXAS CABLE PARTNERS, L.P. 
By: _______ 
Its: _______ 
"Dated this the ___ day of ___, 2004." 
31.02.  Acceptance of Franchise Not a Waiver. Acceptance of this franchise by Grantee shall not constitute a waiver by it of any of its rights. 
ARTICLE XXXII 
SEVERABILITY 
32.01.  Provisions Severable. If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this franchise is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this franchise. It is the intent of City in adopting this franchise that no portion or provision thereof shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any invalidity or unconstitutionality of any other portion or provision, and to this end all provisions of this franchise are declared to be severable. 
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ON THE 2 nd DAY OF MARCH 2004. 
	/s/ ELOISE SMITH, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ SYLVIA IBARRA,; CITY SECRETARY/City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2004-04, arts. I—XXXII, adopted March 2, 2004, sets forth a new CATV franchise of the city. Previously, article I pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 644, 1-16-79. 
 
ARTICLE II. - GAS FRANCHISE[2] 
ORDINANCE NO. 625 
An Ordinance Granting Entex, Inc., Its Successors and Assigns, the Right, Privilege and Franchise for a Period of Twenty-five (25) Years to Construct, Lay, Maintain, Operate, Extend, Remove, Replace and Repair a System of Pipe Lines, Gas Mains, Laterals and Attachments and all Desirable Instrumentalities In, Under, Over, Across and Along any and all Streets, Avenues, parkways, Squares, Alleys and all Other Public Places in the City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas, for the Purpose of Transporting, Distributing, Supplying and Selling Gas (Natural and/or Artificial and/or Mixed) for Heating, Lighting, Power and for all Other Purposes for Which Gas may be Used, to the Municipality of Said City of South Houston, Texas, and its Inhabitants and Others; Providing Conditions Controlling the Use of Public Thoroughfares and Extensions Therein; Establishing Standards of Service; Providing for a Rental of Three Percent (3%) of the Gross Receipts From the Sale of Gas for Residential and Small Commercial Purposes Within the City; Providing for Acceptance; Providing a Severability Clause; Making Miscellaneous Provisions; and Repealing the Franchise Granted to Houston Natural Gas Corporation. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Article II of App. B, sets forth the gas franchise of the city. The absence of a history note following a particular section or subsection indicates that the derivation of that section is being Ord. No. 625, enacted Sept. 6, 1976. A history note following a section or subsection indicates amendments. 
 
Section 1. 
The City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas, herein called "grantor," or "city" does hereby grant unto Entex, Inc., its successors and assigns, herein called "grantee," or "company," the right, privilege and franchise to construct, lay, maintain, operate, use, extend, remove, replace and repair in, under, over, across and along any and all of the present and future streets, avenues, parkways, squares, alleys, thoroughfares, roads, highways, sidewalks, viaducts, bridges, streams, public grounds, public properties and other public places of grantor, and in all tracts, territories and areas hereafter annexed to or acquired by and placed within the corporate boundaries of grantor, a system of pipes, pipe lines, gas mains, laterals, conduits, feeders, regulators, meters, fixtures, connections and attachments and other desirable instrumentalities and appurtenances necessary or proper for the purpose of transporting, distributing, and supplying and selling gas (natural and/or artificial and/or mixed) for heating, lighting, power and for any other purposes for which gas may now or hereafter be used, in and to said grantor and its inhabitants or any other person or persons within or outside the corporate boundaries of grantor.  
Section 2. 
All pipe, fittings, fixtures and equipment installed by company shall be of sound material and good quality, and shall be so laid as not to interfere with the natural or artificial drainage of the city or its underground fixtures, or with navigation in or the natural drainage of any stream. All mains shall be buried under the surface of the ground. The company shall at all times keep on file in the office of the mayor or his delegate a current map or set of maps of its system within the city. As extensions of pipelines are made, from time to time, the company shall file with the mayor or his delegate, maps or plans showing the extension. Within the streets or other public ways of the city, the location and route of all mains, pipes and piping and other fittings or fixtures, shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction of the mayor or his delegate, which regulation and control shall include, but not by way of limitation, the right to require in writing the relocation of company facilities at company's cost within the streets or other public ways whenever such shall be necessary on account of the widening, change of grade, relocation or other city construction within such streets or public ways. No paving cuts shall be made by the company without first obtaining the permission of the mayor or his delegate, but such permission shall not be withheld unless the proposed paving cut would violate the charter or a lawful ordinance of the city.  
Section 3. 
The surface of any public road, highway, streets, lanes, alleys or other public place disturbed by company in laying, constructing, maintaining, operating, using, extending, removing, replacing or repairing its piping system shall be restored immediately after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work and maintained to the satisfaction of the mayor or his delegate for one year from the date of completion of said work, after which time responsibility for the maintenance shall become the duty of the city. No public road, highway, street, lane, alley or other public place shall be encumbered by construction, maintenance or removal work by company for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute such work. If there is in the opinion of the city council an unreasonable delay by the company in restoring and maintaining streets, highways, parks and alleys after excavation, repairs and extensions have been made, the city shall have the right without further notice to restore or repair same and require the company to pay the reasonable cost of so restoring or repairing them.  
Section 4. 
Grantee at its own expense shall run or extend not more than one hundred (100) feet of main, not to exceed a maximum diameter of two (2) inches, to serve any person (as used herein "person" shall include any natural person, firm, association, individual or corporation) applying for or demanding gas or gas service and/or additional gas or gas service. Grantee shall extend all necessary service lines and yard lines from its mains and may require reimbursement for the reasonable cost thereof. Grantee shall not be required to run or extend any main a distance greater than that specified above to any person applying for or demanding gas or gas service and/or additional gas or gas service unless the probable expected use of such gas or gas service by such person will provide to grantee a reasonable and compensatory return or income on the value of the additional main and other equipment which must necessarily be installed to comply with such application or demand.  
Section 5. 
The service furnished hereunder to said grantor and its inhabitants shall be first class in all respects considering all circumstances and shall be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as grantee may make from time to time. Grantee may require reasonable security for the payment of its bills.  
Section 6. 
In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, grantee agrees to pay to the grantor annually during the continuance of this franchise a sum of money equal to three (3) per cent of the gross receipts for the preceding year received by the grantee after the effective date of this franchise from the sale of gas within the corporate limits of the grantor. Payments hereunder shall be calculated on the basis of gross receipts from the sale of gas delivered to grantee's customers within the corporate limits of grantor during the year next preceding that on account of which the payment is made and shall be payable on or before the first day of February of the year for which payment is made, beginning with the first day of February next following the effective date of this franchise and each and every year thereafter; provided, however, that for the payment due on February 1st next following the effective date of the franchise, grantee shall pay an amount equal to two (2) per cent of said gross receipts received prior to the first day of the month next following the effective date of this franchise and three (3) per cent of said gross receipts for the remainder of that year. Upon receipt of the above amount of money, the city secretary shall deliver to the grantee a receipt for such amount. (Ord. No. 646, § 1, 2-6-79) 
Upon request of the grantor, grantee shall present to it any and all records, accounts and books for inspection relative to the gross receipts of grantee within the corporate limits of the grantor. 
The consideration hereinabove set forth, being in excess of the amount which may be involuntarily imposed upon grantee by grantor under V.A.C.S. Tax. Gen. art. 11.03 (1969), shall be paid and received in lieu of any additional charge which the grantor now or hereafter would, in the absence of this franchise agreement, have the right to impose upon grantee as reimbursement for costs incurred by grantor in connection with the regulation of the rates and services of grantee. Further, said consideration is paid and received in lieu of any license, charge, fee, street or alley rental or other character of charge for use and occupancy for the streets, alleys and public places within grantor, and in lieu of any pipe tax or inspection fee or tax, but shall not in anywise increase or diminish grantee's obligation to pay the grantor ad valorem taxes or anywise interfere with collection thereof. 
Any special taxes, rentals or other charges (including reimbursement for costs incurred by grantor in connection with regulation of the rates and services of grantee) accruing after the effective date of this franchise, under the terms of any pre-existing ordinance, or imposed upon grantee by subsequent action of the grantor shall, when paid to the grantor, be applied as a credit to the amount owned to the grantor under the terms of this franchise agreement.  
Section 7. 
Grantee shall hold grantor harmless for all expenses or liability for any unlawful or negligent act of grantee hereunder.  
Section 8. 
Nothing herein contained shall ever be held or considered as conferring upon grantee and its successors and assigns any exclusive rights or privileges of any nature whatsoever.  
Section 9. 
The franchise granted to Houston Natural Gas Corporation by ordinance adopted May 18, 1926, is hereby repealed.  
Section 10. 
This franchise shall take effect and continue and remain in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from and after the date of this ordinance, provided grantee files a written acceptance of this franchise with grantor within one hundred twenty (120) days after final passage of this ordinance.  
Section 11. 
In granting this franchise, it is understood that the lawful power vested by law in the city to regulate all public utilities within the city, and to regulate the local rates of public utilities within the city, within the limits of the constitution and laws, and to require all persons or corporations to discharge the duties and undertaking, for the performance of which this franchise was made, is reserved; and this grant is made subject to all lawful rights, powers and authorities, either regulation or otherwise, reserved to the city by its charter or by the general laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 12. 
If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void, or invalid (or for any reason unenforceable), the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the grantor in adopting this ordinance that no portion hereof or provision or regulation contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality or invalidity of any other portion, provision or regulation, and to this end, all provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
Read in full and passed and adopted at a regular meeting on the 7th day of September, 1976 and approved by the mayor. APPROVED: 
	      Mayor 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      City Secretary 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
(SEAL)  
ARTICLE III. - SEMINOLE PIPELINE FRANCHISE[3] 
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 688 
An Ordinance Granting to Seminole Pipeline Company, the Right, Privilege, and Franchise to Lay, Construct, Replace, Maintain, Operate, and Remove a Fourteen-Inch Pipeline in the City Limits of the City of South Houston, Texas, in Accordance with the Plans and Specifications Heretofore Filed with the City Secretary at the City Hall and as Officially Approved by the City Council, for the Twenty-Five Year Term Herein Provided; Prescribing the Terms and Conditions Under Which Said Right, Privilege, and Franchise is Granted; and Providing for the Acceptance Thereof. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of South Houston: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Article III of App. B sets forth the franchise granted to the Seminole Pipeline Company by the city. The absence of a history note following a particular section indicates that the derivation of that section is Ord. No. 688, enacted June 2, 1981. A history note following a section indicates amendment. Catchlines in brackets [] have been added by the editor, and minor, nonsubstantive additions and deletions have been made for clarity. 
 
Section 1. - [Grant of franchise.] 
The city council of the City of South Houston, Texas, hereinafter referred to as the "city" does hereby, subject to all of the provisions hereof, grant to the Seminole Pipeline Company, hereinafter referred to as the "grantee," for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of this Ordinance, and subject to the terms and conditions hereof, the right, privilege, and franchise to lay, construct, replace, maintain, operate, and remove a fourteen-inch pipeline within the city limits of the City of South Houston, as described in detail by a center line description herein, but generally described as entering the south city limits at the intersection of Texas Avenue and Pecan Drive in the Houston Lighting & Power Company (H.L. & P. Co.) right-of-way, and then northerly along the route of Seventh Street and in the H.L. & P. Co. right-of-way to Avenue A, and then continuing on northerly along the easterly portion of the said H.L. & P. Co. right-of-way to Kolb Road, and then exiting the north city limits at this location.  
Section 2. - [Summary.] 
The following is a summary of the official firm, firm address, person in charge and telephone number of that person and/or firm for the different phases of the execution of this Ordinance as described heretoafter and will be as follows: 
Application of franchise: 
Firm: 	Seminole Pipeline Company 
Address: 	1800 S. Baltimore Avenue 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74119 
Person in charge: 	S. F. Isaacs 
Title: 	Vice President 
Telephone: 	918-584-4471 
 
Engineering design responsibility: 
Firm: 	Seminole Pipeline Company 
Address: 	1800 S. Baltimore Avenue 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74119 
Person in charge: 	Ray Penderson 
Title: 	Manager of engineering 
Telephone: 	918-584-4471 
 
Construction phase of this franchise: (not the contractor) 
Firm: 	Seminole Pipeline Company 
Address: 	P. O. Box 1327 
Alvin, Texas 77511 
Person in charge: 	Ronnie Hammer 
Title: 	Chief inspector 
Telephone: 	Day: 713-331-7710 
	Night: 713-331-9503 
 
Maintenance phase of this franchise: 
Firm: 	Seminole Pipeline Company 
Address: 	P. O. Box 976 
Richmond, Texas 
Person in charge: 	Keith Watkins 
Title: 	Area supervisor 
Telephone: 	Day: 713-342-8645 
	Night: 713-491-0284 
 
Franchise term after construction: 
Firm: 	Seminole Pipeline Company 
Address: 	1800 S. Baltimore Avenue 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74119 
Person in charge: 	S. F. Isaacs 
Title: 	Vice President 
Telephone: 	918-584-4471 
 
It will be the responsibility of the Seminole Pipeline Company to keep the above address, person in charge, and telephone numbers current and on file with the city secretary at the city hall. Failure to keep current records with the city will have a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence.  
Section 3. - [Center line description.] 
The following is the center line description of the said Seminole fourteen-inch pipeline as it crosses the City of South Houston in a southerly to northerly direction: 
General Center Line Description of the Proposed Pipeline 
BEGINNING at a point of intersection, lying on the south city limits of the city and lying also on the south right-of-way line of Genoa Ditch (fifteen-foot right-of-way) at the intersection of Texas Avenue with Pecan Drive. 
THENCE northerly across the Pecan Drive road right-of-way, a section of the Houston Lighting & Power Company (H.L. & P. Co.) fee right-of-way and the road right-of-way of Texas Avenue to Block No. 199 of the city. 
THENCE northerly along the easterly portions of Blocks No. 199, 201, 222, 226, 246, 252, 270, 279, 295, 306, 320, 362 and 373, and said route being also along the easterly side of the said H.L. & P. Co. one hundred-foot fee right-of-way, and said route being also along and adjacent to the west of the Seventh Street road right-of-way from Avenue N to Avenue A. 
THENCE northerly along the easterly portion of the Avenue A Park and being also along the easterly side of the said H.I. & P. Co. fee one hundred-foot right-of-way to Kolb Road. 
ENDING at the north right-of-way line of Kolb Road (the north city limits).  
Section 4. - [General pipeline information.] 
The following general pipeline information shall describe the proposed fourteen-inch pipeline that Seminole Pipeline Company proposes to construct across the City of South Houston: 
(1)  Number of pipeline: 1 
(2)  Size of pipeline: fourteen (14) inches 
(3)  Material being transported: Mixed stream/natural gas liquids 
(4)  Maximum operating pressure: 1650 psi 
(5)  Maximum operating temperature: 100° F. 
(6)  There shall be no restrictions on building on the properties adjacent to the pipeline right-of-way. 
(7)  The pipeline shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the latest rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(8)  The pipeline shall have adequate cathodic protection. 
(9)  All street or road crossings shall be installed by boring under them and encasing the pipeline.  
Section 5. - Franchise fees. 
The grantee shall pay to the City of South Houston a franchise fee in the amount of twenty-seven thousand five hundred dollars ($27,500.00). The franchise fee of twenty-seven thousand five hundred dollars ($27,500.00) payable upon filing of acceptance by grantee.  
Section 6. - [Authorization to lay, construct, operate, etc., pipeline.] 
The franchise herein granted shall and does hereby authorize the grantee to lay, construct, operate, maintain, and remove when necessary, a fourteen-inch pipeline across the City of South Houston along the route herein described, in accordance with the plans and specifications heretofore filed with the city secretary and approved by the city engineer.  
Section 7. - [Transfer of franchise.] 
No transfer of this franchise shall be effective unless it be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the transferor and by the transferee, and stating the true consideration of such transfer, and it shall be filed with the city secretary. The city engineer and city attorney shall file his written recommendations concerning such transfer and by the recommendation of the city engineer and the city attorney, the city council must approve by motion, resolution or ordinance the application for transfer before any such transfer or attempted transfer shall be valid and have any force or effect. If not approved by the city council, the transfer or attempted transfer shall be null and void.  
Section 8. - [Liability.] 
The grantee shall save the city harmless from and against all liability for injury or damage to any person or persons or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of any part or all of such pipeline within the city limits of the City of South Houston. The grantee shall pay to the city all damages caused to the city or any of its agencies by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair, or removal of such pipeline or any part thereof.  
Section 9. - Plans and specifications. 
(1)  All work and design must be accordance with the rules, regulations, drawings, etc., of the city. 
(2)  The grantee shall submit both plans and specifications, and any required soils reports to the city. 
(3)  The plans and specifications, and any required soils reports shall be submitted to the city secretary in triplicate (three (3) sets), and must be signed by a licensed engineer, as licensed in the State of Texas. 
(4)  The plans and specifications and any required soils reports must be approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  The safety of the general public shall be provided for. 
(6)  All utilities, pipelines, cables and other underground facilities, as existing in the field, shall be located and determined [as to] the depth and shown on the plans. 
(7)  All city items, existing and any known proposed [items,] shall be shown on the plans. 
(8)  The shoring and bracing of all excavation, as necessary, shall be provided for the protection of the general public, workers, equipment, city items, etc. 
(9)  Proper engineering and construction practices shall be followed. 
(10)  All road or street crossings shall be bored and cased. 
(11)  Excavation shall be limited to what the contractor is able to cover up in a day. Any excavation left over night, over the weekend, or on holidays due to the weather or other problems, shall be either covered up and/or barricaded for the safety of others. 
(12)  The proposed pipeline shall in no way hamper the existing or proposed city items, streets, waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewers, or other city structures. 
(13)  The grantee shall provide the necessary automatic or manual pressure release and cutoff valves which prevent the flow of the commodity, in either direction, if there should be a break of rupture within the limits of any city property within the city limits. Such valves and the location of such shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(14)  Upon completion of the construction of the proposed fourteen-inch pipeline, the grantee shall furnish to the city a reproducible set of as-built plans accurately showing the actual location, course, alignment and depths of the pipeline within the city limits. The as-built plans shall be the approved construction drawings showing the final results and all changes or revisions due to the construction efforts. 
(15)  The grantee shall construct the pipeline in strict accordance with the approved set of plans and specifications. During construction, problems and unknown conditions may require changes or revisions, and these changes or revisions will be to the written approval of the city engineer. 
(16)  The grantee shall reimburse the city for any and all expenses incurred by the city for the approval of the plans and specifications.  
Section 10. - [Approval of city council.] 
After the plans and specifications are approved by the city engineer, the city council shall approve by motion the authorization for construction of the proposed fourteen-inch pipeline in strict accordance with the approved plans and specifications.  
Section 11. - Inspection. 
(1)  During the construction of this pipeline, Seminole Pipeline Company shall furnish a full-time inspector that is an employee of that said company for the duration of the work in the city limits. 
(2)  The city engineer, being a licensed engineer in the State of Texas, shall personally inspect the work on a part-time basis or as needed. Also the city engineer shall provide a full-time inspector for inspecting all pipeline work within the city limits. The inspector as provided by the city engineer shall be for reporting and inspection only. 
(3)  The city engineer shall have the responsibility of approving any and all construction changes and revisions, the authority to stop the construction work due to noncompliance with the plans and specifications, or [if] the safety of the general public is endangered, or [if] the contractor is tearing up public property, or [if] the work is not in compliance with the good of the city. 
(4)  If the city engineer is unavailable the same authority shall be vested in the mayor. 
(5)  All expenses incurred by the city during and for the inspection of the pipeline construction shall be reimbursed entirely by the grantee.  
Section 12. - Construction. 
(1)  All construction work shall be in accordance with the city engineer-approved and the city council-passed plans and specifications. 
(2)  All construction work shall be inspected by the city, by the city engineer. 
(3)  Prior to construction, the grantee shall submit to the city engineer the necessary information concerning their contractor: 
(a)  Name, address, person in charge, telephone; 
(b)  Type of equipment to be used and the approximate work force; 
(c)  Construction times will be submitted; 
(d)  Work schedules shall be submitted; 
(e)  All other information shall be submitted to the city as requested or needed. 
(4)  There shall be a preconstruction meeting between the grantee, the grantee's inspector or field manager, the city (includes the city engineer, building inspector, mayor and the city engineer's inspector) and the contractor with the contractor's superintendent. 
(5)  Prior notice of construction shall be given to the city before actual construction can begin. The city shall be given at least ten (10) days notice of actual construction. 
(6)  The contractor shall be the agent of the grantee, and the grantee shall be the sole responsible party to the city. All city notices, correspondence, orders, etc., shall be to the grantee. The contractor can and should attend or listen to any meetings, requests, etc., but the grantee is responsible for all aspects of this Ordinance. 
(7)  The grantee shall provide the city with proof of all necessary insurance certificates and bonds before any construction can begin; and all necessary insurance certificates and bonds will be as directed and approved by the city engineer. 
(8)  The grantee shall provide routes, places to park cars, lunch areas, sanitary conditions, water, etc., for the construction workmen, all to the approval of the city. 
(9)  The grantee shall provide spaces on the actual pipeline right-of-way for the contractor's equipment, supplies, materials, tools, and work force, as directed and approved by the city. 
(10)  The grantee shall not let the contractor park equipment or vehicles, store materials, or let workmen enter the citizens' private property. 
(11)  The grantee shall submit to the city engineer a proposed construction route schedule for approval. The willful tearing up of city streets will not be allowed. 
(12)  The grantee shall not wholly close any street or alley but shall at all times maintain a route of travel and maintain safety for the public. 
(13)  The grantee shall not store materials, place equipment, allow vehicles, nor allow any work in the Avenue A Park. 
(14)  The proposed route of the pipeline may be across the asphalt paved area to the east of the Avenue A Park. The grantee shall take careful action to avoid any excessive damage to this paved area than that as only essential to the construction work. The city engineer shall carefully inspect this area. 
(15)  The grantee shall excavate only the area that can be covered up or refilled at the end of the work day. If excavations are left open due to problems, then they shall be covered and/or barricaded as approved by the city engineer. 
(16)  The grantee shall make a sincere effort not to damage and destroy city property and the citizens' property during the construction work. 
(17)  The grantee shall provide that the contractor properly brace and shore all excavation work for the safety of the general public, adjacent city property, and the safety of the work force. 
(18)  When found necessary during construction by the city engineer, the proposed pipeline shall be lowered, raised, relocated, or revised at the sole expense of the grantee. It is the purpose of this item that city improvements, changes and alterations in the existing or future city streets, street right-of-way, alleys, waterlines, storm sewer lines, sanitary sewer lines, or other city structures, shall in no way be hampered by the proposed pipeline or other structures of the grantee. 
(19)  The grantee shall provide boards, old tires or other protective items for the protection of existing streets during the crossing of construction equipment. 
(20)  The grantee shall not stop up any existing open drainage ditches or storm sewers, and shall maintain proper drainage at all times during construction. (No materials shall be placed or stored at any time in the open drainage ditches). 
(21)  The grantee shall provide proper barricades and safety devices during the construction work. 
(22)  The city engineer or mayor shall have the authority, during construction, to stop the work, if the work is not in compliance with the plans and specifications; if the grantee is allowing unsafe actions either by work or to the public; if the grantee is willfully destroying or damaging city property; or if proper city standards are not followed; until such time as compliance or results are achieved. 
(23)  The grantee is cautioned that in hauling excavated material or construction materials upon public streets and thoroughfares he shall use whatever means are necessary to prevent soil, other foreign material or construction debris from littering the aforesaid streets or thoroughfares. In the event that from these haulings the streets or thoroughfares or any other city property becomes cluttered, the grantee shall remove this waste immediately without damage to city property or the traveling public. 
(24)  The grantee shall be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property, trees, monuments, etc., along and adjacent to the pipeline, and shall use every precaution necessary to prevent damage to streets, paving, pipes, conduits, cables, and other underground structures, and shall protect carefully from disturbance or damage all land, monuments, and property marks. When or where any direct or indirect damage or injury is done to city or public or private property by or on account of any act, omission, neglect, or misconduct in the execution of the construction work or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof on the part of the grantee, he shall restore at his own expense such property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done by repairing, rebuilding, or otherwise restoring same, or the grantee shall make good such damage or injury in an acceptable manner. 
(25)  There shall be no construction work undertaken unless the city engineer, or his inspector, is present. 
(26)  Subsurface conditions: 
(a)  It is not represented nor is it possible to determine that all existing city underground utilities and other firms' underground structures can be shown on the plans. When existing unknown underground items constitute an obstruction to the construction, the grantee shall immediately notify the city engineer, who will determine the course of action to be taken. 
(b)  Any damage to any existing underground facilities will be repaired at the grantee's sole expense to the satisfaction of the owner of the facility. 
(c)  No claims or compensation will be allowed against the city for the cost involved in making the changes or relocations referred to herein. 
(27)  The grantee shall notify any and all known utility companies or firms whose facilities will be affected by the pipeline construction, in advance, so that their representatives can observe the construction activity affecting their facilities. 
(28)  Sequence of work: 
(a)  The grantee shall prepare and submit to the city engineer, for approval, a schedule showing each major construction activity and the proposed time interval. No construction will be permitted until such a schedule is approved in writing by the city engineer. 
(b)  The construction schedule shall show all detours, construction traffic routing, actual work areas and time, estimated work time in the city limits, special conditions, etc. 
(29)  All completed work shall be for the approval of the city engineer. 
(30)  It is the request of the City of South Houston that the grantee shall use off-duty personnel of the City of South Houston Police Department to give proper protection to all during the construction and laying of this pipeline at the grantee's expense. 
(31)  Final clean-up: 
(a)  Upon completion of the work and before final inspection by the city engineer, the grantee shall clean, remove rubbish and temporary structures from all city and private properties, restore in an acceptable manner all property which has been damaged during the prosecution of the work, and leave the city and private properties in a neat and presentable condition throughout. This item shall also apply to the pipeline right-of-way in the city limits. 
(b)  The city engineer shall inspect the pipeline project after clean-up for final approval and any final repair work. After final clean-up and final repair work, the city engineer shall issue a written acceptance and the city council shall then accept the project as complete by vote. 
(32)  The grantee shall reimburse the city for any and all expenses incurred by the city for the construction phase of this Ordinance.  
Section 13. - Bonds. 
The grantee shall submit a performance bond in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) from the grantee to the City of South Houston before any construction work can be undertaken in the city limits. This performance bond shall cover all expenses incurred and documented by the city before, during and after the construction of this proposed pipeline. The performance bond shall also cover the repair and repair cost of all known and unknown damages in the city limits to city property. All expenses, costs, repairs, etc., are as outlined herein. Performance bonds (or maintenance bonds) shall be released two (2) years following the written acceptance by the city as provided for in Section 12, Item 31(b) above.  
Section 14. - Repair work. 
(1)  During construction the grantee shall be responsible for the actual repair of any broken city utility lines in a very timely manner. If the grantee does not repair any damaged city utility line in a reasonable period so that necessary city services are maintained, then the city shall repair the damaged line with its own forces or by another contractor. The cost of this repair work shall be for the direct expense of the grantee. 
(2)  If the grantee fails to adequately barricade or place sufficient warning devices at locations of the work area where it is an unsafe condition to the general public, then the city shall be reimbursed for any expense in providing adequate warning devices. 
(3)  After construction, any damage to existing city properties, [such] as roadways, ditches, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, waterlines, manholes, bridges, etc., shall [be] repaired to the state of their original condition, as directed and approved by the city engineer, and the cost of such shall be for the direct expense of the grantee. 
(4)  Failure to reimburse the city for any expense or repair cost or the actual repair of damaged city property shall result in the bonding company making these costs good. 
(5)  The grantee shall refill (including the repaving of any cut in any pavement) all excavations made by it within the right-of-way of any street or alley in the constructing, operating, maintaining, or removing of such pipeline or any part thereof; and if after once refilling such excavation the earth within such excavated area settles so as to leave a depression, the grantee shall make further necessary fills from time to time as ordered by the city engineer, and the cost of such shall be for the direct expense of the grantee.  
Section 15. - Future city improvements. 
If in the construction of future city improvements they conflict with the actual location of this pipeline in a vertical plane, then the grantee shall raise or lower this pipeline at his expense. This item applies to all city-owned properties within the city limits.  
Section 16. - Maintenance. 
The grantee shall maintain this line in good order and condition for the duration of the ordinance period. The grantee shall maintain also in a timely interval or period the repair of this line due to any complaints of leaking, etc., by the city. Also, any or all repair and maintenance work shall be done after first notifying the city of such work and as approved by the city engineer. All repair and maintenance work shall be for the direct expense of the grantee.  
Section 17. - Acceptance by the grantee. 
The grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise with the city secretary of the City of South Houston within thirty (30) days from the date of the passage hereof, and shall thereupon be bound by all of the terms and conditions hereof. The franchise herein granted shall commence and inure to the benefit of the grantee, effective immediately, with the filing of such written acceptance hereof by the grantee. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 2nd day of June, 1981. 
	/s/   
      MAYOR OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON 
 	 
ATTEST: 
_____
ACTING CITY SECRETARY  
ARTICLE IV. - SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY[4] 
ORDINANCE NO. 942 4-92 
AN ORDINANCE WHEREBY THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, AND SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY AGREE THAT, FOR THE PURPOSE OF OPERATING ITS TELECOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS, THE TELEPHONE COMPANY SHALL MAINTAIN AND CONSTRUCT ITS POLES, WIRES, ANCHORS, FIBER, CABLES, MANHOLES, CONDUITS AND OTHER PHYSICAL PLANT AND APPURTENANCES IN, ALONG, ACROSS, ON, OVER, THROUGH, ABOVE AND UNDER ALL PUBLIC STREETS AVENUES, HIGHWAYS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS, BRIDGES OR PUBLIC PROPERTY IN SAID CITY; PRESCRIBING THE ANNUAL COMPENSATION DUE THE CITY UNDER THIS ORDINANCE; PRESCRIBING THE CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND THE PERFORMANCE OF CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION WORK ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR THE TELEPHONE COMPANY'S TELECOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS; PROVIDING AN INDEMNITY CLAUSE; SPECIFYING GOVERNING LAWS; PROVIDING FOR A RELEASE OF ALL CLAIMS UNDER PRIOR ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR FUTURE CONTINGENCIES; PROVIDING FOR WRITTEN ACCEPTANCE OF THIS ORDINANCE BY THE TELEPHONE COMPANY; AND PROVIDING FOR A TERM AND AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
WHEREAS, Southwestern Bell Telephone Company (hereinafter referred to as the "telephone company") is now and has been engaged in the telecommunications business in the State of Texas and in furtherance thereof, has erected and maintained certain items of its physical plant in the City of South Houston, Texas (hereinafter referred to as the "city") for many years pursuant to such rights as have been granted it by and under the laws of the State of Texas, and subject to the reasonable exercise of the police powers granted by and under said laws to the city; and 
WHEREAS, the telephone company has operated its telecommunications business in the city under successive ordinances of the city, the last of which was the ordinance adopted August 4, 1942, which provided compensation to the city for the superintendence of that agreement based upon a percentage of gross receipts received by the telephone company from certain local services rendered within the corporate limits of the city; and 
WHEREAS, it is recognized by the parties that changes in the telecommunications industry, changes in technology, changes in state and federal law, and changes in the accounting practices mandated by the Uniform System of Accounts promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"), along with regulatory requirements of the Texas Public Utility Commission ("PUC"), have caused the traditional method of determining the amount of compensation to municipalities to become administratively impractical for telecommunications utilities. In order to resolve these issues in a manner satisfactory to both the city and the telephone company, the city and the telephone company have chosen the method of determining the amount of compensation provided for in this Ordinance to eliminate the expenses and time related to audits, to achieve administrative simplicity, to provide the city with predictable revenues and an opportunity for growth and to avoid the expense and delays of litigation which could be necessary to resolve any issues in controversy between the parties; and 
WHEREAS, it is to the mutual advantage of both the city and the telephone company that an agreement should be entered into between the telephone company and the city establishing the conditions under which the telephone company shall maintain and construct its physical plant in the city in the future; 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Board of Aldermen of the City of South Houston, Texas, that: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Article IV of App. B sets forth the agreement with Southwestern Bell Telephone Company as adopted by Ord. No. 942 (4-92), adopted April 28, 1992. A history notation after a section or subsection indicates amendment. 
 
Section 1. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to the laws of the State of Texas and this Ordinance, the telephone company has the non-exclusive right and privilege to use the public rights-of-way in the city for the operation of a telecommunications system subject to the restrictions set forth herein. The telephone company may use such rights-of-way for its telecommunications facilities. The telephone company's facilities and transmission media used in or incident to the provision of telecommunications service and to the maintenance of a telecommunications business by the telephone company in the city shall remain as now constructed, subject to changes as under the conditions prescribed in this Ordinance may be considered necessary to the public health and safety by the city in the exercise of its lawful police powers and such changes and extensions as may be considered necessary by the telephone company in the pursuit of this telecommunications business. The terms of this ordinance shall apply throughout the city, and to all operations and facilities used in whole or in part in the provision of telecommunications services in newly annexed areas upon the effective date of any annexation.  
Section 2. - Additional authority required. 
The telephone company is not authorized to provide cable television service as a cable operator in the city under this Ordinance, but must obtain a franchise from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law.  
Section 3. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this Ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the definitions and meanings provided in this Section: 
(a)  Facilities: All telephone company duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment, structures and appurtenances and all associated transmission media. 
(b)  Use: Any telephone company acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance or operation of any facilities in, over, under, along, through or across the public rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  City: The City of South Houston, Texas. 
(d)  Rights-of-way: All present and future streets, avenues, highways, alleys, bridges and public property within the city limits of the city. 
(e)  Direction of the city: All ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations of the city now in force or that may hereafter be passed and adopted which are not inconsistent with this Ordinance. 
(f)  Transmission media: All telephone company cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other four (4) characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
(g)  Non-exclusive: No rights agreed to in this Ordinance by the city shall be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the public rights-of-way within the city to any person or entity as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(h)  Telephone company: Southwestern Bell Telephone Company.  
Section 4. - Term. 
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from July 1, 1995, through June 30, 1996, provided that at the expiration of this initial period, such term shall be automatically extended for successive periods of one (1) year, unless written notice of intent to terminate this agreement is given by either party not less than ninety (90) days prior to the termination of the then current period. When such notice is given this agreement shall terminate at the expiration of the then current period. 
(Ord. No. 95-006, § 1, 6-20-95)  
Section 5. - Supervision by city of location of poles and conduits. 
All poles placed shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be set so that they will not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and so that the same will not unduly interfere with ordinary travel on the streets or sidewalks. The location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, conduits, fiber and cables placed and constructed by the telephone company in the construction and maintenance of its telecommunications system in the city shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control and direction of the city.  
Section 6. - Attachments to poles and space in ducts. 
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be construed to require or permit any pole attachments for electric light or power wires or communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company to be attached to the telephone company's poles or other physical plant or placed in the telephone company's conduit. 
If the city desires pole attachments for electric light or power wires or communication facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company, or if the city desires to place communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company in any telephone company duct, then a further separate, noncontingent agreement shall be prerequisite to such attachment(s) or such use of any duct by the city. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall obligate or restrict the telephone company in exercising its rights voluntarily to enter into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power companies or with other wire-using companies which are authorized to operate within the city.  
Section 7. - Streets to be restored to preexisting condition. 
The surface of any public street, avenue, highway, alley or public place disturbed by the telephone company in the construction or maintenance of its telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. Should the city reasonably determine, within one year from the date of such restoration, that such surface requires additional restoration work to place it in as good a condition as before the commencement of the work, the telephone company shall perform such additional restoration work to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. No public street, avenue, highway, alley or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all work.  
Section 8. - Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires. 
Upon request, the telephone company shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the telephone company may require payment in advance. The telephone company shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements.  
Section 9. - Tree trimming. 
The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the telephone company, its contractors and agents, to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the aerial wires, fiber or cables of the telephone company, and when so directed by the city, said trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city or of any city official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated.  
Section 10. - Indemnity. 
The telephone company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses (including attorney's fees) and damages to persons or property arising directly or indirectly out of the construction, maintenance or operation of the telephone company's facilities located within the public rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the telephone company. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the benefit of the telephone company and the city.  
Section 11. - Administration of ordinance. 
(a)  The city may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to this Ordinance and the telephone company shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(b)  Copies of petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by the telephone company to the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utility Commission of Texas shall be provided to the city upon request. 
(c)  The city may establish, after reasonable notice, such rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this Ordinance and the construction of the telephone company's facilities on city property to the extent permitted by law.  
Section 12. - Compensation to the city. 
(a)  As compensation for the use, occupancy, oversight, supervision and regulation of the city's rights-of-way, and in lieu of and in full compensation for any lawful tax or license or charge or right-of-way permit fee or inspection fee, whether charged to the telephone company or its contractor(s), or any right-of-way easement or street or alley rental or franchise tax or other character of charge for use and occupancy of the rights-of-way within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments in accordance with state law or sales taxes now or hereafter levied by the city in accordance with state law, the city hereby imposes a charge upon the gross receipts (as hereinafter defined) of the telephone company. The amount of the charge for the first year this ordinance is in effect shall be fifty-one thousand dollars ($51, 000.00). In no event shall such charge be less than the above amount for each year this Ordinance is in effect, except as provided in the case of disannexation as set forth in paragraph 12(e), or as provided in Section 16 herein. 
The telephone company will, according to tariff, bill such charge to the customer service charges included within the term "gross receipts," as defined herein. Gross receipts, for purposes of this charge, shall include only customer service charges which meet all four of the following conditions: (1) such charges are for telephone company services provided within the city; (2) such charges are billed through the telephone company's Customer Records Information System ("CRIS"); (3) such charges are the recurring charges for the local exchange access rate element specified in the telephone company's tariffs filed with the PUC; and (4) such charges are subject to an interstate end user common line ("EUCL") charge as imposed by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"). For the second and subsequent years while this Ordinance remains in effect, the above charge is subject to adjustment by application of the growth factor set out in paragraph 12(c). This adjustment for the growth factor will be made effective as of each anniversary date of this Ordinance. 
The telephone company shall adjust its billings to customers to account for any undercollection or overcollection of the charge due the city. 
(b)  The charge for each year shall be paid in four (4) equal payments. The dates shall be February 28, May 31, August 31 and November 30, with the first payment under this Ordinance due on November 30, 1992. In the event of any over or undercollection from customers at the expiration of this Ordinance, the telephone company may make a pro rata one-time credit or charge to the customer billing for affected customers who are billed for a service included within gross receipts, as defined in paragraph 12(a). This will be accomplished within one hundred fifty (150) days following the date of expiration of this Ordinance. If however, it is impractical to credit any overcollection to customers, then such overcollection shall be paid to the city. 
(c)  The growth factor shall be calculated by dividing the telephone company's revenues within the corporate limits of the city subject to the state telecommunications sales tax ("sales tax revenues") applicable to services rendered within the corporate limits of the city for the twelve-month period ending three (3) months prior to the next anniversary date of this Ordinance by the sales tax revenues for the twelve-month period ending three (3) months prior to either the initial effective date or the preceding anniversary date of this Ordinance as applicable. The growth factor calculated by the method set forth in the preceding sentence, if greater than one, shall be multiplied by the current year's charge to determine the dollar amount of the charge for the next year. If the growth factor calculated above is one or less, the charge for the next year shall be equal to the current year's charge. The telephone company will adjust its customer billing to account for the growth factor calculated above. 
Once the growth factor calculation is completed, the telephone company will provide the city with the sales tax revenues upon which the growth factor calculation was based. 
The city agrees to rely upon audits by the Texas Comptroller of public accounts of state telecommunications sales taxes as reported by the telephone company which are performed in compliance with Sections 151.023 and 151.027 of the Texas Tax Code Annotated (Vernon's 1982). 
The growth factor shall be recomputed to reflect any final, nonappealable adjustments made pursuant to an audit finding by the Texas Comptroller of an inaccuracy in the telephone company's reports of revenues subject to state telecommunications sales taxes. The charge shall be recalculated using the growth factor recomputed as specified in the preceding sentence, and the recalculated charge shall be used for all future calculations required by this Ordinance, any overpayment or underpayment resulting from such recalculation shall be subtracted from or added to the first installment due the following year. If any overpayment or underpayment shall be due during the final year of this Ordinance, then payment shall be made as follows. In the case of overpayment by the telephone company, the city shall pay such overpayment to the telephone company within one hundred fifty (150) days following the expiration of this Ordinance and, in the case of underpayment by the telephone company, the telephone company shall pay such underpayment to the city within one hundred fifty (150) days following the expiration of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Such payments shall not relieve the telephone company from paying all applicable municipally-owned utility service charges. Should the city not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing charge shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, rights-of-way permit or inspection fees, rentals, rights-of-way easements or franchise taxes aforesaid, then the city agrees that it will apply so much of such payments as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the telephone company's obligation, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, rights-of-way permit or inspection fees, rentals, rights-of-way easements or franchise taxes. 
(e)  In the event that either (1) territory within the boundaries of the city shall be disannexed and a new incorporated municipality created which includes such territory or (2) an entire, existing incorporated municipality shall be consolidated or annexed into the city, then notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the charge shall be adjusted. To accomplish this adjustment, within thirty days following the action effecting a disannexation/annexation as described above, the city shall provide the telephone company with maps of the affected area(s) showing the new boundaries of the city. 
In the event of an annexation as described above, the charge for the city will be adjusted to include the amount of the payment by the telephone company to the existing incorporated municipality being annexed. In the event that the annexed municipality had no ordinance imposing a charge or in the event of a disannexation, then the adjustment to the charge will be calculated using the effective date of the imposition of local sales taxes as determined by the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts. The adjustment shall be the percent increase/decrease in the telephone company's gross receipts as defined herein for the city for the first calendar month following the local sales tax effective date compared to the last month prior to such effective date. This adjustment to the charge will be made on the first day of the second month following the local sales tax effective date and the adjusted charge shall be prorated from that date through the remainder of the payment year. The charge as adjusted shall be used for all future calculations required by this Ordinance.  
Section 13. - Assignment of ordinance. 
This Ordinance and any rights or privileges hereunder shall not be assignable to any other entity without the express consent of the city. Such consent shall be evidenced by an ordinance which shall fully recite the terms and conditions, if any, upon which such consent is given.  
Section 14. - Mutual release. 
The city hereby fully releases, discharges, settles and compromises any and all claims which the city has made or could have made arising out of or connected with the Ordinance adopted August 14, 1942, and renewed or extended from time to time thereafter, and its predecessor ordinances, if any, (hereinafter referred to collectively as "1942 Ordinance"). This full and complete release of claims for any matters under the 1942 Ordinance shall be for the benefit of Southwestern Bell Telephone Company; its parent; its affiliates; their directors, officers and employees; successors and assigns; and included any and all claims, actions, causes of action and controversies, presently known or unknown, arising directly or indirectly out of or connected with the telephone company's obligations to the city pursuant to the provisions of the 1942 Ordinance. Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, its parent, its affiliates, successors and assigns hereby fully release, discharge, settle and compromise any and all claims, actions causes of action or controversies heretofore made or which could have made, known or unknown, against the city, its officers or its employees, arising out of or connected with any matters under 1942 Ordinance. 
It is the intent of the city and the telephone company to enter into the foregoing mutual releases in order to reach a compromise that is acceptable to both the city and the telephone company. This ordinance and the mutual releases set forth in this Section represents a compromise of each party's claims as well as each party's defenses, and is not intended to be and is not admission of liability or vulnerability by either party to the other with respect to either the claims or the defense asserted against the other.  
Section 15. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and agreements. 
The Ordinance adopted August 4, 1942, is hereby repealed; provided, however, such repeal shall take effect at 11:59 p.m. on the day immediately preceding the effective date specified in the Section of this Ordinance entitled "acceptance of agreement and effective date". All other ordinances and agreements and parts of ordinances and agreements in conflict herewith are also repealed, which repeal shall take effect at the time and on the date specified in the preceding sentence.  
Section 16. - Future contingency. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance to the contrary, in the event that (a) this Ordinance or any part hereof, (b) any tariff provision by which the telephone company seeks to collect the charge imposed by this Ordinance, or (c) any procedure provided in this Ordinance, or (d) any competition due the city under this Ordinance, becomes, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, unlawful or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, the telephone company and city shall meet and negotiate a new ordinance passage. The telephone company shall have thirty (30) days from and after the final passage of this Ordinance to file its written acceptance of this Ordinance with the city secretary. This Ordinance shall become effective beginning the first day of the quarter not less than thirty (30) days after its final passage by the city.  
ARTICLE V. - M & R EXPLORATION COMPANY PIPELINE FRANCHISE[5] 
ORDINANCE NO 995 (3-94) 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO M & R EXPLORATION COMPANY, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE, AND FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, LAY, REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE, AND REMOVE, EITHER EXISTING FOUR (4) AND/OR TWO (2) INCH DIAMETER PIPELINES, OR NEW TWO (2) INCH DIAMETER PIPELINES, ON AND ACROSS STREETS, ALLEYS, AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY, ALL IN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS TO BE HERETOFORE FILED WITH THE CITY SECRETARY AT THE CITY HALL, FOR A TWENTY-FIVE (25) YEAR TERM HEREIN PROVIDED, PROVIDING FOR ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE, AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an ordinance granting a franchise to M & R Exploration Company, adopted March 1, 1994. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - General description. 
The City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, hereinafter referred to as the "city" does hereby, subject to all of the provisions hereof, grants to the AmeriCo Energy, LLC., hereinafter referred to as the "grantee," for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of this ordinance, and subject to the terms and conditions hereof, the right, privilege, and franchise to construct, install, lay, reuse, replace, maintain, operate, and remove, either existing four- and/or two-inch diameter pipelines or new two-inch diameter pipelines within the city limits of the City of South Houston, as described in detail herein below; but generally described as follows: 
Phase No. 1 Estimated Routes: 
Being proposed gathering lines and appurtenances for two (2) wells located at Lot No. 9 - Block No. 70 and Lot No. 13 - Block No. 70, which both front Louisiana Avenue; 
Option No. 1 being an existing four-inch diameter pipe from Lot No. 13 - Block No. 70 along the Northwesterly R.O.W. section of Louisiana Avenue Southwesterly to approximately the middle of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65, and then either an existing two-inch diameter line across Lots No. 8 and 7 - Block No. 65 Northwesterly to the Canniff Road and Dakota Avenue Ditches at the City's Westerly City Limits line, or a new two-inch diameter line along the Northeasterly section of Sherman Street Northwesterly to the Canniff Road and Dakota Avenue Ditches at the City's Westerly City Limits line, and then either option both into the City of Houston city limits and existing storage facilities situated in that location; or 
Option No. 2 being installing a new two-inch diameter line from Lot No. 13 - Block No. 70 along the Northwesterly R.O.W. section of Louisiana Avenue Southwesterly to either approximately the middle of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65, and attaching the new two-inch diameter line to the existing two-inch diameter across Lots No. 8 and 7 - Block No. 65 to the Canniff Road and Dakota Avenue Ditches at the City's Westerly City Limits line, or extending on Southwesterly to the Northeasterly section of Sherman Street, and then a new two-inch diameter line Northwesterly along the Northeasterly section of Sherman Street to the Canniff Road and Dakota Avenue Ditches at the City's Westerly City Limits. 
Phase No. 2 Estimated Routes: 
Being proposed gathering lines and appurtenances for two (2) wells located at Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64 and Lot No. 8 - Block No. 36, which both front Kansas Avenue; 
Option No. 1 being an existing two-inch diameter line from the rear of Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64, along the sixteen-foot wide alley of Block No. 64 Southwesterly to Sherman Street, then a new two-inch diameter line along the Northeasterly R.O.W. section of Sherman Street Southeasterly to an existing two-inch diameter line in the Northwesterly R.O.W. section of Kansas Avenue, then along an existing two-inch diameter line in the Northwesterly R.O.W. section of Kansas Avenue from Sherman Street Southwesterly to approximately the middle of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 36, then a new two-inch diameter line along the Northwesterly R.O.W. section of Kansas Avenue from Lot No. 8 - Block No. 36 and the well service line at that location Southwesterly to the Canniff Road Ditch, and then across the Canniff Road Ditch to the City's Westerly City Limits line; and then on to existing storage facilities situated in the City of Houston city limits; or 
Option No. 2 being from Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64 well an existing two-inch diameter line from the rear of Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64, along the sixteen-foot wide alley of Block No. 64 Southwesterly to Sherman Street, then Northwesterly along the Northeasterly R.O.W. section of Sherman Street using an existing two-inch diameter line Northwesterly to the Northwesterly section of Louisiana Avenue; then either a new two-inch diameter line from Louisiana Avenue Northwesterly along the Northeasterly R.O.W. section of Sherman Street to the Canniff Road and Dakota Avenue Ditches at the City's Westerly City Limits, and on to existing storage facilities in the City of Houston; or by an existing two-inch diameter line in the Northwesterly section of Louisiana Avenue from Sherman Street Northeasterly to approximately the middle of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65, then using an existing two-inch diameter line across Lots No. 8 and 7 - Block No. No. 65 to the Canniff Road and Dakota Avenue Ditches at the City's Westerly City Limits, and on to existing storage facilities in the City of Houston. 
At this time the exact routes, sizes, reuse of existing lines and appurtenances, proposed new lines and appurtenances, exact locations and other exact factors are difficult and impossible to describe in detail, until professional engineering and surveying design phase services and/or construction services are performed and completed. 
Note that the exact routes, sizes, existing or new, lines and appurtenances, exact field locations, etc.; After all necessary field surveying work and utilities research; shall be designed by the applicant's engineer, and then finally submitted to the city's consulting engineer for his review and approval. The applicant's contractor may have to perform excavation and construction to determine the reuse or verification of existing lines to complete the plans. However, without the approval of the city's consulting engineer, the applicant can do no work on the project. The final applicant's engineering/surveying plans and specifications documents, including the final approval execution by the city's consulting engineer, shall be later filed with the city secretary and attached as exhibit "B" to this ordinance. The applicant shall furnish the city with reproducible copies of the final approved drawings and specifications. 
It is the applicant's responsibility to furnish all necessary engineering, surveying, drawings, specifications, plan-profile sheets, etc. For this project to the city's consulting engineer for his review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 99-010, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 4-3-01)  
Section 2. - General information. 
The following is a summary of the official firm, firm address, person in charge and telephone number of that person and/or firm for the different phases of the execution of this ordinance as described hereinafter and will be as follows: 
1.  Application of franchise: 
AmeriCo Energy Resources, LLC 
10940 Old Katy Road, Suite 100 
Houston, Texas 77043 
2.  Engineering design responsibility: AmeriCo Energy Resources, LLC 
3.  Maintenance phase of this franchise: AmeriCo Energy Resources, LLC 
4.  Franchise term after construction: The unexpired term of the original Franchisee 
Firm: AmeriCo Energy Resources, LLC 
10940 Old Katy Road, Suite 100 
Houston, Texas 77043 
Person in charge: Asghar (Oscar) Nosrati 
Title: Co-Manager 
Telephone: (713) 984-9700 
It is the responsibility of AmeriCo Energy to keep the above address, person in charge, and telephone numbers current and on file with the city secretary at the city hall. Failure to keep current records with the city will have a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 99-010, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 4-3-01)  
Section 3. - General centerline description. 
The following is the general centerline descriptions of the said M & R exploration two- and/or four-inch gathering pipelines as they are proposed to be utilized in the Northwesterly quadrant of the city: 
GENERAL CENTERLINE DESCRIPTIONS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINES 
Phase No. 1 - Options No. 1 And 2: (Well on Lot No. 13 - Block No. 70 to Well on Lot No. 9 - Block No. 70 and to West City Limits at Sherman Street and Dakota Avenue) 
BEGINNING at the Well situated on Lot No. 13 - Block No. 70: 
THENCE Southeasterly across a portion of Lot No. 13 - Block No. 70 to a point in the Northwesterly R.O.W. section of Louisiana Avenue. 
ALTERNATE NO. 1, 
THENCE Southwesterly along the Northwesterly section of the Louisiana Avenue R.O.W., passing at Lot No. 9 - Block No. 70 the line extending from the Well location on the Easterly portion and approximately at the middle of that lot, and then continuing on to a point located approximately in the front of the middle of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65. 
THENCE Northwesterly across the middle portion of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65, the 16-foot wide alley of Block No. 65, the Westerly portion of Lot No. 7 - Block No. 65, the R.O.W.s of the Dakota Avenue and Canniff Road Ditch Easements, to a point exiting the Westerly city limits of the City and being an Easterly city limits of the City of Houston, and onto existing storage facilities in the City of Houston. 
ENDING at a point on the Westerly city limits of the City and being the approximate intersection of the Westerly R.O.W. line of the Canniff Road Ditch and R.O.W. with the Southwesterly centerline projection of the Dakota Avenue Ditch Easement. 
ALTERNATE NO. 2, 
THENCE Southwesterly along the Northwesterly section of the Louisiana Avenue R.O.W., passing at Lot No. 9 - Block No. 70 the line extending from the Well location on the Easterly portion and approximately at the middle of that lot, and then continuing on to a point located in the Northeasterly section of Sherman Street R.O.W. 
THENCE Northwesterly along the Northeasterly section of Sherman Street R.O.W., across the Canniff Road Ditch to a point exiting the Westerly city limits of the City and being an Easterly city limits of the City of Houston, and onto existing storage facilities in the City of Houston. 
ENDING at a point on the Westerly city limits of the City and being the approximate intersection of the Westerly R.O.W. line of the Canniff Road Ditch and R.O.W. with the Southwesterly centerline projection of the Dakota Avenue Ditch Easement. 
Phase No. 2 - Option No. 1: (Well on Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64 to Well on Lot 8 - Block No. 36 and West City Limits at Kansas Street) 
BEGINNING at the Well situated on Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64: 
THENCE Northwesterly across a Northwesterly portion of Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64 to a point lying in the Southwesterly portion of the 16-foot wide alley in Block No. 64; 
THENCE Southwesterly along the approximate middle of the 16-foot wide alley in Block No. 64 to a point, lying in the Northeasterly section of the Sherman Street R.O.W.; 
THENCE Southeasterly along the Northeasterly section of the Sherman Street R.O.W. to a point, lying in the Northwesterly section of the Kansas Avenue R.O.W.; 
THENCE Southwesterly along the Northwesterly section of the Kansas Avenue R.O.W., passing at the dividing line between Lots No. 7 & 8 - Block No. 36, the line extending from the Well located on-the Westerly portion and approximately at the middle of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 36, and then continuing on to a point exiting the Westerly city limits of the City and being an Easterly city limits of the City of Houston, and onto existing storage facilities in the City of Houston. 
ENDING at a point on the Westerly city limits of the City and being the approximate intersection of the Westerly R.O.W. line of the Canniff Road Ditch and R.O.W. with the centerline projection of the Kansas Avenue R.O.W. 
Phase No. 2 - Option No. 2: (Well on Lot No. 8 - Block No. 36 to Well line from Well on Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64 to West City Limits at Sherman Street and Dakota Avenue) 
BEGINNING at the Well situated on Lot No. 8 - Block No. 36: 
THENCE Southwesterly across parts of Lots No. 8 and 7 - Block No. 36 to a point, lying in the Easterly portion of Lot No. 7 - Block No. 36; 
THENCE Southeasterly partly across a portion of Lot No. 7 - Block No. 36 and partly across a portion of the Northwesterly R.O.W. of Kansas Avenue to a point, lying in the Northwesterly portion of the Kansas Avenue R.O.W., 
THENCE Northeasterly across a Northwesterly portion of Kansas Avenue R.O.W. to a point lying in the Northeasterly portion of the Sherman Street R.O.W. near the Southwesterly corner of Lot No. 9 - Block No. 64; 
THENCE Northeasterly along the Northeasterly section of Sherman Street R.O.W., passing at approximately the middle section of the 16-foot wide alley in Block No. 64 the line extending along the said 16-foot wide alley in Block No. 64 and being from the Well located on the Westerly portion and approximately at the middle of Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64, and then continuing on to a point, lying in the Northwesterly portion of the Louisiana Avenue R.O.W. near the Southwesterly corner of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65; 
ALTERNATE NO. 1A, 
THENCE Northeasterly along the Northwesterly section of the Louisiana Avenue R.O.W. to a point, lying in the front of and being at approximately the middle of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65; 
THENCE Northwesterly across the middle portion of Lot No. 8 - Block No. 65, the 16-foot wide alley of Block No. 65, the Westerly portion of Lot No. 7 - Block No. 65, the R.O.W.s of the Dakota Avenue and Canniff Road Ditch Easements, to a point exiting the Westerly city limits of the City and being an Easterly city limits of the City of Houston, and onto existing storage facilities in the City of Houston. 
ENDING at a point on the Westerly city limits of the City and being the approximate intersection of the Westerly R.O.W. line of the Canniff Road Ditch and R.O.W, with the Southwesterly centerline projection of the Dakota Avenue Ditch Easement. 
ALTERNATE NO. 2A, 
THENCE Northwesterly along the Northeasterly section of the Sherman Street R.O.W. to a point, exiting the Westerly city limits of the City and being an Easterly city limits of the City of Houston, and onto existing storage facilities in the City of Houston. 
ENDING at a point on the Westerly city limits of the City and being the approximate intersection of the Westerly R.O.W. line of the Canniff Road Ditch and R.O.W. with the Southwesterly centerline projection of the Dakota Avenue Ditch Easement. 
NOTE: At the end of the design phase and/or the "as-built" phase of this franchise, and as approved by the city's consulting engineer, the applicant shall submit Exhibit "B" to this franchise, being the final legal metes and bounds description of the pipelines, and executed by a licensed surveyor.  
Section 4. - Pipeline information. 
The following general pipeline information shall describe the proposed two-inch pipeline that M & R Exploration Company proposes to construct across the City of South Houston: 
1)  Number of pipelines: One from the four wells located at Lot No. 8 - Block No. 36, Lot No. 14 - Block No. 64, Lot No. 9 - Block No. 70, and Lot No. 13 - Block No. 70; and then to exit points on the Westerly city limits line of the City at Sherman Street & Dakota Avenue and/or Kansas Avenue. 
2)  Size of pipelines: Either 2? and/or 4? diameter existing, and/or 2? diameter new, or a combination thereof all. To be determined after the design phase. See Exhibit "A" attachment (Exhibit "A" is not printed herein but is on file in the office of the city secretary). 
3)  Material being transported: Crude Oil and High Pressure Gas 
4)  Maximum operating pressure: Crude Oil - 35 PSI 
High Pressure Gas - 750 PSI 
5)  Maximum operating temperature: Crude Oil - 75° F 
High Pressure Gas - 90° F 
6)  There shall be no restrictions on buildings being constructed on the properties adjacent to the pipelines and R.O.W.s. 
7)  The pipeline shall be constructed, reused, operated and maintained in accordance with the latest rules and regulations of the U. S. Department of Transportation. 
8)  Pipelines shall be buried a minimum of two and five-tenths (2.5) feet deep and a maximum of four and five-tenths (4.5) feet deep, and variance only as approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
10)  Street and road crossings shall be installed by boring under them or by open cutting and replacing, as approved by the engineer for this project. Open cutting and replacing shall be by typical sections shown on the plans. 
(Ord. No. 99-010, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 4-3-01)  
Section 5. - Franchise fees. 
The grantee shall pay to the City of South Houston a franchise fee an initial franchise fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall thereafter pay to the city an annual fee in the amount also of five hundred dollars ($500.00), on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this franchise.  
Section 6. - Authorization. 
The franchise herein granted shall and does hereby authorize the grantee to construct, install, lay, reuse, operate, maintain, and remove when necessary, two-inch and/or four-inch diameter pipelines on and across streets, alleys, and rights-of-way in the northwesterly portions of the City of South Houston, and being along the routes herein above generally described (to be described in exact descriptions at the end of the design phase or into part of the construction phase); and in strict accordance with the plans and specifications to be attached heretofore as Exhibit "B" at the end of the design phase or part of the construction phase; and all of which are to be filed with the city secretary and approved by the city's consulting engineer.  
Section 7. - Laws, regulations, rules and permits. 
1.  The work done by M & R Exploration Co. under the grant of authority of this franchise is and in the future, shall be subject to and governed by all present and future laws, regulations, and rules of the city, the State of Texas, and the United States of America, including any other governmental agency having jurisdiction. 
2.  M & R Exploration Co. shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by law, rule, regulation, ordinance, and applicable governmental requirements for as long as required.  
Section 8. - Transfer. 
No transfer of this franchise shall be effective unless it be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the transferor and by the transferee, and stating the true consideration of such transfer, and it shall be filed with the city secretary. The city's consulting engineer and the city attorney shall file his written recommendations concerning such transfer and by the recommendation of the city's consulting engineer and the city attorney, the city council must approve by motion, resolution or ordinance the application for transfer before any such transfer or attempted transfer shall be valid and have any force or effect. If not approved by the city council, the transfer or attempted transfer shall be null and void.  
Section 9. - Indemnification and save harmless clause. 
M & R Exploration Co. hereby releases, acquits, and forever discharges the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from any and all claims, demands, rights or causes or action of whatsoever character or nature arising from or by reason of any and all bodily or personal injuries, including death and mental anguish, damage to property and the consequences thereof which may be sustained by M & R Exploration Co., its employees or agents, in connection with this franchise and which are caused in whole or in part by the negligence of the city, its officers, agents, or employees. 
M & R Exploration shall keep, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officers, agents, and employees from any and all costs, liability, damage or expense of any nature and howsoever caused, claimed or recovered by anyone by reason of injury to or death of any person or persons or damage to or destruction of property caused by or resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, agents, or employees arising in connection with M & R Exploration Co.'s franchise hereunder. It is the expressed intention of both the city and M & R Exploration Co. that the indemnity provided for in this section is indemnity by M & R Exploration Co. to indemnify and protect the city from the consequences of the negligence by sole, joint, or concurrent, active or passive. For purposes of this indemnification provision, acts and/or omissions of M & R Exploration Co.'s agents, contractors, and employees shall be considered the acts and omissions of M & R Exploration Co. The provisions of this section shall survive the termination, expiration or cancellation of this agreement.  
Section 10. - Plans (drawings) and specifications. 
1)  All work and design must be in accordance with the rules, regulations, drawings, etc., of the city. 
2)  The grantee shall submit both plans and specifications, and any required soils reports to the city. The plans shall include plan-profile sheets. 
3)  The plans and specifications, and any required soils reports, shall be submitted to the city secretary in triplicate (3 sets), and-all engineering must be signed by a licensed engineer, as licensed in the State of Texas, and all surveying must be signed by a licensed surveyor, as licensed in the State of Texas. 
4)  The plans and specifications, and any required soil reports must be approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
5)  The safety of the general public and the project shall be provided for and be the sole responsibility of, the applicant and his contractor. 
6)  All utilities, pipelines, cables and other underground facilities, as existing in the field, shall be located and [the depth] determined and shown on the plans. 
7)  All city items existing and any known proposed shall be shown on the plans. 
8)  Trench safety for all excavation and trenching, as required and necessary, shall be provided for the protection of the general public, workers, equipment, city items, etc., to the approval of the city's consulting engineer. 
9)  Proper engineering and construction practices shall be followed at all times. 
10)  All road or street crossings shall be bored or open cut and replaced, as approved by the engineer. Open cut and replaced streets shall have cement stabilized sand backfill installed from under the pipe to the bottom of the paving structure for the width of the trench, and to the approval of the city's consulting engineer. 
11)  Excavation shall be limited to what the contractor is able to cover up in a day. Any excavation left over night, over the weekend, or on holidays due to the weather or other problems, shall be either covered up and/or barricaded for the safety of others. 
12)  The proposed pipeline shall in no way hamper the existing or proposed city items, streets, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewers, or other city structures. 
13)  The grantee shall provide the necessary automatic or manual check valves or cutoff type valves, which prevent the flow of the commodity, in either direction if there should be a break or rupture within the limits of any city property within the city limits. Such valves and the location of such shall be as approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
14)  Upon completion of the design phase, the applicant shall submit a reproducible set of the final approved drawings and specifications. Upon completion of the construction of the proposed two-inch and/or four-inch diameter pipelines, the grantee shall furnish to the city a reproducible set of as-built plans accurately showing the actual location, course, alignment and depths of the pipeline within the city limits. The as-built plans shall be the approved construction drawings showing the final results and all changes or revisions due to the construction efforts. 
15)  The grantee shall construct the pipeline in strict accordance with the approved set of plans and specifications. During construction, problems and unknown conditions may require changes or revisions, and these changes or revisions will be to the written approval of the city's consulting engineer. 
16)  The grantee shall reimburse the city for any and all expenses incurred by the city for the preparation of the franchise phase, the approval process of the plans (drawings) and specifications phase, and the design phase.  
Section 11. - Inspection. 
1)  During the construction of this pipeline, M & R Exploration Company shall furnish a full time contractor superintendent, or an approved employee of M & R Exploration Company, for the duration of the work in the city limits. 
2)  The city's consulting engineer, or his designated inspector, shall personally inspect the work on a part time basis or as needed basis for the duration of the work. An inspector as provided by the city's consulting engineer shall be for reporting and inspecting the work and project only. 
3)  The city's consulting engineer shall have the responsibility of approving any and all constructions changes and revisions; and the authority to stop the construction work due to noncompliance with the plans and specifications, or the safety of the general public is endangered, or the contractor is tearing up public property, or the work is not in compliance with the best interests of the city. 
4)  All expenses incurred by the city during and for the inspection phase of the pipeline construction shall be reimbursed entirely by the grantee.  
Section 12. - Construction phase. 
1)  All construction work shall be in accordance with the city's consulting engineer's approved plans (drawings) and specifications and franchise documents. 
2)  All construction work shall be inspected by the city, which shall be by the city's consulting engineer, or his designated inspector. 
3)  Prior to construction, the grantee shall submit to the city consulting engineer the necessary information concerning their contractor to be retained for the construction of this project: 
(a)  Name, address, person in charge, [and] telephone numbers. 
(b)  Type of equipment to be used and the approximated work force. 
(c)  Construction contract times will be submitted. 
(d)  Work schedules shall be submitted. 
(e)  All other information shall be submitted to the city as requested or needed. 
4)  There shall be a pre-construction meeting between the grantee, the grantee's inspector or field manager, the city consulting engineer, the city's consulting engineer's inspector if applicable, and the contractor along with the contractor's superintendent for this project. 
5)  Prior notice of construction shall be given to the city before actual construction can begin. The city shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice of actual construction. 
6)  The contractor shall be the agent of the grantee, and the grantee shall be the sole responsible party to the city. All city notices, correspondence, orders, etc. shall be to the Grantee. The contractor can and should attend or listen to any meetings, requests, etc., but the Grantee is responsible for all aspects of this ordinance. 
7)  The grantee shall provide the city with proof of all necessary insurance certificates and bonds before any construction can begin; and all necessary insurance certificates and bonds will be as directed and approved by the city's consulting engineer and the city attorney. 
8)  The grantee shall provide routes, places to park cars, lunch areas, sanitary conditions, water, etc. for the construction workmen, all to the approval of the city. 
9)  The grantee shall provide spaces on the actual pipeline R.O.W.s for the contractors equipment, supplies, materials, tools, and work force, as approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
10)  The grantee shall not let the contractor park equipment or vehicles, store materials, or let workmen enter any adjacent citizen's private property. 
11)  The grantee shall submit to the city's consulting engineer a proposed construction route schedule for approval. The willful tearing up of city streets will not be allowed. 
12)  The grantee shall not wholly close any street or alley but shall at all times maintain a route of travel, maintain safety for the public, and maintain an area for ongoing maintenance in all alleys. 
13)  The grantee shall not store materials, place equipment, allow vehicles, nor allow any work in the adjacent ditches of belonging to the Harris County Flood Control District (HCFCD). 
14)  The proposed route or routes of the pipelines may be across existing facilities and open ditches belonging to the HCFCD. The grantee and his contractor shall notify the HCFCD of any work if required and shall have to obtain approval from the HCFCD of any such work in, over, under, or along side HCFCD ditches. 
15)  The grantee shall excavate only the area that can be covered up or refilled at the end of the work day. If excavations are left open due to problems, then they shall be covered and/or barricaded as approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
16)  The grantee shall make a sincere effort not to damage and destroy any city property and any citizen's private property during the construction work. 
17)  The grantee shall provide that the contractor provides proper and adequate trench and excavation safety in accordance with state statutes and also minimum OSHA regulations at all time during construction. 
18)  When found necessary during construction by the city's consulting engineer, the proposed pipeline shall be lowered, raised, relocated, or revised at the sole expense of the grantee. It is the purpose of this item that city improvements, changes and alterations in the existing or future city streets, street R.O.W., alleys, water lines, storm sewer lines, sanitary sewer lines, or other city structures, shall in no way be hampered by the proposed pipeline or other structures of the grantee. 
19)  The grantee shall provide boards, old tires or other protective items for the protection of existing streets during the crossing of construction equipment. 
20)  The grantee shall not stop up any existing open drainage ditches or storm sewers, and shall maintain proper drainage at all times during construction. (No materials shall be placed or stored at any time in the open drainage ditches). 
21)  The grantee shall provide proper barricades, safety, and warning devices during the construction work. 
22)  The city's consulting engineer shall have the authority, during construction, to stop the work, if the work is not in compliance with the plans and specifications, if the grantee is allowing unsafe actions either by work or to the public, if the grantee is willfully destroying or damaging city property, or if proper city standards are not followed; until such time as compliance or results are achieved. 
23)  The grantee is cautioned that in hauling excavated material or construction materials upon public streets and thoroughfares, he shall use whatever means are necessary to prevent damage to the streets, and to prevent soil, other foreign material or construction debris from littering the aforesaid streets or thoroughfares. In the event that from these haulings, the streets or thoroughfares or any other city property, become cluttered, the grantee shall remove this waste immediately without damage to city property or the traveling public. Any damage to the city streets shall be repaired by the contractor to the approval of the city's consulting engineer. 
24)  The grantee shall be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property, trees, monuments, etc., along and adjacent to the pipeline, and shall use every precaution necessary to prevent damage to streets, paving, pipes, conduits, cables, and other underground structures, and shall protect carefully from disturbance or damage all land, monuments, and property marks. When or where any direct or indirect damage or injury is done to city or public or private property by or on account of any act, omission, neglect, or, misconduct in the execution of the construction work or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof on the part of the grantee, he shall restore at his own expense such property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done by repairing, rebuilding, or otherwise restoring same, or the grantee shall make good such damage or injury in an acceptable manner. 
25)  Sub-surface conditions. It is not represented nor is it possible to determine that all existing city underground utilities and other firms underground structures can be shown on the plans. When existing unknown underground items constitute an obstruction to the construction, grantee shall immediately notify the city's consulting engineer, who will determine the course of action to be taken. Any damage to any existing underground facilities will be repaired at the grantee's sole expense to the satisfaction of the owner of the facility. No claims or compensation will be allowed against the city for the cost involved in making the changes or relocations referred to herein. 
26)  The grantee shall notify any and all known utility companies or firms whose facilities will be affected by the pipeline construction, in advance, so that their representatives can observe the construction activity affecting their lines and facilities. 
27)  Sequence of work (determined at the pre-construction meeting): 
(a)  The grantee shall prepare and submit to the city engineer, for approval, a schedule showing each major construction activity and the proposed time interval. No construction will be permitted until such a schedule is approved in writing by the city engineer. 
(b)  The construction schedule shall show all detours, construction traffic routing, actual work areas and time, estimated work time in the city limits, special conditions, etc. 
28)  All completed work shall be for the approval of the city's consulting engineer. 
29)  If flagmen are required during the construction of this project, then it is the request of the City of South Houston that the grantee shall use off duty personnel of the City of South Houston Police Department, or he can use the approved contractor personnel with approved colored vests and flags. 
30)  Final clean-up: 
(a)  Upon completion of the work and before final inspection by the city's consulting engineer, the grantee shall clean, remove rubbish and temporary structures from all city and private properties, restore in an acceptable manner all property which has been damaged during the prosecution of the work, and leave the city and private properties in a neat and presentable condition throughout. This item shall also apply to the applicant's properties in the city limits. 
(b)  The city's consulting engineer shall inspect the pipeline project after clean-up for final approval and any final repair work. After final clean-up and final repair work, the city's consulting engineer shall issue a written acceptance of the project for the city. 
31)  The grantee shall reimburse the city for any and all expenses incurred by the city for the construction phase of this ordinance.  
Section 13. - Safety and understanding. 
Construction safety. The grantee and his contractor shall be solely responsible for the safety of the work and facilities, themselves, their employees and other persons, as well as for the protection of the safety of the improvements being constructed and the property of themselves or any other person(s), as a result of the construction operations hereunder. 
Franchise safety. The grantee shall be solely responsible for the safety of all of the improvements, facilities, system, etc. covered under this said franchise, himself, his employees and other persons, as well as for the protection of the safety of all items and systems covered under the said franchise and the property of himself or any other person, as a result of the franchise operations hereunder granted. 
Grantee understanding. The grantee, and his contractor as applicable, shall at all times remain independent contractors, solely responsible for the work, operations, and safety and the manner and methods of completing, operating, maintaining, and repairing the franchise system, so long as such methods do not adversely affect the completed improvements and franchise facilities, the city being interested only in the results obtained and conformity of such completed improvements and franchise system to the plans, specifications, and franchise documents.  
Section 14. - Repair work. 
1)  During construction the grantee shall be responsible for the actual repair of any broken city utility lines in a very timely manner. If the grantee does not repair any damaged city utility line in a reasonable period so that necessary city services are maintained, then the city shall repair the damaged line with its own forces or by another contractor. The cost of this repair work shall be for the direct expense of the grantee. 
2)  If the grantee fails to adequately barricade or place sufficient warning devices at locations of the work area where it is an unsafe condition to the general public, then the city shall be reimbursed for any expense in providing adequate warning devices. 
3)  After construction, any damage to existing city properties, as roadways, ditches, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, manholes, bridges, signs, etc. shall be repaired to the state of their original condition, as approved by the city's consulting engineer, and the cost of such shall be for the direct expense of the grantee. 
4)  Failure to reimburse the city for any expense or repair cost or the actual repair of damaged city property, shall result in the bonding or surety company making these costs good. If the grantee or the bonding company refuse to reimburse the city for any repair costs or expense, then this franchise ordinance shall become null and void. 
5)  The grantee shall refill all excavations, including the repaving of pavement excavations and cuts, made by it within the R.O.W. of any street or alley in the constructing, operating, maintaining, or removing of such pipeline or any part thereof; and if after once refilling such excavation the earth or repaving within such excavated area settles so as to leave a depression, the grantee shall make further necessary fills from time to time as ordered by the city's consulting engineer, and the cost of such shall be for the direct expense of the grantee.  
Section 15. - Future city improvements. 
If in the construction of future city improvements they conflict with the actual location of these pipelines in a vertical or horizontal plane, then the grantee shall raise, lower, or move this pipeline at his expense. This item applies to all city-owned properties within the city limits.  
Section 16. - Maintenance. 
The grantee shall maintain these lines in good order and condition for the duration of the ordinance period. The grantee shall maintain also in a timely interval or period the repair of this line due to any complaints of leaking, etc. by the city. Also, any or all repair and maintenance work shall be done after just notifying the city of such work and as approved by the city's consulting engineer. All repair and maintenance work shall be for the direct expense of the grantee. Any leaks, leaking, etc. of the grantee's lines shall be cleaned up in a timely manner, including all soils and other items that such spillage contaminates, and all at the sole expense of the grantee.  
Section 17. - Grantee acceptance. 
The grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise with the city secretary of the City of South Houston within thirty (30) days from the date of the city council passage hereof, and shall thereupon be bound by all of the terms and conditions hereof. The franchise herein granted shall commence and inure to the benefit of the grantee, effective immediately, with the filing of such written acceptance hereof by the grantee. 
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 1st DAY OF MARCH 1994. 
	 DENNIS CORDRAY       
 MAYOR OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON 
ATTEST: 	
 YOUNG LORFING       
 CITY SECRETARY 	
CITY SEAL: 	
  
ARTICLE VI. - ARCO PIPELINE COMPANY FRANCHISE[6] 
ORDINANCE NO. 638 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO ARCO PIPELINE COMPANY, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO LAY, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE A THIRTY-SIX INCH (36?) PIPELINE IN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS HERETOFORE FILED WITH CITY HALL FOR THE FIFTY (50) YEAR TERM HEREIN PROVIDED; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE, AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an ordinance granting a franchise to Arco Pipeline Company, adopted Nov. 1, 1977. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Seaway Pipeline Company Assignment, App. B, Art. VII. 
 
Section 1. - Grant of franchise; description of centerline. 
The City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "city," does hereby, subject to all of the provisions hereof, grant to Arco Pipeline Company, hereinafter referred to as "grantee," for a term of fifty (50) years from the date of this ordinance, and subject to the terms and conditions hereof, the right, privilege, and franchise to lay, replace, maintain, operate and remove a 36-inch crude oil pipeline within the city limits of the City of South Houston, generally entering the city limits at a point where the below-described Rancho Pipeline Company's fee property intersects the south boundary line of the city, the centerline description of said pipeline being as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the south corporate boundary line of the City of South Houston, Texas, (being located within the right-of-way of Genoa Street, sometimes called Pecan Street) where Rancho Pipeline Company's fee property crosses Genoa Street at a point 5.3 feet westerly of Rancho Pipeline System's (formerly Shell Pipeline Corporation's) existing 24-inch pipeline; thence, northerly at a point 5.3 feet westerly from Rancho Pipeline System's 24-inch pipeline through the H. C. Burnett Survey Abstract 1066 and the southerly portion of the H. T. & B. R. R. Company Survey, Abstract 393 to right-of-way line of Kolb Street established as the northerly city limits of South Houston.  
Section 2. - Terms and conditions. 
Each of the following terms, provisions and conditions is a material part of the franchise herein granted, and grantee by its acceptance of this franchise agrees to perform each and every provision and condition: 
(a)  The franchise herein granted shall and does hereby authorize the grantee to run a thirty-six-inch pipeline across and underneath the public streets and easements from its entrance as aforesaid into the city and continuing across the City of South Houston as aforesaid to its exit at the northerly city limit line, upon the approval of the building inspector as to the points at which the pipeline will cross or run along or underneath any street or streets and right-of-way or rights-of-way within the City of South Houston in accordance to plans and specifications heretofore filed with the city secretary and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  When found necessary by the city council or building inspector, any such line or other structures shall be lowered [or] relocated, upon written request by said building inspector at the sole expense of the grantee. It is the purpose of this subsection that improvements, changes and alterations in either existing or future streets, street right-of-way, water, sanitary, sewer, or storm sewers shall in no way be hampered by the line or other structures of the grantee. 
(c)  The grantee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial franchise fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and shall thereafter pay to said city an annual fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year, payable annually in advance, on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of the ordinance granting this franchise; provided, that the grantee may at its election and option pay in advance at the time the initial franchise fee is paid the aggregate amount of the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) annual fees to be thereafter payable for the full term covered hereby and if such advance payment is made of such annual fees, no further annual fees shall be payable during the life and term of this franchise. 
(d)  Grantee shall save the city harmless from and against all liability for injury or damage to any person or persons or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of any part or all of such pipeline within the right-of-way of any street or alley of the city. Grantee shall pay to the city all damages caused to the city of any of its agencies by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of such pipeline or any part thereof. 
(e)  Grantee shall refill (including the repaving of any cut in any pavement) all excavations made by it within the right-of-way of any street or alley in the constructing, operating, maintaining, or removing of such pipeline or any part thereof; and if after once refilling such excavation the earth within such excavated area settles so as to leave a depression, the grantee shall make further necessary fills from time to time as ordered by the city's building inspector or by the city council. Grantee will repair all portions of any street or alley across or along which its said line is laid and place the same in as good a state of repair and condition as they were in at the time of construction, repair or removal was commenced, such repairs to be the satisfaction of the city council. 
(f)  All construction contemplated by grantee, including all work of repairing or refilling, shall be done under plans and specifications thereof approved by the building inspector and subject to his approval of the completed work; and any excavation in or along any such street or alley shall be replaced with materials of the same kind as those removed unless the city's such building inspector approves of some other type of fill or material. Grantee shall notify the city's building inspector before commencing at any time an excavation in any portion of any street or alley and shall not wholly close any street or alley but shall at all times maintain a route of travel along and within such roadway area which shall include any sidewalk area, except that in cases of emergency the city's such building inspector, the mayor, or the city council may authorize a temporary closing of any street, alley, or sidewalk in order to take care of any break or leakage in the pipeline if in the opinion of the city's such building inspector, the mayor or the city council, such closing is necessary to protect the safety of the public. 
(g)  If the grantee fails to commence or thereafter to diligently prosecute any such repair, refilling or other work so required to be done by it within a reasonable time after being notified thereof by the city's building inspector, the city may cause such work to be done at the expense of the grantee and may recover all such expenses from the grantee, together with all costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(h)  The grantee shall provide the necessary automatic pressure release (cutoff) valves which prevent the flow of the commodity, in either direction if there should be any break or rupture within the right-of-way limits of any street or public property; such valves must meet with the approval of the building inspector. 
(i)  Upon completion of the laying of the initial pipeline, grantee shall furnish to the city a building plan and drawing accurately showing the actual location, course and alignment of the pipeline, said plans shall consist not only of the plan but also of a suitable profile accurately showing the location of all streets or alleys across or along which the pipeline was laid as well as the location of any other pipeline, utility line or other underground facility in close proximity of said pipeline. 
(j)  All notices to grantee shall be given as follows: 
Arco Pipeline Company 
P.O. Box 22146 
Houston, Texas 77027 
(k)  Initial construction and installation of such pipeline will be in accordance to the plans and specifications heretofore submitted to, and approved by, the city. 
(l)  The city may, at any such time deemed advisable by the city, retain a professional engineer to inspect in-progress construction by grantee, or to examine any plans and specifications submitted by grantee, to city concerning construction proposed by grantee, and grantee shall pay and reimburse the city for the cost of such services within ten (10) days following notice of same given by city. With reference to the inspection of in-progress work, should such engineer be of the opinion that same is not in compliance with the plans and specifications, or the city permit relating to same, he shall have the authority to stop the work in progress until such time as compliance is achieved. This provision shall be in addition to other provisions contained herein. 
(m)  Pipeline will be used for the transportation of crude oil. 
(n)  Maximum operating pressure will be five hundred (500) pounds per square inch. 
(o)  Maximum operating temperature will be ambient. 
(p)  In addition to any provision herein contained, pipeline will be constructed and operating in accordance with rules and regulations of U. S. Department of Transportation. 
(q)  Prior notice of construction will be given to city before actual construction in the city. 
(r)  All street crossings will be installed by boring under them. 
(s)  Pipeline will have adequate cathodic protection as defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation.  
Section 3. - Transfer of franchise. 
No transfer of this franchise shall be effective unless it be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the transferor and by the transferee, and stating the true consideration of such transfer, and it shall be filed with the city secretary. The city engineer shall file his written recommendation concerning such transfer and the recommendation of the city engineer, the city council must approve by motion, resolution or ordinance the application for transfer before any such transfer or attempted transfer shall be valid and have any force or effect. If not approved by the city council, the transfer or attempted transfer shall be null and void. 
Cross reference— Seaway Pipeline Company Assignment, App. B, Art. VII.  
Section 4. - Acceptance of franchise. 
The grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise with the city secretary of the City of South Houston within thirty (30) days from the date of the passage hereof and shall thereupon be bound by all of the terms and conditions hereof. The franchise herein granted shall commence and inure to the benefit of the grantee, effective immediately, with the filing of such written acceptance hereof by grantee. The grantee shall not commence any work or construction of any type within the right-of-way limits of any street or public property until the final passage and acceptance of this franchise. Also made a part of this agreement shall be the request of the City of South Houston that the grantee shall use personnel of the City of South Houston Police Department to give proper protection to all concerned during the construction and laying of this line. 
PASSED ON FIRST READING by the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall this 1st day of November, A.D., 1977. 
/s/ Gene Kitch       
Gene Kitch, Mayor of the 
City of South Houston, Texas 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Toy Ann Harp, Acting City Secretary 
LaNelle Chafin, City Secretary 
TO THE HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON: 
The Company for itself, its successors and assigns, hereby accepts the attached ordinance and agrees to be bound by all of its terms and provisions. 
ARCO PIPELINE COMPANY 
By /s/ ;hg; D. M. Wigstone 
Dated the 28th day of November, A.D., 1977. 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
	) 
COUNTY OF HARRIS 	) 
 
I, LANELLE CHAFIN, the duly appointed, qualified and acting City Secretary of the City of South Houston, Texas, hereby certify that the above and foregoing Acceptance was received and filed in the office of the City Secretary of the City of South Houston on the 1st day of November, 1977. 
EXECUTED under my hand and the official seal of the City of South Houston, Texas, at said City, this 3rd day of November, A.D., 1977. 
ATTEST: 
/s/ LaNelle Chafin 
LANELLE CHAFIN, City Secretary, 
of the City of South Houston, Texas  
ARTICLE VII. - SEAWAY PIPELINE COMPANY ASSIGNMENT[7] 
ORDINANCE NO. 96-028 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 638 TO SUBSTITUTE SEAWAY PIPELINE CO. FOR ARCO PIPELINE CO. AS THE HOLDER OF THE 50 YEAR PIPELINE FRANCHISE GRANTED NOVEMBER 1, 1977 UNDER THE SAME TERMS AND CONDITIONS BUT WITH A MORE SPECIFIC LEGAL DESCRIPTION. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an ordinance granting the Seaway Pipeline Assignment, adopted Nov. 12, 1996. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Approval of assignment. 
Ordinance No. 638 was passed on November 1, 1977. It granted Arco Pipeline Company (hereafter "ARCO") a fifty-year franchise for pipeline purposes. ARCO has assigned its interests in that franchise to Seaway Pipeline Company, subject to city approval. City approves the assignment of the balance of the term of the franchise and approves the assignee as the holder of the franchise for the duration of the franchise. The terms and conditions of the original ordinance (Ordinance No. 638 shall remain the same for the new holder of the franchise save and except the description of the centerline for the north-south pipeline corridor along 7th Street shall be the centerline described in Exhibit "A," two pages in length dated August 20, 1996, prepared and certified by Fred P. Langham R.P.L.S. and reviewed and approved by the city engineer. A copy is attached as Exhibit "A." 
Editor's note— Exhibit A has not been included herein but can be found on file with the city.  
Section 2. - Terms and conditions. 
The terms and conditions of Ordinance No. 638 shall remain the same as in the original ordinance save and except there is attached hereto as "Exhibit A" and incorporated herein by reference a revised and improved legal description of the pipeline corridor authorized.  
Section 3. - Acceptance of franchise. 
The grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise with the city secretary in compliance with the provisions of section 4 of Ordinance 638 within sixty (60) days from the date of passage hereof and shall thereupon be bound by all of the terms and conditions hereof. The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date that said written acceptance is filed with the city secretary. The acceptance shall not be filed until all costs to the city have been paid by Seaway Pipeline Company as required in section 4 herein.  
Section 4. - Costs. 
This action shall be at no cost to the city. The cost for engineering review was six hundred dollars ($600.00), payable to R.W. Patrick and Associates, P.O. Box 928, South Houston, Texas, 77587. The fees for legal services (review and drafting of the documents of approval) were three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) payable to Gregg, Mieszkuc, Lewis and Daughtry, P.C., 17044 El Camino Real, Houston, Texas, 77058. Seaway Pipeline Company shall pay same promptly. 
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS in a regular meeting on the 12th day of November, 1996. 
/s/ Cipriano Romero 
CIPRIANO ROMERO, Mayor of the 
City of South Houston, Texas 
Attest: 
/s/ Barbara Bigham 
BARBARA BIGHAM, City Secretary 
City of South Houston, Texas  
ARTICLE VIII. - CENTERPOINT ENERGY ENTEX 
ORDINANCE NO. 2004-26 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING CENTERPOINT ENERGY ENTEX, A DIVISION OF CENTERPOINT ENERGY RESOURCES CORP., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY-FIVE (25) YEARS TO CONSTRUCT, LAY, MAINTAIN, OPERATE, EXTEND, REMOVE, REPLACE AND REPAIR A SYSTEM OF PIPELINES, GAS MAINS, LATERALS AND ATTACHMENTS AND ALL DESIRABLE INSTRUMENTALITIES IN, UNDER, OVER, ACROSS AND ALONG ANY AND ALL STREETS, AVENUES, PARKWAYS, SQUARES, ALLEYS AND ALL OTHER PUBLIC PLACES IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS FOR THE PURPOSE OF TRANSPORTING, DISTRIBUTING, SUPPLYING AND SELLING GAS (NATURAL AND/OR ARTIFICIAL AND/OR MIXED) FOR HEATING, LIGHTING, POWER, AND FOR ALL OTHER PURPOSES FOR WHICH GAS MAY BE USED, TO THE SAID MUNICIPALITY AND ITS INHABITANTS AND OTHERS; PROVIDING CONDITIONS CONTROLLING THE USE OF PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES AND EXTENSIONS THEREIN; ESTABLISHING STANDARDS OF SERVICE; PROVIDING FOR PAYMENT OF THREE PERCENT (3%) OF THE GROSS RECEIPTS FROM THE SALE OF GAS TO RESIDENTIAL AND SMALL COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS WITHIN SAID MUNICIPALITY; PROVIDING FOR ACCEPTANCE; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; MAKING MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS; AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
SECTION 1. The City of South Houston, Harris County, Texas, (herein called "Grantor") does hereby grant unto CenterPoint Energy Entex, a division of CenterPoint Energy Resources Corp., its successors and assigns (herein called "Grantee") the right, privilege, and franchise to construct, lay, maintain, operate, use, extend, remove, replace and repair in, under, over, across, and along any and all of the present and future streets, avenues, parkways, squares, alleys, thoroughfares, roads, highways, sidewalks, viaducts, bridges, streams, public grounds, public properties, and other public places in South Houston, Texas, and in all tracts, territories, and areas hereafter annexed to or acquired by and placed within the corporate boundaries of said municipality, a system, of pipes, pipelines, gas mains, laterals, conduits, feeders, regulators, meters, fixtures, connections, and attachments and other desirable instrumentalities and appurtenances necessary or proper, for the purpose of transporting, distributing, supplying and selling gas (natural and/or artificial and/or mixed) for heating, lighting, power and for any other purpose for which gas may now or hereafter be used, in and to said municipality and its inhabitants or any other person or persons within or outside the corporate boundaries of said municipality. 
SECTION 2. Grantee's property shall be so constructed and maintained as not to interfere unreasonably with traffic over the public thoroughfares of said municipality and the same shall be laid in accordance with the lines, grades, and conditions established by Grantor prior to and during the term of the franchise. Within the streets or other public ways of the City, the location and route of all mains, pipes and piping and other fittings or fixtures, shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction of the Mayor or his delegate, which regulation and control shall include, but not by way of limitation, the right to require in writing the relocation of Company facilities at Company's cost within the streets or other public ways whenever such shall be necessary on account of the widening, change of grade, relocation, or other city construction within such streets or public ways. 
The surface of any public road, highway, street, lane, alley, or other public place disturbed by Company in laying, constructing, maintaining, operating, using, extending, removing, replacing, or repairing its piping system shall be restored immediately after the completion of the work and maintained to the satisfaction of the Mayor or his delegate for one (1) year from the date of completion of said work, after which time responsibility for the maintenance shall become the duty of the City. No public road, highway, street, lane, alley, or other public place shall be encumbered by construction, maintenance or removal work by Company for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute such work. If there is in the opinion of the City Council an unreasonable delay by the Company in restoring and maintaining streets, highways, parks and alleys after excavation, repairs and extensions have been made, the City shall have the right without further notice to restore or repair same and require the Company to pay the reasonable cost of so restoring or repairing them. 
SECTION 3. The service furnished hereunder to said municipality and its inhabitants shall be first-class in all respects considering all circumstances and shall be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as Grantee may make from time to time. Grantee may require reasonable security for the payment of its bills. 
SECTION 4. Grantee at its own expense shall run or extend not more than one hundred (100) feet of pipe, not to exceed a diameter of two (2) inches, in order to bring gas service to the property line of each additional customer. 
SECTION 5. In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, Grantee agrees to pay to the Grantor annually during the continuance of this franchise a sum of money equal to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts for received by the Grantee from the sale of gas to residential and small commercial customers within the corporate limits of the Grantor. Payments hereunder shall be calculated on the basis of gross receipts from the sale of gas to residential and small commercial customers within the corporate limits of Grantor and shall be payable for the preceding year on or before the first (1st) day of March of the year for which payment is made following the effective date of this franchise and each and every year thereafter. Upon receipt of the above amount of money, the City Secretary shall deliver to Grantee a receipt for such amount. 
Upon request of the Grantor, Grantee shall present to it any and all records, accounts and books for inspection relative to the gross receipts of Grantee within the corporate limits of the Grantor. 
The consideration hereinabove set forth shall be paid and received in lieu of any license, charge, fee, street or alley rental or other character of charge for use and occupancy for the streets, alleys and public places within Grantor, and in lieu of any pipe tax or inspection fee or tax, but shall not in anywise increase or diminish Grantee's obligation to pay the Grantor ad valorem taxes or anywise interfere with collection thereof. 
Any special taxes, rentals or other charges accruing after the effective date of this franchise, under the terms of any preexisting ordinance or imposed upon Grantee by subsequent action of the Grantor shall, when paid to the Grantor, be applied as a credit to the amount owed to the Grantor under the terms of this franchise agreement. 
Any payment made by Grantee pursuant to this ordinance shall be deemed final and correct as to both Grantor and Grantee unless questioned within two (2) years after the date of such payment. 
SECTION 6. If the Legislature of the State of Texas amends the ceiling on utility gross receipts payments to municipalities established by Tex. Tax Code §182.025, then Grantor may prospectively change the percentage of Grantee's gross receipts payable to Grantor under Section 5 of this franchise to the level established by such amendment; provided, however, that such change in the percentage of Grantee's gross receipts payable to Grantor shall not become effective unless and until Grantor shall have approved and authorized rate schedules acceptable to Grantee which will permit Grantee to fully recover through its rates effective within the corporate limits of Grantor any increase in amounts payable to Grantor resulting from such change. 
SECTION 7. Grantee shall hold Grantor harmless from all expenses or liability for any unlawful or negligent act of Grantee hereunder. 
SECTION 8. Nothing herein contained shall ever be held or considered as conferring upon Grantee and its successors and assigns any exclusive rights or privileges of any nature whatsoever. 
SECTION 9. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
SECTION 10. Provided Grantee files a written acceptance of this franchise with Grantor within one hundred-twenty (120) days after final passage of this Ordinance, this franchise shall take effect and continue and remain in effect for a primary term of twenty-five (25) years from and after the date of this Ordinance; and, at the end of the primary term, this franchise shall automatically renew itself for successive five (5) year periods unless Grantee or Grantor shall provide written notice to the contrary to the other at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the primary term or any succeeding five (5) year renewal term. 
SECTION 11. If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void, or invalid (or for any reason unenforceable), the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the Grantor in adopting this ordinance that no portion hereof or provision or regulation contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality or invalidity of any other portion, provisions or regulation, and to this end, all provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ON THIS THE 17th DAY OF AUGUST 2004. 
	      ELOISE SMITH, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      SYLVIA IBARRA, 
      CITY SECRETARY City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE IX. - REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES, INC. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2002-28 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES, IN., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS TO OPERATE A SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANTING OF THIS FRANCHISE; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
 
Section 1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein, when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
(a)  City is the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(b)  Council is the City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  Solid Waste, whenever used in this Ordinance, shall have the definition as set forth in Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston, as amended. 
(d)  Grantee is Republic Waste Services, Inc. 
(e)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind.  
Section 2. - Grant of exclusive authority. 
(a)  There is hereby granted by the City to the Grantee, the exclusive right and privilege to collect and dispose of Solid Waste (refuse) for the City of South Houston, except for temporary use of roll-off containers, all as set out in that one certain contract between Grantee and City as passed and approved by the City Council on November 19, 2002, and to use and occupy the streets, alleys and public ways for the purposes set forth therein.  
Section 3. - Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
The Grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of its police power by the City.  
Section 4. - Duration of franchise. 
This franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect for a period of five years, but shall be subject to optional renewal by the City for additional one-year extensions thereafter.  
Section 5. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  The Grantee shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from any liability, cost, damage and expense of every character arising out of, or in any manner resulting from or contributed to by, any wrongful or negligent act or omission of Grantee, its agents, servants or employees in the maintenance and operation of its facilities in the City or in the exercise of any right or privilege hereunder. 
(b)  The Grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of this franchise, liability insurance insuring the City, as provided in the aforesaid contract. Evidence of such insurance coverage shall be submitted to the City.  
Section 6. - Forfeitures or transfer of franchise. 
(a)  If the Grantee shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this franchise and should the Grantee continue to violate same for a period of thirty (30) days after Grantee shall have been notified in writing by the City by notice mailed to the Grantee's address furnished the City by Grantee, to desist from such violation so specified, then the City may terminate and cancel this franchise; provided, however, that the City shall not cancel this franchise if the Grantee is without fault as to the violation; and further provided that this franchise may not be terminated and canceled until after the grantee first has been provided with adequate opportunity to be heard before the City Council, and then only by ordinance duly adopted by the City Council. It is further provided, however, that should the Grantee be adjudged a bankrupt, then the City, after sixty (60) days written notice to the Grantee, may, if it so desires, terminate and cancel this franchise. 
(b)  The Grantee shall not sell, lease, assign or transfer this franchise without the prior written approval of the City, which approval will not be reasonably withheld; provided, however, that this franchise may be assigned by the Grantee as security for debt without approval by the City.  
Section 7. - Rates. 
Rates set by the franchise holder shall be listed with the City and available for inspection by the public.  
Sec. 8. - Payment to the City. 
During the lifetime of this franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the City an annual sum of five percent of the gross fees collected from users of its services in the City. The franchise holder shall file quarterly reports with the City showing its receipts and pay to the City with such report the amount of franchise fee due.  
Section 9. - Acceptance of franchise. 
Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance, Grantee shall file its written acceptance of this ordinance and franchise with the City Secretary, or else this ordinance shall be null and void. Upon this written acceptance by Grantee, this ordinance and franchise shall constitute a contract between the City and Grantee and shall be binding upon both. Such acceptance shall reflect Grantee's mailing address and Grantee agrees to notify the City of any change of mailing address.  
Section 10. - Separability. 
That the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City Council would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.  
Section 11. - Effective date. 
That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption. 
PASSED AT A REGULAR MEETING OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, HELD ON THE 19th DAY OF NOVEMBER 2002. 
	/s/ Eloise Smith 
      ELOISE SMITH, MAYOR 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Susan Engel 
      SUSAN ENGEL, 
      CITY SECRETARY 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE X. - PRI SERVICES, INC. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2002-29 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO PRI SERVICES, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS TO OPERATE A SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON USING ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS IN TEMPORARY LOCATIONS; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANTING OF THIS FRANCHISE; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
 
Section 1. - Short title and definitions. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "PRI Franchise Ordinance". For the purposes of the Ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
(a)  City is the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(b)  Council is the City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  Solid Waste, whenever used in this Ordinance, shall mean dirt, rocks, and debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction or repair of buildings and other earthen, wooden, masonry, or metal waste materials collected in Roll Off Containers. 
(d)  Grantee is PRI Services Inc. 
(e)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind. 
(f)  Roll-off Containers shall mean steel containers positioned temporarily at a jobsite for removal of Solid Waste from the jobsite, which shall be located there only so long as the job continues.  
Section 2. - Grant of nonexclusive authority. 
(a)  There is hereby granted by the city to the company, the right and privilege to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth. 
(b)  The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant the use of the alleys, streets, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this agreement.  
Section 3. - Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of its police power by the City.  
Section 4. - Duration of franchise. 
This franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect for a period of five (5) years but shall be subject to renewal by the city for an additional one-year period, not to exceed a total of six (6) years, including the initial five-year period.  
Section 5. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  The grantee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability, cost, damage and expense of every character arising or in any manner resulting from or contributed to by any wrongful or negligent act or omission of grantee, its agents, servants or employees in the maintenance and operation of its facilities in the city or in the exercise of any right or privilege hereunder. 
(b)  The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees, that it will maintain throughout the term of this franchise, liability insurance insuring the city and the grantee in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for bodily injury or death to any one person with the limit of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) for bodily injury or death from any one accident; 
(2)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; 
(3)  Evidence of such insurance coverage shall be submitted to the city.  
Section 6. - Forfeitures or transfer of franchise. 
(a)  If the grantee shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this franchise, and should the grantee continue to violate same for a period of thirty (30) days after grantee shall have been notified in writing by the city by notice mailed to the grantee's address furnished city by grantee to desist from such violation so specified, then the city may terminate and cancel this franchise; provided, however, that the city shall not cancel this franchise if the grantee is without fault as to the violation; and further provided, that this franchise may not be terminated and canceled until after the grantee first has been provided with adequate opportunity to be heard before the city council, and then only by ordinance duly adopted by the city council. It is further provided, however, that should the grantee be adjudged a bankrupt, then the city, after sixty (60) days' written notice to the grantee, may, if it so desires, terminate and cancel this franchise. 
(b)  The grantee shall not sell, lease, assign or transfer this franchise without the prior written approval of the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, that this franchise may be assigned by the grantee as security for debt without approval by the city.  
Section 7. - Rates. 
Rates set by the franchise holder shall be listed with the city and available for inspection by the public.  
Section 8. - Payment to the city. 
During the lifetime of this franchise, the grantee shall pay to the city an annual sum of five percent of the gross fees collected from users of its services for roll-off containers in the city. The franchise holder shall file quarterly reports with the city showing its receipts and pay to the city with such report the amount of franchise fee due.  
Section 9. - Acceptance of franchise. 
Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance, grantee shall file its written acceptance of this ordinance and franchise with the city secretary, or else this ordinance shall be null and void. Upon this written acceptance by grantee, this ordinance and franchise shall constitute a contract between the city and grantee, and shall be finding upon both. Such acceptance shall reflect grantee's mailing address and grantee agrees to notify the city of any change of mailing address.  
Section 10. - Limitations of franchise. 
Nothing in this franchise agreement shall authorize grantee to furnish any trash, rubbish or garbage services to any resident of the city except by the use of temporary, roll-off containers at construction projects.  
Section 11. - Separability. 
That the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City Council would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.  
Section 12. - Effective date. 
That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption. 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of South Houston this 19 th day of November 2002. 
	/s/ Eloise Smith 
      ELOISE SMITH, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
Attest: 
/s/ Susan Engel 
      SUSAN ENGEL, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XI. - FRANK J. GAMBOA 
ORDINANCE NO. 2002-30 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO FRANK J. GAMBOA, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS TO OPERATE A SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON USING ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS IN TEMPORARY LOCATIONS; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANTING OF THIS FRANCHISE; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
 
Section 1. - Short title and definitions. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Frank J. Gamboa Franchise Ordinance". For the purposes of the Ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
(a)  City is the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(b)  Council is the City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  Solid Waste, whenever used in this Ordinance, shall mean dirt, rocks, and debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction or repair of buildings and other earthen, wooden, masonry, or metal waste materials collected in Roll Off Containers. 
(d)  Grantee is PRI Services Inc. 
(e)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind. 
(f)  Roll-off Containers shall mean steel containers positioned temporarily at a jobsite for removal of Solid Waste from the jobsite, which shall be located there only so long as the job continues.  
Section 2. - Grant of nonexclusive authority. 
(a)  There is hereby granted by the city to the company, the right and privilege to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth. 
(b)  The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant the use of the alleys, streets, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this agreement.  
Section 3. - Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of its police power by the City.  
Section 4. - Duration of franchise. 
This franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect for a period of five (5) years but shall be subject to renewal by the city for an additional one-year period, not to exceed a total of six (6) years, including the initial five-year period.  
Section 5. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  The grantee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability, cost, damage and expense of every character arising or in any manner resulting from or contributed to by any wrongful or negligent act or omission of grantee, its agents, servants or employees in the maintenance and operation of its facilities in the city or in the exercise of any right or privilege hereunder. 
(b)  The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees, that it will maintain throughout the term of this franchise, liability insurance insuring the city and the grantee in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for bodily injury or death to any one person with the limit of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) for bodily injury or death from any one accident; 
(2)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; 
(3)  Evidence of such insurance coverage shall be submitted to the city.  
Section 6. - Forfeitures or transfer of franchise. 
(a)  If the grantee shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this franchise, and should the grantee continue to violate same for a period of thirty (30) days after grantee shall have been notified in writing by the city by notice mailed to the grantee's address furnished city by grantee to desist from such violation so specified, then the city may terminate and cancel this franchise; provided, however, that the city shall not cancel this franchise if the grantee is without fault as to the violation; and further provided, that this franchise may not be terminated and canceled until after the grantee first has been provided with adequate opportunity to be heard before the city council, and then only by ordinance duly adopted by the city council. It is further provided, however, that should the grantee be adjudged a bankrupt, then the city, after sixty (60) days' written notice to the grantee, may, if it so desires, terminate and cancel this franchise. 
(b)  The grantee shall not sell, lease, assign or transfer this franchise without the prior written approval of the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, that this franchise may be assigned by the grantee as security for debt without approval by the city.  
Section 7. - Rates. 
Rates set by the franchise holder shall be listed with the city and available for inspection by the public.  
Section 8. - Payment to the city. 
During the lifetime of this franchise, the grantee shall pay to the city an annual sum of five percent of the gross fees collected from users of its services for roll-off containers in the city. The franchise holder shall file quarterly reports with the city showing its receipts and pay to the city with such report the amount of franchise fee due.  
Section 9. - Acceptance of franchise. 
Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance, grantee shall file its written acceptance of this ordinance and franchise with the city secretary, or else this ordinance shall be null and void. Upon this written acceptance by grantee, this ordinance and franchise shall constitute a contract between the city and grantee, and shall be finding upon both. Such acceptance shall reflect grantee's mailing address and grantee agrees to notify the city of any change of mailing address.  
Section 10. - Limitations of franchise. 
Nothing in this franchise agreement shall authorize grantee to furnish any trash, rubbish or garbage services to any resident of the city except by the use of temporary, roll-off containers at construction projects.  
Section 11. - Separability. 
That the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City council would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.  
Section 12. - Effective date. 
That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption. 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of South Houston this 19 th day of November 2002. 
	/s/ Eloise Smith 
      ELOISE SMITH, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
Attest: 
/s/ Susan Engel 
      SUSAN ENGEL, 
      CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XII. - REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES 
ORDINANCE NO. 2002-31 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS TO OPERATE A SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON USING ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS IN TEMPORARY LOCATIONS; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANTING OF THIS FRANCHISE; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
 
Section 1. - Short title and definitions. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Republic Waste Services Franchise Ordinance". For the purposes of the Ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
(a)  City is the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(b)  Council is the City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  Solid Waste, whenever used in this Ordinance, shall mean dirt, rocks, and debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction or repair of buildings and other earthen, wooden, masonry, or metal waste materials collected in Roll Off Containers. 
(d)  Grantee is PRI Services Inc. 
(e)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind. 
(f)  Roll-off Containers shall mean steel containers positioned temporarily at a jobsite for removal of Solid Waste from the jobsite, which shall be located there only so long as the job continues.  
Section 2. - Grant of nonexclusive authority. 
(a)  There is hereby granted by the city to the company, the right and privilege to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth. 
(b)  The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant the use of the alleys, streets, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this agreement.  
Section 3. - Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of its police power by the City.  
Section 4. - Duration of franchise. 
This franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect for a period of five (5) years but shall be subject to renewal by the city for an additional one-year period, not to exceed a total of six (6) years, including the initial five-year period.  
Section 5. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  The grantee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability, cost, damage and expense of every character arising or in any manner resulting from or contributed to by any wrongful or negligent act or omission of grantee, its agents, servants or employees in the maintenance and operation of its facilities in the city or in the exercise of any right or privilege hereunder. 
(b)  The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees, that it will maintain throughout the term of this franchise, liability insurance insuring the city and the grantee in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for bodily injury or death to any one person with the limit of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) for bodily injury or death from any one accident; 
(2)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; 
(3)  Evidence of such insurance coverage shall be submitted to the city.  
Section 6. - Forfeitures or transfer of franchise. 
(a)  If the grantee shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this franchise, and should the grantee continue to violate same for a period of thirty (30) days after grantee shall have been notified in writing by the city by notice mailed to the grantee's address furnished city by grantee to desist from such violation so specified, then the city may terminate and cancel this franchise; provided, however, that the city shall not cancel this franchise if the grantee is without fault as to the violation; and further provided, that this franchise may not be terminated and canceled until after the grantee first has been provided with adequate opportunity to be heard before the city council, and then only by ordinance duly adopted by the city council. It is further provided, however, that should the grantee be adjudged a bankrupt, then the city, after sixty (60) days' written notice to the grantee, may, if it so desires, terminate and cancel this franchise. 
(b)  The grantee shall not sell, lease, assign or transfer this franchise without the prior written approval of the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, that this franchise may be assigned by the grantee as security for debt without approval by the city.  
Section 7. - Rates. 
Rates set by the franchise holder shall be listed with the city and available for inspection by the public.  
Section 8. - Payment to the city. 
During the lifetime of this franchise, the grantee shall pay to the city an annual sum of five percent of the gross fees collected from users of its services for roll-off containers in the city. The franchise holder shall file quarterly reports with the city showing its receipts and pay to the city with such report the amount of franchise fee due.  
Section 9. - Acceptance of franchise. 
Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance, grantee shall file its written acceptance of this ordinance and franchise with the city secretary, or else this ordinance shall be null and void. Upon this written acceptance by grantee, this ordinance and franchise shall constitute a contract between the city and grantee, and shall be finding upon both. Such acceptance shall reflect grantee's mailing address and grantee agrees to notify the city of any change of mailing address.  
Section 10. - Limitations of franchise. 
Nothing in this franchise agreement shall authorize grantee to furnish any trash, rubbish or garbage services to any resident of the city except by the use of temporary, roll-off containers at construction projects.  
Section 11. - Separability. 
That the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City Council would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.  
Section 12. - Effective date. 
That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption. 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of South Houston this 19 th day of November 2002. 
	/s/ Eloise Smith 
      ELOISE SMITH, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
Attest: 
/s/ Susan Engel 
      SUSAN ENGEL, 
      CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XIII. - CENTERPOINT ENERGY HOUSTON ELECTRIC, LLC 
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-25 (Amendment) 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO CENTERPOINT ENERGY HOUSTON ELECTRIC, LLC, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO USE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND TO USE, LICENSE, OR EXPLOIT THE COMPANY'S FACILITIES WITHIN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO CONDUCT AN ELECTRIC DELIVERY BUSINESS IN THE CITY AND FOR SUCH OTHER BUSINESS PURPOSES AS THS COMPANY MAY DESIRE FROM TIME TO TIME, SPECIFICALLY INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE GRANTING OF ACCESS TO THOSE FACILITIES FOR THE DELIVERY OF BROADBAND OVER POWER LINES OR SIMILAR SERVICE WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 
 
Section 1. - [Adopted.] 
That the facts contained in the preamble to the ordinance are determined to be true and correct and are hereby adopted.  
Section 2. - Definitions. 
Annual Adjustment Factor has the meaning set forth in Section 11 below. 
Annual Franchise Fee has the meaning set forth in Section 11 below. 
Broadband over Power Lines (BPL) or "Access BPL" has the same meaning as that used by the Federal Communications Commission in Section 15.3 of its Rules as reprinted below: 
Access Broadband over Power Line (Access BPL). A carrier current system installed and operated on an electric utility service as an unintentional radiator that sends radio frequency energy on frequencies between 1.705 Mhz and 80 Mhz over medium voltage lines or over low voltage lines to provide broadband communications and is located on the supply side of the utility service's points of interconnection with customer premises. Access BPL does not include power line carrier systems as defined in Section 15.3(t) of this part or In-House BPL as defined in Section 15.3(gg) of this part. 
City means the City of SOUTH HOUSTON, Texas, a municipal corporation of the State of Texas. 
City Council means the governing body of the City, or its designee. 
Company means CenterPoint Energy Houston Electric, LLC, a Texas limited liability company. 
Effective Date means July 1, 2006. 
First Rate Case has the meaning set forth in Section 14 below. 
Force Majeure means forces or conditions not reasonably within the control of a party, including a strike; war or act of war (whether an actual declaration of war is made or not); insurrection; riot; act of public enemy; fire; flood or OTHER act of God; sabotage; shortages in materials, supplies and equipment; governmental regulations, limitations and restrictions as to the use and availability of materials, supplies and equipment and as to the use of services; unforeseen and unusual demands for service; or other events, where the affected party has exercised all due care in the prevention thereof and such causes or OTHER events are without the fault or negligence of the affected party. 
Franchise means this Ordinance and the rights and privileges granted by this Ordinance. 
Franchise Year has the meaning set forth in Section 11, below. 
Franchise Area means the area within the boundaries of the City as of the Effective Date and as same may change from time to time during the term of the Franchise. 
Initial Franchise Year shall have the meaning set forth in Section 11, below. 
Other Services means any service, exclusive of the transmission and distribution of electricity, provided or allowed to be provided through the use or license of the System for a fee, including but not limited to BPL. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Prior Franchise has the meaning set forth in the first Whereas clause, above. 
Public Rights-of-Way means the areas in, under, upon, over, across, and along any and all of the present and future streets or streams now or hereafter owned or controlled by the City. 
Public Works Improvement Projects has the meaning set forth in Section 5, below. 
PUC means the Public Utility Commission of Texas, or its successor agency with equivalent jurisdiction. 
Retail Customer means any Person taking delivery of electricity from the Company, at a point of delivery within the Franchise Area. 
Street means the surface and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, alley, bridge, sidewalk, or other public place or way. 
System means the Company's facilities erected, constructed, maintained, operated, used, extended, removed, replaced, and repaired, as necessary, by the Company pursuant to this Franchise, including without limitation, all poles, pole lines, towers, transmission lines, wires, guys, conduits, cables, and OTHER desirable instrumentalities and appurtenances (including telegraph and telephone poles and wires for use of the Company), necessary and proper for the purpose of transmitting and distributing electricity to the City and the inhabitants of said City or OTHER Persons, for any purpose for which electricity may be used. 
(Ord. No. 2006-32, § 2, 11-7-06)  
Section 3. - [Grant of franchise.] 
Subject to the terms, conditions and provisions of this franchise, the city hereby grants to the company the right, privilege and franchise to use the city's public rights-of-way to construct, maintain, operate and use the company's system to conduct within the city an electric delivery business and the right to use, license, or exploit the system within the public rights-of-way for other services. this franchise does not restrict the city's right to impose reasonable fees upon third parties for the use of the public rights-of-way to provide other services, so long as such fees are assessed on a non-discriminatory basis with those charged to other companies providing services competitive with the other services.  
Section 4. - [Term.] 
Upon the filing with the City by the Company of the acceptance required hereunder, the Prior Franchise shall be amended by replacing the language thereof, in its entirety, with the language of this Franchise; and the term thereof shall be extended; and it shall remain in full force and effect for an additional term and period of thirty (30) years from and after January 1, 2008.  
Section 5. - [Rights-of-way.] 
All poles erected by the Company pursuant to the authority herein granted shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be so set that they shall not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and so that the same shall interfere as little as practicable with the ordinary travel, on the Streets or other Public Rights-of-Way. Within the Streets or other Public Rights-of-Way of the City, the location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, lines, conduits and cables placed and constructed and to be placed and constructed by the Company in the construction and maintenance of the Company's System in the City, shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction of the City, or of any City official to whom such duties have or may be duly delegated, which regulation and control shall include, but not by way of limitation, the right to require in writing, to the extent provided in Section 10, the relocation of the Company's System at the Company's cost within the Streets or other Public Rights-of-Way whenever such shall be reasonably necessary to accommodate improvement projects within such Streets or Public Rights-of-Way by the city department with primary responsibility for public works' projects ("Public Works Improvement Projects").  
Section 6. - [Surrenders possession of public right-of-way.] 
In consideration for the compensation set forth in Sections 11 and 15, the City agrees that if the City sells, conveys, or surrenders possession of any portion of the Public Right-of-Way that is being used by the Company pursuant to this Franchise, the City, to the maximum extent of its right to do so, shall first grant the Company an easement for such use; and the sale, conveyance, or surrender of possession of the Public Right-of-Way shall be subject to the right and continued use of the Company.  
Section 7. - [Time periods and standards.] 
Following completion of work in Public Rights-of-Way, the Company shall repair the affected Public Rights-of-Way as soon as possible, but in all cases shall comply with all valid City ordinances governing time periods and standards relating to excavating in the Public Rights-of-Way. No Street or other Public Right-of-Way shall be encumbered by construction, maintenance or removal work by the Company for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute such work.  
Section 8. - [Grade of service.] 
The service furnished hereunder to the City and its inhabitants shall be first-class in all respects, considering all circumstances, and the Company shall furnish the grade of service to Retail Customers as provided by its rate schedules and shall maintain its System in reasonable operating condition during the continuance of this Franchise. The Company's tariffs shall govern the rates, access to service, terms and quality of electric delivery services provided by the Company. An exception to the requirement is automatically in effect when due to Force Majeure. In any Force Majeure event, the Company shall do all things reasonably within its power to restore normal service.  
Section 9. - [Temporary removal of wires.] 
The Company, on the written request of any person, shall remove or raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit construction work in the vicinity thereof or to permit the moving of vessels, houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires, shall be paid by the benefited party or parties, and the Company may require such payment in advance, being without obligation to remove, raise, or lower its wires until such payment has been made. The Company shall be given adequate, and in no event fewer than forty-eight (48) hours, advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.  
Section 10. - [Transmission and distribution facilities.] 
The Company shall construct, operate, and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities in substantial accordance with the Company's own Service Standards and the National Electrical Safety Code ("NESC"). The Company shall determine the specific location and the method of construction and types of materials used in building, maintaining, and operating the Company's transmission and distribution facilities. The City shall require its employees and contractors performing work for the benefit of the city to comply with all applicable laws, statutes, codes and standards (including, without limitation, Section 752 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended or replaced, and the NESC) when working near the Company's System and to report as soon as practicable any damage done to the Company's System. The Company also agrees to require its employees and contractors performing work for the benefit of the City to comply with all applicable laws, statutes, codes and standards (including, without limitation, Section 752 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended or replaced, and the NESC) when working near the City's facilities and to report as soon as practicable any damage done to the City's facilities. The Company shall relocate facilities within Public Rights-of-Way at the Company's own expense, exclusive of street lighting and facilities installed for service directly to the City, to accommodate Public Works Improvement Projects, including, but not limited to, street widening, change of grade, water, sewer, or drainage upgrades, construction or reconstruction projects and minor relocation of traffic lanes. The City shall bear the costs of all relocations of street lighting and facilities installed for service directly to the City and of any relocation of other facilities requested by the City for reasons other than Public Works Improvement Projects. Except in the event of an emergency, the City shall give the Company at least seventy-two (72) hours' notice when the City or City's contractor is requesting the bracing of the Company's poles. The Company shall pay for the bracing to accommodate Public Works Improvement Projects, including, but not limited to, street widening, change of grade, water, sewer, or drainage upgrades, construction or reconstruction projects and minor relocation of traffic lanes.  
Section 11. - [Annual franchise fee.] 
In consideration for the rights and privileges herein granted, the Company agrees to pay to the City, beginning on the Effective Date and continuing throughout the remaining term of the Prior Franchise and the additional thirty (30) year term of this Franchise provided for in Section 4, above, an annual franchise fee (referred to herein as "Annual Franchise Fee"), subject to an Annual Adjustment Factor as set forth below. Except as set forth in Section 15, payment of the Annual Franchise Fee shall be the total compensation payable to the City in consideration for the right, privilege and franchise herein conferred for the Company's use of the Public Rights-of-Way to construct, operate, use and maintain its System for the provision of electric transmission and distribution service and its right to use, license, or exploit its System for Other Services. 
The Annual Franchise Fee shall be calculated as follows: 
1.  The "Annual Franchise Fee," for the twelve-month period beginning on the Effective Date (the "Initial Franchise Year"), shall be $440,774.36. 
2.  The Annual Franchise Fee for each succeeding twelve-month period (each a "Franchise Year"), including the Franchise Year beginning July 1, 2007, shall be adjusted by multiplying $440,774.36 by the Annual Adjustment Factor. The "Annual Adjustment Factor" for any given year shall be a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the kWh delivered by the Company within the Franchise Area (inclusive of street lighting) in the previous calendar year and the denominator of which shall be the kWh delivered by the Company within the Franchise Area (inclusive of street lighting) in 2005, said amount being 135,063,649 kWh. (Example: The Annual Franchise Fee for the Franchise Year beginning July 1, 2010 $440,774.36)x 2009 kWh 135,063,649 kWh). 
In no case, however, shall the Annual Franchise Fee be less than the Annual Franchise Fee established in (1), above, for the Initial Franchise Year. 
In calculating the amount to be paid each year, the Company shall offset its Annual Franchise Fee payments with the amount of the Municipal Account Franchise Credits and Municipal Franchise Fee Credits provided in the Company's tariffs and applicable to the City in the prior calendar year. The annual Franchise fee shall be payable in equal monthly installments due the first day of each calendar month. The Company shall calculate the new franchise fee to be payable for each Franchise Year beginning July 1 st and shall provide the same along with the basis for such calculation to the City for its review no later than April 1 st of each year. If the Company does not receive an objection from the City by May 31 st , the Company shall implement the adjusted Annual Franchise Fee payment on July 1 st . If the additional thirty (30) year term of this Franchise provided for in Section 4, above, ends on any day other than the last day of the last Franchise Year, then the Annual Franchise Fee for the final Franchise Year shall first be calculated pursuant to this Section 11 and then pro-rated accordingly.  
Section 12. - [Franchise payments.] 
The parties agree that the franchise payments due under this Franchise are reasonable and necessary and that the parties shall use their best efforts to enable the Company to recover these payments through its electric rates.  
Section 13. - [No additional charges.] 
Except as provided in Section 15, the Annual Franchise Fee payable hereunder shall be the total compensation payable by the Company to the City for the Company's use of the Public Rights-of-Way for the conduct of its business under the Franchise. The City shall not charge any additional license, charge, fee, street or alley rental, or OTHER character of charge or levy for the use or occupancy of the Public Rights-of-Way in the City, or any pole tax or inspection fee tax. If the City does charge the Company any additional license, charge, fee, street or alley rental, or other character of charge or levy, then the Company may deduct the amount charged from the next succeeding franchise payment or payments until fully reimbursed. The Franchise shall constitute a permit to perform all work on the Company's System within the Public Rights-of-Way and to park vehicles in the Streets and other Public Rights-of-Way when necessary for the installation, removal, operation or maintenance of the Company's System. The Company and contractors performing work for the Company shall not be required to obtain any permits in addition to the Franchise or to pay any fee in addition to the Annual Franchise Fee in order to perform work on the Company's System or to park within the Streets and other Public Rights-of-Way. The Company shall cooperate with the City to avoid unnecessary disruption, and the Company shall comply with all valid City ordinances governing time periods and standards relating to excavating in the Public Rights-of-Way.  
Section 14. - [Base rates.] 
In the first rate case to review the Company's base rates following the Effective Date (the "First Rate Case"), the City shall support the Company's request to include in the Company's base rates the entire then-effective Annual Franchise Fee. If, as a result of the First Rate Case, or any subsequent rate case, the Company's entire then-effective Annual Franchise Fee is not included in the Company's base rates, then the Company shall be required to pay only so much in franchise fees as the amount of franchise fees used by the PUC to calculate the Company's then-effective rates.  
Section 15. - [Conductor space.] 
In addition to the considerations set forth in Section 11, the Company shall furnish, free of charge, subject to the use of the City, such pole and/or duct space as may be required from time to time for the installation of the City-owned traffic, police and fire alarm system conductors; provided such conductor space does not exceed the available capacity on any one existing pole or in one existing interior duct. The Company shall allow for the expanded use of existing energized conductors by the City for the purposes of providing traffic signal communication interconnectivity with prior written approval from the Company. The specific location for these traffic, police and fire alarm conductors on the Company poles or ducts shall be determined by the Company and shall be allotted at the time specific applications for space are received from the City. All City traffic, police and fire alarm circuits on the Company poles and ducts shall be designed and installed, operated and maintained in compliance with the applicable provisions of the NESC and other laws, statutes, codes and ordinances applicable to private parties and so as to create no interference, corrosion, harm, damage or hazard with, to or from the Company's System or the Company's business. All plans for such city traffic, police and fire alarm circuits must be submitted for the Company's written approval prior to installation. Any modifications to the Company's System necessary to accommodate such installation shall be paid by the City. If, after installation, the City's equipment is found to interfere with the Company's System or business, the Company and the City shall work together to address the problem and, if deemed practical by the Company, preserve the City's access. Where main underground duct lines are located between manholes, the Company shall permit free of charge the installation in one interior duct by the City of its traffic, police or fire alarm signal cables; provided space is available in an interior duct not suitable for power circuits without interference with the Company's system neutral conductors. All cables installed by the City in the Company ducts shall be of the non-metallic sheath type to prevent corrosive or electrolytic action between the City- and the Company-owned cables. A request for duct assignment shall in each instance be submitted to the Company and a sketch showing duct allocation shall be received from the Company prior to the installation of the City cables in Company-owned duct lines. All City-owned conductors and cables, whether on poles or in duct lines, shall be constructed, maintained and operated in such manner as to not interfere with or create a hazard in the operation of the Company's System or the Company's business. If, after installation, the City's equipment is found to interfere with the Company's System or business, the Company and the City shall work together to address the problem and, if deemed practical by the Company, preserve the City's access. 
In addition to the consideration set forth in Section 11, the Company shall permit the City to use, free of charge, extra space on its street light poles to install City-owned traffic control signs and decorative banners, with prior written approval from the Company and provided that such use is consistent with the NESC and OTHER applicable engineering and operational codes and standards. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Franchise, it is further agreed that the Company shall not be responsible to any party or parties whatsoever for any claims, demands, losses, suits, judgments for damages or injuries to Persons or property by reason of the construction, maintenance, inspection or use of the traffic signal light systems, police and fire alarm systems, traffic control signs, or decorative banners belonging to the City and constructed upon the Company's poles or street light poles or in its ducts, and the City shall indemnify and hold the Company harmless against all such claims, losses, demands, suits and judgments, to the extent permitted by the Texas Tort Claims Act, but the City does not, by this agreement, admit primary liability to any third party by reason of the City's operation and use of such traffic signal light systems, police and fire alarm systems, traffic control signs, or decorative banners, such being a function of government.  
Section 16. - [Audit.] 
The City may conduct an audit or other inquiry, or may pursue a cause of action in relation to the payment of the Annual Franchise Fee only if such audit, inquiry, or pursuit of a cause of action concerns a payment made fewer than two (2) years before commencement of such audit, inquiry, or pursuit of a cause of action. The City shall bear the costs of any such audit or inquiry. All books and records related to the Company's operations under this Franchise shall be available to the City. Upon receipt of a written request from the City, such documents shall be made available for inspection and copying no later than thirty (30) days from the receipt of such request. Amounts due to the City for past underpayments or amounts due the Company for past overpayments shall include interest calculated using the annual interest rates for overcharges as set by the Texas Public Utility Commission. Said interest shall be payable on such sum from the date the initial payment was due until it is past.  
Section 17. - [Waive claims of prior franchise agreements.] 
The parties agree to waive any and all claims, asserted or unasserted, arising out of prior franchise agreements including, without limitation, the Prior Franchise, except those claims relating to the Company's obligations as determined in an audit underway as of March 1, 2006.  
Section 18. - [Exclusive rights of privileges.] 
Nothing contained in this Franchise shall ever be construed as conferring upon the Company any exclusive rights or privileges of any nature whatsoever.  
Section 19. - [Efficient electrical service.] 
It shall be Company's obligation as provided in Section 8 hereof to furnish efficient electrical service to the public at reasonable rates and to maintain its property in good repair and working order except when prevented from so doing by forces and conditions not reasonably within the control of the Company. Should the Company fail or refuse to maintain its System in good order and furnish efficient service at all times throughout the life of this grant, except only when prevented from so doing by Force Majeure, or should Company fail or refuse to furnish efficient service at reasonable rates, lawfully determined by the City, throughout the life of this grant, excepting only during such periods as the Company shall in good faith diligently contest the reasonableness of the rates in question, then it shall forfeit and pay to the City the sum of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25) for each day it shall so fail or refuse after reasonable notice thereof and a hearing thereon by the City. Any suit to recover such penalty shall be filed within one year from the date the penalty accrues.  
Section 20. - [Invalid, illegal or incapable provisions.] 
If any term or other provision of the Franchise is determined by an unappealable decision by a court, administrative agency, or arbitrator to be invalid, illegal, or incapable of being enforced by any rule of law or public policy, all other conditions and provisions of the Franchise shall nevertheless remain in full force and effect so long as the economic or legal substance is not affected in any manner materially adverse to either party. Upon such determination that any term or other provision is invalid, illegal, or incapable of being enforced, the parties shall negotiate in good faith to modify the Franchise so as to effect the original intent of the parties as closely as possible.  
Section 21. - [Claims for damages.] 
Subject to Section 15, the Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect and hold the City harmless against all claims for damages or demands for damages to any Person or property by reason of the construction and maintenance of its electricity transmission and distribution System, or in any way growing out of the granting of this Franchise, either directly or indirectly, or by reason of any act, negligence, or nonfeasance of the contractors, agents or employees of the Company, its successors or assigns, and shall refund to the City all sums which it may be adjudged to pay on any such claim, or which may arise or grow out of the exercise of the rights and privileges hereby granted, or by the abuse thereof, and the Company, its successors and assigns, shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from and on account of all damages, costs, expenses, actions, and causes of action, to the extent permitted by the Texas Tort Claims Act, that may accrue to or be brought by any Person, Persons, Company or Companies at any time hereafter by reason of the exercise of the rights and privileges hereby granted, or of the abuse thereof.  
Section 22. - [City regulation.] 
In granting this Franchise, it is understood that the lawful power vested by law in the City to regulate all public utilities within the City, and to regulate the local rates of public utilities within the City, within the limits of the Constitution and laws, and to require all persons or corporations to discharge the duties and undertakings, for the performance of which this Franchise was made, is reserved; and this grant is made subject to all lawful rights, powers and authorities, either of regulation or otherwise, reserved to the City by its Charter or by the general laws of this State.  
Section 23. - [Amendment.] 
This Franchise amends the Prior Franchise, and extends the term of the Prior Franchise for an additional thirty (30) years and replaces all other former franchise agreements with the Company, or its predecessors, which are hereby repealed.  
Section 24. - [Lose, waive, impair powers and rights in the city.] 
The City, by the granting of this Franchise, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the lawful powers and rights, now or hereafter vested in the City under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas and under the Charter of the City to regulate the rates and services of the Company; and the Company, by its acceptance of this Franchise, agrees that all such lawful regulatory powers and rights as the same may be from time to time vested in the City shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the City at any time and from time to time.  
Section 25. - [File.] 
Within 30 days following the final passage and approval of this ordinance, the Company shall file with the City Secretary, accompanied by appropriate authorized corporate resolutions in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, a written statement in the following form signed in its name and behalf: 
"To the Honorable Mayor and the City Council of the City of SOUTH HOUSTON, Texas: 
For itself, its successors and assigns, Grantee, CENTERPOINT ENERGY HOUSTON ELECTRIC, LLC, hereby accepts the attached ordinance and agrees to be bound by all of its terms, conditions and provisions." 
CENTERPOINT ENERGY HOUSTON ELECTRIC, LLC 
By: _____ 
Name: _____ 
Title: _____ 
"Dated this the _______ day of ________ 2006."  
Section 26. - [Published.] 
This Franchise having been published as required by the Texas Local Government Code shall take effect and be in force immediately following its final passage and approval, and receipt by the City of the Company's acceptance filed pursuant to Section 25, in compliance with the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code. The Company shall pay the cost of those publications and any costs associated with any elections held regarding this Franchise required by such provisions.  
Section 27. - [Notice, order, etc. sent by registered or certified mail.] 
Every notice, order, petition, document, or other direction or communication to be served upon the City or the Company shall be deemed sufficiently given if sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. Every such communication to the Company shall be sent to: 
Vice President, Regulatory Relations 
CenterPoint Energy, Inc. 
1111 Louisiana Street 
Houston, Texas 77002 
Unless and until changed by written notice given in accordance with this section, every such communication to the City or the City Council shall be sent to: 
Maria Vega, City Secretary 
City of South Houston 
P. O. Box 238 
1018 Dallas Street 
South Houston, Texas 77587 
and, as applicable, to: 
Joe Soto, Mayor 
City of South Houston 
P. O. Box 238 
1018 Dallas Street 
South Houston, Texas 77587 
The mailing of such notice, direction, or order shall be equivalent to direct personal notice and shall be deemed to have been given the earlier of receipt or two business days after it was mailed.  
Section 28. - [Right and remedies are cumulative.] 
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and not exclusive of any remedies provided by law, and nothing contained in this Franchise shall impair any of the rights of the City or the Company under applicable law, subject in each case to the terms and conditions of this Franchise. 
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ON THE 2 nd DAY OF AUGUST 2006. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      MARIA VEGA, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XIV. - REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES, INC. 
Ordinance No. 2008-07 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS TO OPERATE A SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANTING OF THIS FRANCHISE; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
 
Section 1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
(a)  City is the City of South Houston, Texas. 
(b)  Council is the City Council of South Houston, Texas. 
(c)  Solid Waste whenever used in this Ordinance, shall have the definition as set forth in Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of South Houston, as amended. 
(d)  Grantee is Republic Waste Services, Inc. 
(e)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind.  
Section 2. - Grant of exclusive authority. 
(a)  There is hereby granted by the City to the Grantee, the exclusive right and privilege to collect and dispose of Solid Waste (refuse) for the City of South Houston, except for temporary use of roll-off containers, all as set out in that one certain contract between Grantee and City as passed and approved by the City Council on June 24, 2008, and to use and occupy the streets, alleys and public ways for the purposes set forth therein.  
Section 3. - Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
The Grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of its police power by the City.  
Section 4. - Duration of franchise. 
This franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect for a period of five years, commencing on July 1, 2008; and shall automatically renew for an additional three-year (3) period unless notice is given by either the Service Provider or the City to the other within sixty days prior to the end of the initial five-year (5) period.  
Section 5. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  The Grantee shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from any liability, cost, damage and expense of every character arising out of, or in any manner resulting from or contributed to by, any wrongful or negligent act or omission of Grantee, its agents, servants or employees in the maintenance and operation of its facilities in the City or in the exercise of any right or privilege hereunder. 
(b)  The Grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of this franchise, liability insurance insuring the City, as provided in the aforesaid contract. Evidence of such insurance coverage shall be submitted to the City.  
Section 6. - Forfeitures or transfer of franchise. 
(a)  If the Grantee shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this franchise and should the Grantee continue to violate same for a period of thirty (30) days after Grantee shall have been notified in writing by the City by notice mailed to the Grantee(s address furnished the City by Grantee, to desist from such violation so specified, then the City may terminate and cancel this franchise; provided, however, that the City shall not cancel this franchise if the Grantee is without fault as to the violation; and further provided that this franchise may not be terminated and canceled until after the Grantee first has been provided with adequate opportunity to be heard before the City Council, and then only by ordinance duly adopted by the City Council. It is further provided, however, that should the Grantee be adjudged a bankrupt, then the City, after sixty (60) days written notice to the Grantee, may, if it so desires, terminate and cancel this franchise. 
(b)  The Grantee shall not sell, lease, assign or transfer this franchise without the prior written approval of the City, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, that this franchise may be assigned by the Grantee as security for debt without approval by the City.  
Section 7. - Rates. 
Rates set by the franchise holder shall be listed with the City and available for inspection by the public.  
Section 8. - Payment to the city. 
During the lifetime of this franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the City an annual sum of five percent of the gross fees collected from users of its services in the City. The franchise holder shall file quarterly reports with the City showing its receipts and pay to the City with such report the amount of franchise fee due.  
Section 9. - Acceptance of franchise. 
Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance, Grantee shall file its written acceptance of this ordinance and franchise with the City Secretary, or else this ordinance shall be null and void. Upon this written acceptance by Grantee, this ordinance and franchise shall constitute a contract between the City and Grantee and shall be binding upon both. Such acceptance shall reflect Grantee(s mailing address and Grantee agrees to notify the City of any change of mailing address.  
Section 10. - Severability. 
That the City Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City Council would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.  
Section 11. - Effective date. 
That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption. 
PASSED AT A SPECIAL MEETING OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, HELD ON THE 24TH DAY OF JUNE 2008. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      MARICELA BARRERA, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XV. - CLOVER PRODUCTION COMPANY AND GAS COMPANY 
ORDINANCE NO. 2012-10 
COUNCIL CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, PROVIDING FOR CONSENT TO THE CHANGE OF A FRANCHISE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ORIGINALLY GRANTED TO M & R EXPLORATION COMPANY FOR AN OIL AND GAS PIPELINE, UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 995, DATED MARCH 1, 1994,; PROVIDING THAT TERRY OIL AND GAS COMPANY, D/B/A CLOVER PRODUCTION COMPANY, HAS ACQUIRED 100% OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN THE SYSTEM AND FRANCHISE; PROVIDING THAT THE NEW OWNERSHIP AND FRANCHISEE SHALL BE CALLED CLOVER PRODUCTION COMPANY; INCREASING THE FRANCHISE FEE AND CHARGES ASSESSED FOR VARIOUS PURPOSES AND THEREFORE DIRECTING THE BUILDING OFFICIAL TO ISSUE A PERMIT UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, PASSED IN JUNE 2012; BUT WAIVING THE PERMIT FEE THEREUNDER SINCE NEW FEES ARE CHARGED IN THIS FRANCHISE; PROHIBITING ASSIGNMENT WITHOUT WRITTEN CITY APPROVAL; REQUIRING THE FRANCHISEE TO SIGN THIS FRANCHISE AGREEING TO THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS AND THE ORIGINAL TERMS OF ORDINANCE NO. 995; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
 
Section 1. - . 
The forgoing recitals are approved and incorporated herein by reference.  
Section 2. - . 
The Franchise Authority consents to the Transaction described herein.  
Section 3. - . 
This ordinance shall be deemed effective upon final adoption as soon as the franchisee acknowledges its acceptance of the obligation to be bound by the original ordinance as amended and pays its fees for the franchise.  
Section 4. - . 
This ordinance shall have the force of a continuing agreement and the Franchise Authority shall not amend or otherwise alter this Ordinance without the written consent of the city.  
Section 5. - . 
Section 5 of the original ordinance styled FRANCHISE FEES is hereby amended to read: The grantee (franchisee) shall pay to the city an initial franchise fee upon this transfer of $1,500 and shall thereafter pay an annual fee to the city of $1,000 on the anniversary date of this approval of the transfer. That annual fee of $1,000 may be increased or decreased by resolution of the City Council without the necessity of the passage of another amendment of this ordinance, but any new assignment or sale must be with written city approval. The payment of this initial fee of $1,500, and the payment of any delinquent fees for this franchise to date, whether incurred by this applicant or its predecessor, shall entitle applicant to a permit under Ordinance No. 2012-08, passed in June 2012, without paying any fees called for therein and the payment of the annual fee called for herein shall also exempt franchisee from paying the annual fee in Ordinance No. 2012-08 so long as this franchise is still in effect, but not otherwise. 
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ON THE 26 th DAY OF JUNE 2012. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      BARBARA S. BIGHAM, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XVI. - FAIRWAY ENERGY PARTNERS, LLC 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-03 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING FAIRWAY ENERGY PARTNERS, LLC, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, AND ERECT A 24" PIPELINE (PIPELINE NUMBER ONE OF TWO) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL AND CONDENSATE WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS TO BE FILED WITH THE CITY SECRETARY; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to FAIRWAY ENERGY PARTNERS, LLC, the right, privilege and franchise to construct, install, erect, reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove a 24" pipeline (pipeline number 1 of 2) in a location depicted on the attached Vicinity Map CB-4071-161 within the City of South Houston, Texas, to facilitate the transportation of crude oil and condensate in accordance with the plans and specifications to be filed with the City Secretary. The 24" pipeline shall be designed by the applicant's engineer and then finally submitted to the City's consulting engineer for his review and approval. The applicant's contractor shall have to perform excavation and construction to determine the reuse of same. Without the approval of the City's consulting engineer, the applicant may do no work on the 24" pipeline or the project. The applicant's final engineering/surveying plans and specifications (containing the City's consulting engineer's written approval) shall be filed with the City Secretary. The applicant shall furnish reproducible copies of the final approved drawings. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
APPLICANT: Fairway Energy Partners, LLC 
Three Riverway, Ste. 1550, Houston, TX 77056 
APPLICANT'S ENGINEER: Steve Lalumandier 
APPLICANT'S CONTRACTOR: Duphil, Inc. 
6608 Interstate 10 
Orange, TX 77632 
APPLICANT'S person in charge: 
Name: William E. Rome 
Title: Chief Operating Officer 
E mail: BillRome@fairwaymidstream.com 
Office Phone: 713-559-1962 Cell: 281-415-3819 
Fax: 713-840-1447 
Applicant shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500.00 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee applicant shall pay to the City of South Houston a franchise fee in the amount of $2,000.00, an administration fee for data and inspection of $1,500.00, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000.00 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The franchisee applicant and all work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The franchisee applicant shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 5. - Indemnification. 
In each application for a permit, each person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the construction, installation, replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 24" pipeline by the franchisee applicant, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives.  
Section 6. - Plans and Inspections. 
All work and design shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance with the Plans and Specs on file with the City. City's consulting engineer or his designated inspector or the City building official shall personally inspect the work. Prior notice of the construction activity shall be given to the City before any construction efforts are closed-in or filled. No excavated areas shall be un-barricaded overnight. Any construction changes shall require the approval of the City consulting engineer. City inspection expenses shall be reimbursed by applicant franchisee. The precise location of the 24" pipeline shall be suggested by the applicant franchisee and approved by a City inspector prior to commencement of excavation or digging. The area shall be left and kept at all times clean, neat and presentable and free of rubbish and hazards such as holes or sharp objects.  
Section 7. - Acceptance. 
Applicant franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 23 rd DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XVII. - FAIRWAY ENERGY PARTNERS, LLC 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-04 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING FAIRWAY ENERGY PARTNERS, LLC, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, AND ERECT A 24" PIPELINE (PIPELINE NUMBER TWO OF TWO) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL AND CONDENSATE WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS TO BE FILED WITH THE CITY SECRETARY, PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE, PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to FAIRWAY ENERGY PARTNERS, LLC, the right, privilege and franchise to construct, install, erect, reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove a 24" pipeline (pipeline number 2 of 2) in a location depicted on the attached Vicinity Map CB-4071-161 within the City of South Houston, Texas, in accordance with the plans and specifications to be filed with the City Secretary. The 24" pipeline shall be designed by the applicant's engineer and then finally submitted to the City's consulting engineer for his review and approval. The applicant's contractor shall have to perform excavation and construction to determine the reuse of same. Without the approval of the City's consulting engineer, the applicant may do no work on the 24" pipeline or the project. The applicant's final engineering/surveying plans and specifications (containing the City's consulting engineer's written approval) shall be filed with the City Secretary. The applicant shall furnish reproducible copies of the final approved drawings. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
APPLICANT: Fairway Energy Partners, LLC 
Three Riverway, Ste. 1550, Houston, TX 77056 
APPLICANT'S ENGINEER: Steve Lalumandier 
APPLICANT'S CONTRACTOR: Duphil, Inc. 
6608 Interstate 10 
Orange, TX 77632 
APPLICANT'S person in charge: 
Name: William E. Rome 
Title: Chief Operating Officer 
E mail: BillRome@fairwaymidstream.com 
Office Phone: 713-559-1962 Cell: 281-415-3819 
Fax: 713-840-1447 
Applicant shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500.00 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee applicant shall pay to the City of South Houston a franchise fee in the amount of $2,000.00, an administration fee for data and inspection of $1,500.00, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000.00 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The franchisee applicant and all work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas or the United States of America. The franchisee applicant shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 5. - Indemnification. 
In each application for a permit, each person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the construction, installation, replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 24" pipeline by the franchisee applicant, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives.  
Section 6. - Plans and Inspections. 
All work and design shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance with the Plans and Specs on file with the City. City's consulting engineer or his designated inspector or the City building official shall personally inspect the work. Prior notice of the construction activity shall be given to the City before any construction efforts are closed-in or filled. No excavated areas shall be un-barricaded overnight. Any construction changes shall require the approval of the City consulting engineer. City inspection expenses shall be reimbursed by applicant franchisee. The precise location of the 24" pipeline shall be suggested by the applicant franchisee and approved by a City inspector prior to commencement of excavation or digging. The area shall be left and kept at all times clean, neat and presentable and free of rubbish and hazards such as holes or sharp objects.  
Section 7. - Acceptance. 
Applicant franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 23 rd DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 
 	 
ATTEST: 
	
 	 
\LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS  
ARTICLE XVIII. - REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES, INC. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-14 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 2008-07, GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO REPUBLIC WASTE SERVICES, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, TO OPERATE A SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON; TO RENEW THE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT FROM JULY 1, 2016, THROUGH JUNE 30, 2019; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANTING OF THIS FRANCHISE; CONTAINING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS: 
 
Section 1. 
This Amendment to the City of South Houston, Texas, Franchise Agreement for the Collection, Hauling and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste in the City of South Houston, Texas, (the "Amendment') is made effective as of July 1, 2016, by and between the City of South Houston, Texas (the "City"), and BFI Waste Services of Texas, LP d/b/a Allied Waste Services, Houston Services Group // Republic Services of Houston, qualified to do and actually doing business in the state of Texas (herein called the "Contractor"). The City and the Contractor are referred to in this Agreement collectively as the "Parties" and individually as "Party."  
Section 2. - Recitals. 
A.  The Parties entered into that certain Franchise Agreement for the Collection, Hauling and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste in the City of South Houston, Texas, dated July 1, 2008 (the "Agreement") pursuant to which Contractor agreed to provide solid waste collection and disposal services as set forth in this Agreement; and 
B.  The Parties desire to amend the Agreement pursuant to the terms of this Amendment.  
Section 3. - Amendment. 
Now, therefore, for and in consideration of the respective covenants herein contained, the Parties have agreed as follows: 
• Extension of Term. The term of the Agreement shall be extended for an additional period of three (3) years, and such new term will begin July 1, 2016, and continue through June 30, 2019. 
• Modification of Rates. 
a.  Rates for commercial and industrial services shall be increased by five percent (5%) during each year of the extension of term beginning on January 1, 2017, and continuing through January 1, 2019. 
b.  Rates for residential services shall be increased by three percent (3%) during each year of the extension of term beginning on January 1, 2017, and continuing through January 1, 2019. 
• Recitals. The Recitals set forth above are true and accurate, and are hereby incorporated into this Amendment by this reference. 
• References to Contractor. The Parties agree that all references to "Contractor" in the Agreement, as amended, shall mean BFI Waste Services of Texas, LP. 
• Conflict in Terms. In the case of a conflict in terms between this Amendment and any Contract documents, this Amendment shall prevail. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Amendment in duplicate conformed originals as of the date first set forth above. 
CONTRACTOR: 	CITY: 
BFI Waste Services of Texas, LP. 	City of South Houston, Texas 
By: _______________ 	By: _______________ 
Name: _______________ 	
Name: _______________ 	
Title: _______________ 	Title: _______________ 
  
Section 4. - Severability Clause. 
The Council of the City of South Houston, Texas, does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence(s), clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid, or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that, in such event it would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid, and declares that its intent is to make no portion(s) of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 23 RD DAY OF AUGUST 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XIX. - ENTERPRISE TE PRODUCTS PIPELINE COMPANY, LLC 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-17 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO ENTERPRISE TE PRODUCTS PIPELINE COMPANY, LLC, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 12" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #P103/L2474; CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #7) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF DIESEL, FUEL OIL, AND OTHER LIQUID OR LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to ENTERPRISE TE PRODUCTS PIPELINE COMPANY, LLC, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 12" pipeline (Pipeline company line #P103/L2474, City designated pipeline #7) in a location described as "in the Pipeline Corridor along the west side of 7th street, from the south City limit to the north City limit, the 7th pipeline east from the "west Pipeline Corridor easement line" within the City of South Houston, Texas, to facilitate the transportation of diesel, fuel oil, and other liquid or liquefied petroleum products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: Enterprise TE Products Pipeline Company, LLC 
c/o Enterprise Products Company 
Attention: Land Department (L2474) 
P.O. Box 4324 
Houston, Texas 77210 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: Michael D. Brown 
Title: Agent & Attorney-In-Fact 
E mail: leases@eprod.com 
Office Phone: 281-887-3305 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000; and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 12" pipeline by the franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the 27 th day of SEPTEMBER 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XX. - KINDER MORGAN TEJAS PIPELINE, LLC 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-18 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO KINDER MORGAN TEJAS PIPELINE, LLC, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 12" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #202-400, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #8) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to KINDER MORGAN TEJAS PIPELINE, LLC, the right, privilege and franchise to, reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 12" pipeline (Pipeline company line #202-400, City designated pipeline #8) in a location described as "in the Pipeline Corridor along the west side of 7th street, from the south City limit to the north City limit, the 3rd pipeline west from the "East Pipeline Corridor easement" within the City of South Houston, Texas; to facilitate the transportation of natural gas. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: Kinder Morgan Tejas Pipeline, LLC 
001 Louisiana Street, Suite 1000 
Houston, Texas 77002 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: Daniel G. Gredvig 
Title: Attorney-in-fact 
E mail: dan_gredvig@kindermorgan.com 
Office Phone: 713-420-4061 
Fax: 713-667-7628 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 12" pipeline by the franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the 27 th day of SEPTEMBER 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XXI. - INEOS CHOCOLATE BAYOU PIPELINE, LLC 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-24 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO INEOS CHOCOLATE BAYOU PIPELINE, LLC, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 14" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #INS-AJCB, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #10) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF ETHANE WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to INEOS CHOCOLATE BAYOU PIPELINE, LLC, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 14" pipeline (Pipeline company line #INS-AJCB, City designated pipeline #10) in a location described as "in the Pipeline Corridor along the west side of 7th street, from the south City limit to the north City limit, the 1st pipeline west from the "East Pipeline Corridor easement boundary" within the City of South Houston, Texas; to facilitate the transportation of Ethane. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: INEOS Chocolate Bayou Pipeline, LLC 
P.O. Box 1488 
Alvin, Texas 77512-1488 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: Rich O'Connor 
Title: Vice President and Pipeline System Manager 
E mail: Annette.vogel@ineos.com 
Office Phone: 281-581-3344 
Fax: 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 14" pipeline by the franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary. In lieu of the written 15-day notice being required on the insurance certificate as required in Ordinance 2012-08 Section 7(b), INEOS Chocolate Bayou Pipeline, LLC will provide the written notice of cancellation of insurance within 15 days of cancellation.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the 25 th day of OCTOBER 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XXII. - ENTERPRISE HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, L.P. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-25 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO ENTERPRISE HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, L.P., THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 24" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #OTH14/L3248, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #9) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL AND OTHER LIQUID OR LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to ENTERPRISE HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, L.P., the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 24" pipeline (Pipeline company line #OTH14/L3248, City designated pipeline #9) in a location described as "in the Pipeline Corridor along the west side of 7th Street, from the south City limit to the north City limit, the 2nd pipeline west from the "East Pipeline Corridor easement boundary" within the City of South Houston, Texas; to facilitate the transportation of crude oil and other liquid or liquified petroleum products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: Enterprise Houston Ship Channel, L.P. 
c/o Enterprise Products Company 
Attn: Land Department (L3248) 
P.O. Box 4324 
Houston, Texas 77210 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: Paul D. Lair 
Title: Agent & Attorney-in-Fact 
E mail: leases@eprod.com 
Office Phone: 713-381-6500 
Fax: 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee previously paid a construction fee of $6,275.96, and an administrative fee of $1,500 (Ordinance No. 2012-08, Section 17 - Oil Tanking, L.P., now Enterprise Houston Ship Channel, L.P., construction permit #000061506). Franchisee has agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 24" pipeline by the franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the 25 th day of OCTOBER 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XXIII. - SHELL PIPELINE COMPANY, LP, HOPE HOUSTON LINE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-28 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO SHELL PIPELINE COMPANY, LP (HOPE-HOUSTON PIPELINE), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 10" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #HOPE-HOUSTON, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #17) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS OR PETROLEUM PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to SHELL PIPELINE COMPANY, LP, HOPE HOUSTON LINE, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 10" pipeline (Pipeline company line #Hope-Houston, City designated pipeline #17) in a location described as "along the north side of Genoa Street from west city limits to east city limits within the City of South Houston, Texas; to facilitate the transportation of natural gas or petroleum products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: Shell Pipeline Company, LP 
P.O. Box 2648 
Houston, Texas 77252 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: Clarinda Maldonado 
Title: Attorney-in-fact 
E mail: rick.gardiner@shell.com 
Office Phone: 713-241-4689 
Fax: 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 10" pipeline by the franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary. In lieu of the written 15-day notice being required on the insurance certificate as required in Ordinance No. 2012-08, Section 7(b), Shell Pipeline Company, LP, will provide the written notice of cancellation of insurance within 15 days of cancellation.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the 22nd day of NOVEMBER 2016. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE XXIV. - TPC GROUP, LLC  
DIVISION 1. - TPC GROUP, LLC (TPC 4-1 PIPELINE) 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-01 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO TPC GROUP, LLC (TPC 4-1 PIPELINE), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 4" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #TPC 4-1, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #18) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF BUTENE PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to TPC Group, LLC, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 4" pipeline (Pipeline company line #TPC 4-1, City designated pipeline #18) in a location described as "entering the City at intersection of Winkler Drive and Canniff Road and continuing south within the western edge of the Canniff Road right-of-way, thence southeast parallel and south of Alabama Avenue, thence east within the southern edge of Genoa Street, thence south and exiting the City limits at or near Genoa Street and Hwy. 3 within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of Butene products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: TPC Group, LLC 
c/o Buckeye Development & Logistics, LLC - Daniel Mangum 
   (Name) 
One Greenway Plaza Suite 600 
Houston, TX 77046 
   (Address) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Shelly Heuser, Senior Vice President, TPC Group, LLC 
E mail: 	dmangum@buckeye.com 
Office Phone: 	832-325-1626 
Fax: 	832-214-6949 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
Ordinance No. 378, dated March 19, 1956, granted the original pipeline owner, Petro Tex Chemical, the right to install and operate this pipeline. This ordinance will bring the current owner, TPC Group, LLC into compliance with Ordinance No. 2012-08 (new pipeline ordinance). The Franchisee has paid $1,000 for 2016 annual fees due under Ordinance No. 2012-08 and shall pay to the City of South Houston an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 4" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This Franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  10th  day of JANUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By:  Shelly Heuser, Senior Vice President, TPC Group, LLC 
  (Printed Name and Title)  
DIVISION 2. - TPC GROUP, LLC (TPC 5-1 PIPELINE) 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-02 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO TPC GROUP, LLC (TPC 5-1 PIPELINE), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 6" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #TPC 5-1, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #19) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF BUTADIENE PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to TPC Group, LLC, the right, privilege and Franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 6" pipeline (Pipeline company line #TPC 5-1, City designated pipeline #19) in a location described as "entering the City at intersection of Winkler Drive and Canniff Road and continuing south within the western edge of the Canniff Road right-of-way, thence southeast parallel and south of Alabama Avenue, thence east within the southern edge of Genoa Street, thence south and exiting the City limits at or near Genoa Street and Hwy. 3 within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of Butadiene products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: TPC Group, LLC 
c/o Buckeye Development & Logistics, LLC - Daniel Mangum 
   (Name) 
One Greenway Plaza Suite 600 
Houston, TX 77046 
   (Address) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Shelly Heuser, Senior Vice President, TPC Group, LLC 
E mail: 	dmangum@buckeye.com 
Office Phone: 	832-325-1626 
Fax: 	832-214-6949 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
Ordinance No. 378, dated March 19, 1956, granted the original pipeline owner, Petro Tex Chemical, the right to install and operate this pipeline. This ordinance will bring the current owner, TPC Group, LLC, into compliance with Ordinance No. 2012-08 (new pipeline ordinance). The Franchisee has paid $1,000 for 2016 annual fees due under Ordinance No. 2012-08 and shall pay to the City of South Houston an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 6" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This Franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  10th  day of JANUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By:  Shelly Heuser, Senior Vice President, TPC Group, LLC 
  (Printed Name and Title)  
DIVISION 3. - TPC GROUP, LLC (TPC 6-1 PIPELINE) 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-03 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO TPC GROUP, LLC (TPC 6-1 PIPELINE), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 4" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #TPC 6-1, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #20) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to TPC Group, LLC, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 4" pipeline (Pipeline company line #TPC 6-1, City designated pipeline #20) in a location described as "entering the City at intersection of Winkler Drive and Canniff Road and continuing south within the western edge of the Canniff Road right-of-way, thence southeast parrellel and south of Alabama Avenue, thence east within the southern edge of Genoa Street, thence south and exiting the City limits at or near Genoa Street and Hwy. 3 within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of natural gas products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee: TPC Group, LLC 
c/o Buckeye Development & Logistics, LLC - Daniel Mangum 
   (Name) 
One Greenway Plaza Suite 600 
Houston, TX 77046 
   (Address) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Shelly Heuser, Senior Vice President, TPC Group, LLC 
E mail: 	dmangum@buckeye.com 
Office Phone: 	832-325-1626 
Fax: 	832-214-6949 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
Ordinance 378, dated March 19, 1956, granted the original pipeline owner, Petro Tex Chemical, the right to install and operate this pipeline. This ordinance will bring the current owner, TPC Group, LLC, into compliance with Ordinance No. 2012-08 (new pipeline ordinance). The Franchisee has paid $1,000 for 2016 annual fees due under Ordinance No. 2012-08 and shall pay to the City of South Houston an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 4" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This Franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  10th  day of JANUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By:  Shelly Heuser, Senior Vice President, TPC Group, LLC 
  (Printed Name and Title)  
ARTICLE XXV. - MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP  
DIVISION 1. - MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, GENOA-SPEED JUNCTION PIPELINE (#7030) 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-10 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP (GENOA-SPEED JUNCTION PIPELINE 1 OF 2), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 24" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #7030, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #1) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, GENOA-SPEED JUNCTION PIPELINE 1 of 2, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 24" pipeline (Pipeline company line #7030, City designated pipeline #1) in a location described as "along the pipeline corridor on the west side of 7 th street more specifically described as the 1 st pipeline east of the west easement line of the pipeline corridor from the south city limits to the north city limits within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of crude oil products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee:  Magellan Pipeline Holdings, LP 
   (Name) 
One Williams Center (Attn: R.E.) 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74172 
   ( Address ) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Bob Miller 
Title: 	Supervisor R.E. 
E mail: 	bob.miller@magellanlp.com 
Office Phone: 	918-574-7393 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 24" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  28th  day of FEBRUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By: Michael Pearson, V.P. 
(Printed Name and Title)  
DIVISION 2. - MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, SPEED JUNCTION-GENOA JUNCTION (#7055) 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-11 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP (GENOA-SPEED JUNCTION PIPELINE 2 OF 2), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 24" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #7055, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #2) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, SPEED JUNCTION-GENOA JUNCTION, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 24" pipeline (Pipeline company line #7055, City designated pipeline #2) in a location described as "along the pipeline corridor on the west side of 7 th street, more specifically described as the 2 nd pipeline east of the west easement line of the pipeline corridor from the south city limits to the north city limits within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of crude oil products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee:  Magellan Pipeline Holdings, LP 
   (Name) 
One Williams Center (Attn: R.E.) 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74172 
   ( Address ) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Bob Miller 
Title: 	Supervisor R.E. 
E mail: 	bob.miller@magellanlp.com 
Office Phone: 	918-574-7393 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 24" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of transfer of ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  28th  day of FEBRUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By: Michael Pearson, V.P. 
(Printed Name and Title)  
DIVISION 3. - MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, BRIDGETEX-E. HOUSTON 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-12 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP (BRIDGETEX- E. HOUSTON), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 24" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #7050, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #4) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, BRIDGETEX-E. HOUSTON, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 24" pipeline (Pipeline company line #7050, City designated pipeline #4) in a location described as "along the pipeline corridor on the west side of 7 th street, more specifically described as the 4 th pipeline east of the west easement line of the pipeline corridor from the south city limits to the north city limits within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of crude oil products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee:  Magellan Pipeline Holdings, LP 
   (Name) 
One Williams Center (Attn: R.E.) 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74172 
   ( Address ) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Bob Miller 
Title: 	Supervisor R.E. 
E mail: 	bob.miller@magellanlp.com 
Office Phone: 	918-574-7393 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee was granted authority to install this pipeline under Ordinance No. 2012-08, Section 17, and has paid all annual franchise fees through 2016. The name was changed from Oil Tanking, L.P. to Bridgetex Pipeline Company, LLC under Ordinance No. 2013-22. The Franchisee shall hereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 24" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This Franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of Transfer of Ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  28th  day of FEBRUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By: Michael Pearson, V.P. 
(Printed Name and Title)  
DIVISION 4. - MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, E. HOUSTON-WEST COLUMBIA 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-13 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP (E. HOUSTON-WEST COLUMBIA), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 16" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #6959, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #5) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF REFINED CRUDE OIL PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, E. HOUSTON-WEST COLUMBIA, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 16" pipeline (Pipeline company line #6959, City designated pipeline #5) in a location described as "along the pipeline corridor on the west side of 7 th street, more specifically described as the 5 th pipeline east of the west easement line of the pipeline corridor from the south city limits to the north city limits within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of refined crude oil products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee:  Magellan Pipeline Holdings, LP 
   (Name) 
One Williams Center (Attn: R.E.) 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74172 
   ( Address ) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Bob Miller 
Title: 	Supervisor R.E. 
E mail: 	bob.miller@magellanlp.com 
Office Phone: 	918-574-7393 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 16" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This Franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of Transfer of Ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  28th  day of FEBRUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By: Michael Pearson, V.P. 
(Printed Name and Title)  
DIVISION 5. - MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, LOGAN-PASADENA PIPELINE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-14 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP (LOGAN-PASADENA PIPELINE), THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO REUSE, REPLACE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND REMOVE AN EXISTING 12" PIPELINE (PIPELINE COMPANY LINE #7000, CITY DESIGNATED PIPELINE LINE #13) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF REFINED CRUDE OIL PRODUCTS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to MAGELLAN PIPELINE HOLDINGS, LP, LOGAN-PASADENA PIPELINE, the right, privilege and franchise to reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove an existing 12" pipeline (Pipeline company line #7000, City designated pipeline #13) in a location described as "along the west side of Allen-Genoa Road from the south city limits to the north city limits within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of crude oil products. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee:  Magellan Pipeline Holdings, LP 
   (Name) 
One Williams Center (Attn: R.E.) 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74172 
   ( Address ) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Bob Miller 
Title: 	Supervisor R.E. 
E mail: 	bob.miller@magellanlp.com 
Office Phone: 	918-574-7393 
 
Franchisee shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. Failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee shall pay to the City of South Houston an initial administrative fee in the amount of $1,500. Franchisee has also agreed to pay $2,000 for two previous years' annual fees plus the current year's annual fee of $1,000, and shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee's work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
The Franchisee shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 12" pipeline by the Franchisee, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of Transfer of Ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  28th  day of FEBRUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By: Michael Pearson, V.P. 
(Printed Name and Title)  
ARTICLE XXVI. - ENTERPRISE HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, L.P., ECHO TO EHT SYSTEM 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-15 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AUTHORITY UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 2012-08, CHAPTER 19, SECTION 19-5, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, ENTITLED "INSTALLATION OF PIPELINES" (PIPELINE ORDINANCE) TO ENTERPRISE HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, L.P., (ECHO TO EHT SYSTEM) THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, AND ERECT A 30" PIPELINE (ENTERPRISE PIPELINE #C130, CITY PIPELINE #21) TO FACILITATE THE TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE OIL AND CONDENSATE WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS TO BE FILED WITH THE CITY SECRETARY; PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL FEE; PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SAID RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE IS GRANTED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTANCE THEREOF 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH HOUSTON, TEXAS, THAT: 
 
Section 1. - Franchise. 
The City Council (hereinafter called "CITY") hereby grants to ENTERPRISE HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, L.P., ECHO TO EHT SYSTEM, the right, privilege and franchise to construct, install, erect, reuse, replace, maintain, operate and remove a 30" pipeline (company pipeline #C130, City pipeline #21) in a location described as "along the pipeline corridor on the west side of 7 th street, more specifically described as the 2 nd pipeline west of the east easement line of the pipeline corridor from the south city limits to the north city limits within the City of South Houston, Texas"; to facilitate the transportation of crude oil and condensate in accordance with the plans and specifications to be filed with the City Secretary. The 30" pipeline shall be designed by the applicant's engineer and then finally submitted to the City's consulting engineer for his review and approval. Without the approval of the City 's consulting engineer, the applicant may do no work on the 30" pipeline or the project. The applicant's final engineering/surveying plans and specifications (containing the City's consulting engineer's written approval) shall be filed with the City Secretary. The applicant shall furnish reproducible copies of the final approved drawings. THIS IS ONLY A FRANCHISE FOR THE UNDERGROUND FACILITY AND NOT FOR ANY PIPELINE EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS ABOVE-GROUND SAVE AND EXCEPT WARNING SIGNS WHICH SHALL BE ABOVE-GROUND.  
Section 2. - General Information. 
Franchisee:  Enterprise Houston Ship Channel, L.P. 
   (Name) 
c/o Enterprise Products Company 
Attention: Land Department (Line C130) 
P.O. Box 4324 
Houston, Texas 77210-4324 
   ( Address ) 
Franchisee's person in charge: 
Name: 	Mark D. Tausend 
Title: 	Attorney-in-fact 
E mail: 	mtaylor@mphine.com 
Office Phone: 	713-219-4406 
 
Applicants Engineer: 
TRC Pipeline Services, LLC 
2087 E. 71st Street 
Tulsa, OK 74136 
Phone Number: (918) 496-0400 
Company Contact (PE): Justin T. Johnson 
Company Contact's email: jtjohnson@trcsolutions.com 
Applicant's Contractor: 
The applicant shall notify the City within thirty (30) days after selecting the contractor that will install the pipeline. 
Applicant shall keep current the above information and shall promptly notify the City Secretary in writing of any changes. failure to comply with same shall carry a penalty of $500.00 per occurrence.  
Section 3. - Franchise Fees. 
The Franchisee applicant shall pay to the City of South Houston pursuant to Ordinance 2012-08 a construction fee in the amount of $6,268 which represents the fee per linear foot for new construction, an administrative fee in the amount of $1,500 and $1,000 for the first year's franchise fee. The total fees are $8,768. The Franchisee shall thereafter pay an annual fee of $1,000.00 on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 4. - Laws, Regulations, Rules and Permits. 
The Franchisee applicant and all work done under the grant of authority contained herein shall be governed by all present and future laws, rules or regulations of this City, the State of Texas, or the United States of America. The Franchisee applicant shall obtain and keep current at its expense all permits and licenses required by law for so long as they are required. This franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 5. - Indemnification and Insurance. 
In each application for a permit, each person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued shall indemnify and hold the CITY harmless from any liability, cost, damage, attorney's fees or costs of any kind resulting from the construction, installation, replacement, maintenance, operation and removal of the 30" pipeline by the Franchisee applicant, its LICENSED OPERATORS, agents, independent contractors or representatives. The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of the Franchise maintain comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of $3,000,000, as it pertains to a public street, alley or other public way or easement. A certificate of insurance specifying the coverage shall be kept on file with the City Secretary.  
Section 6. - Term. 
This Franchise is granted for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of adoption by City Council.  
Section 7. - Notice of Transfer of Ownership. 
Notice of transfer of ownership must be promptly given by the new owner to the City Secretary in each instance of the transfer of ownership of the pipeline. This Franchise is not transferrable without the written consent of the City.  
Section 8. - Plans and Inspections. 
All work and design shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance with the Plans and Specs on file with the City. City's consulting engineer or his designated inspector or the City building official shall personally inspect the work. Prior notice of the construction activity shall be given to the City before any construction efforts are closed-in or filled. No excavated areas shall be un-barricaded overnight. any construction changes shall require the approval of the City consulting engineer. City inspection expenses shall be reimbursed by applicant Franchisee. The precise location of the 30" pipeline shall be suggested by the applicant Franchisee and approved by a City inspector prior to commencement of excavation or digging. The area shall be left and kept at all times clean, neat, and presentable and free of rubbish and hazards such as holes or sharp objects.  
Section 9. - Acceptance. 
Applicant Franchisee shall file its written acceptance of this Franchise with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days of final passage and shall thereupon be bound by the terms and conditions. 
PASSED and APPROVED this the  28th  day of FEBRUARY 2017. 
	      JOE SOTO, MAYOR 
      City of South Houston, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      LANCE AVANT, CITY SECRETARY 
      City of South Houston, Texas 	
 	 
Franchisee hereby accepts the terms and conditions of this Franchise the __ day of _______, 2017. 
Written Acceptance: 
______________________________ 
By:  Marc D. Tausend, Attorney-in-fact 
(Printed Name and Title) 
