7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/248
City of Slaton
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 7
This code contains all ordinances deemed advisable to be included in this Code of Ordinances as enacted
through Ordinance 803 adopted 9/13/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Slaton, Texas, as compiled, edited and published
by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Slaton, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city commission, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
city commission:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/248
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Slaton, Texas.
City administrator, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words “city administrator,” “city
secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city
administrator, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the
city.
Commission. Whenever the term “commission” or “city commission” or “the commission” is used, it shall mean
the city commission of the City of Slaton, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Lubbock, Texas.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time as may be in current use in the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Property. The word “property” means and includes real and personal property.
Real property. The term “real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/248
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall
be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in the code
of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city commission for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of,
or additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during
the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall
be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/248
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
articles or sections inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful
or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00). However, a fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that
governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this code or of
any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is designated
as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition
to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive
relief and revocation of licenses or permits. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Penalty for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001.
Sec. 1.01.010 Labor on public works–Authorized
A justice or judge shall have the right and authority to compel any person offending against this code or any
ordinance of the city and found guilty in the municipal court, and sentenced to pay a fine, to labor on the streets
and other public works in the city in default of the payment of such fine. (1978 Code, sec. 1-7; Ordinance
adopting Code)
State law reference–Community service in satisfaction of fine or costs, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.049.
Sec. 1.01.011 Same–Pay
Any such person so found guilty and put to work on such streets or public works shall be allowed the sum as
provided in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, article 45.049, for such labor, which sum shall be applied on
the amount of the fine. (1978 Code, sec. 1-8; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Community service in satisfaction of fine or costs, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.049.
Sec. 1.01.012 Burden of proving exception, excuse, etc., in prosecution for violation of code
In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this code, upon proof of the provision of the code, it shall
not be necessary to negate any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in the code, and the burden of
proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant. (1978 Code, sec. 1-12)
ARTICLE 1.02 ELECTIONS*
Sec. 1.02.001 Effect of state law
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/248
All elections pertaining to affairs of the city shall be governed by and conducted in accordance with the election
laws of the state, specifically, V.T.C.A., Election Code. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.002 Ward descriptions
(a) Ward I. Beginning at the north line of Division Street at the point of the west city limits; then extending
east along the mid-line of Division Street to the extended mid-line of 20th Street; then north along the mid-line
of 20th Street to the extended mid-line of Crosby Street; then east along the mid-line of Crosby Street to the
mid-line of 12th Street; then south along the mid-line of 12th Street to the mid-line of Lynn Street; then east
along the mid-line of Lynn Street to the mid-line of 10th Street; then south along the mid-line of 10th Street to
the mid-line of Floyd Street, then west along the mid-line of Floyd Street to a point where the mid-line of Floyd
Street intersects the mid-line of Division Street and the extended mid-line of 11th Street; then south along the
mid-line of 11th Street to the mid-line of Geneva Street; then west along the mid-line of Geneva Street to the
mid-line of 16th Street; then south along the mid-line of 16th Street to the south right-of-way line of Powers
Street; then west along the south right-of-way line of Powers Street to the right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 84;
then southeast along the north right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 84 to the mid-line of 9th Street; then south
across U.S. Highway 84 along the mid-line of 9th Street to the south city limits; then westerly and northwesterly
along the southwest line of the city limits to the point of beginning.
(b) Ward II. Beginning at the north line of Division Street at the point of the west city limits; then extending
east along the mid-line of Division Street to the extended mid-line of 20th Street; then north along the mid-line
of 20th Street to the extended mid-line of Crosby Street; then east along the mid-line of Crosby Street to the
mid-line of Panhandle Street; extending that line along the mid-line of Crosby Street as it crosses Panhandle
Street to the mid-line of 11th Street, then north along the mid-line of 11th Street to the mid-line of Hale Street;
then northeasterly along the mid-line of Hale Street to the mid-line of 9th Street; then northerly along the midline
of 9th Street to the south right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 84; then northwesterly along the south right-ofway
line of U.S. Highway 84 to a point where the extended east line of 12th Street would cross the south rightof-
way line of U.S. Highway 84; then directly across U.S. Highway 84 to the north city limits and then
continuing westerly and following the north and west line of the city limits to the point of beginning.
(c) Ward III. Beginning at a point in the mid-line of Panhandle Street where it crosses the mid-line of Crosby
Street to the mid-line of 11th Street; then north along the mid-line of 11th Street to the mid-line of Hale Street;
then northeasterly along the mid-line of Hale Street to the mid-line of 9th Street; then northerly along the midline
of 9th Street to the south right-of-way of U.S. Highway 84; then northwesterly along the south right-of-way
line of U.S. Highway 84 to a point where the extended east line of 12th Street would cross that south right-ofway
line of U.S. Highway 84; then directly across U.S. Highway 84 to the north city limits; then continuing
southeasterly along the line of the city limits to the extended mid-line of Division Street; then west along the
mid-line of Division Street to the mid-line of New Mexico Street; then south along the mid-line of New Mexico
Street to the mid-line of Geneva Street; then west along the mid-line of Geneva Street to the mid-line of 11th
Street; then north along the mid-line of 11th Street to the mid-line of Division Street; then east along the midline
of Floyd Street to the mid-line of 10th Street; and then north along the mid-line of 10th Street to the point of
beginning.
(d) Ward IV. All the southeast portion of the city lying south and east of ward I, as described, and south of
ward III.
(Ordinance 739 adopted 11/14/11)
Charter reference–Original descriptions and authority to change, art. VI, sec. 3.
ARTICLE 1.03 CITY COMMISSION*
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/248
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Mayor
Sec. 1.03.031 Emergency powers of mayor–Generally; calling special police force
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary, in order to enforce the laws of the city and to avert danger to
persons or property or to suppress a riot or outbreak or calamity, or to prevent a public disturbance, or when he
has good reason to believe or well grounded fears of any serious violation of law or ordinance or any outbreak or
any other danger of a serious character to the city or the inhabitants thereof which cannot be controlled by the
regular city police force, he shall cause to be summoned into service a special police force of such numbers, as
in his judgment may be necessary for the preservation of the peace and good order of the city; and such special
police, while in service, shall be subject to the orders of the mayor and shall perform such duties as he may
require, and while on duty shall have the same power and authority as are conferred upon the regular city police
officers under the law; and any person so summoned and failing to appear or obey such summons, or failing to
perform any duty required hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1978 Code, sec. 2-1)
Charter reference–Emergency powers of mayor generally, art. VI, sec. 13.
Sec. 1.03.032 Same–Closing public places
The mayor shall have authority, in cases of riot or serious outbreak, or disturbance of the peace, with the view to
preserve the peace and good order in the city, to order and enforce the closing of any theater, ballroom,
restaurant, or other public house, and may arrest in person or cause the arrest of any person refusing to obey
such orders. (1978 Code, sec. 2-2)
Secs. 1.03.033–1.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Meetings*
Sec. 1.03.061 Continuing or adjourning meetings
All meetings may be continued or adjourned; provided, a special meeting shall not be continued beyond the date
and time of the next regular meeting. (1978 Code, sec. 2-21)
Sec. 1.03.062 Reading and acting on reports of expenditures
All reports of expenditures shall be approved or disapproved at the regular commission meetings. (1978 Code,
sec. 2-23)
ARTICLE 1.04 ADMINISTRATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.04.001 City seal
The corporate seal of the city shall be an impression showing the word “seal” enclosed by the words “City of
Slaton, County of Lubbock, Texas” in a circle. (1978 Code, sec. 1-13)
Sec. 1.04.002 City maps
The city engineer shall provide two (2) identical maps of the city, which shall truly reflect the boundaries of the
city. One map shall be placed in the office of the city engineer and the other map shall be placed in the office of
the city secretary and each shall be placed on a wall or on a convenient stand so as to be immediately accessible
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/248
to any person desiring information reflected thereby. In the event any territory is annexed to the city, the city
engineer shall immediately correct each map so as to add thereto the additional territory, indicating on each of
the maps the date of the annexation, the number of the ordinances by which the annexation was accomplished
and a reference to the minutes or the ordinance records of the city where such instrument is recorded in full.
(1978 Code, sec. 1-14)
Sec. 1.04.003 Legal services
(a) The office of city attorney is hereby abolished.
(b) The city commission may hereafter employ an attorney on a contractual basis to assist the commission in
the performance of governmental functions, such attorney to be subject to discharge at any time by vote of a
majority of the city commission.
(1978 Code, sec. 2-7)
Secs. 1.04.004–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. City Administrator*
Sec. 1.04.031 Appointment; function
The governing body shall appoint a city administrator, who shall be the administrative head of the municipal
government under the direction and supervision of the governing body. (1978 Code, sec. 2-30)
Sec. 1.04.032 Residence
The city administrator may or may not be a resident of the city when appointed, but during the term of his office
he shall reside in the city. (1978 Code, sec. 2-31)
State law reference–Residency requirements for municipal employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 151.021.
Sec. 1.04.033 Term of office
(a) The city administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the
will of the governing body. Upon discharge, the administrator shall be entitled to and shall receive one day's pay
for each full month of service as city administrator as a severance allowance. This allowance shall be payable
only in the event discharge does not follow, and is not based upon, a final conviction for an offense involving
moral turpitude and arising out of misconduct in the office.
(b) The rate of pay shall be based upon the average daily wage during the last 120 days of service.
(c) Payment shall be made no later than the tenth (10th) day of the month following discharge and, if not then
paid, shall bear interest at a rate of interest equal to the prime rate of Citizens Bank of Lubbock County, or its
successor, as established from time to time.
(Ordinance 517, sec. 2-32, adopted 1/8/90)
Sec. 1.04.034 Absence or disability
During the absence or disability of the city administrator, the governing body shall designate some properly
qualified person to perform the duties of said office. (1978 Code, sec. 2-33)
Sec. 1.04.035 Compensation and bond
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/248
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the governing body shall fix from time to time by
ordinance and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the governing body, the premium to be paid
by the city. (1978 Code, sec. 2-34)
Sec. 1.04.036 Powers and duties
The powers and duties of the city administrator shall be:
(1) To devote all of his working time and attention to the affairs of the city, and be responsible to
the governing body for the efficient administration of its affairs.
(2) To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
(3) With the advice of the governing body, to appoint and remove all heads of departments. He
shall have the power to appoint and remove all subordinate employees.
(4) To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the governing body or that
may hereafter be created by the governing body.
(5) To attend all meetings of the governing body with the right to take part in the discussion, but
having no vote; and he shall be notified of all special meetings of the governing body.
(6) To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public
utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to
call the same to the attention of the governing body.
(7) To act as budget officer and as such to prepare and submit to the governing body, prior to the
beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as
much detail as practicable the estimated amounts required by months for the efficient operation of
each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures.
(8) The city administrator, in addition to the foregoing subsection (7), shall make and file a budget
as required by state law.
(9) To make a full written report to the governing body as soon after the close of each month's
accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding
month, and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the allowances made
for such departments in the annual budget, and to keep the governing body fully advised at all times
as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
(10) To act as purchasing agent for the city, and to purchase all merchandise, materials and
supplies needed by the city, and establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such supplies shall
be kept and from which same shall be issued as needed; and to adopt such rules and regulations
governing requisitions and transaction of business between himself as such purchasing agent and the
heads of the departments, officers and employees of the city as the governing body may approve.
(11) To recommend to the governing body the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and
subordinate employee of the city; and it shall be the duty of the governing body to pass ordinances or
resolutions, from time to time, fixing rates of compensation.
(12) To recommend to the governing body, in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such
measures as he may deem necessary or expedient.
(13) To do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the
governing body.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/248
(1978 Code, sec. 2-35)
ARTICLE 1.05 FINANCE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.05.001 Fiscal year
The fiscal year of the city shall begin with the first day of October of each year and shall end with the thirtieth
day of September of the following year. (1978 Code, sec. 11-1)
State law reference–City fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
Sec. 1.05.002 Accounting system adopted; accepted principles
A system of accounting for the city's assets, liabilities, revenues and expenditures is hereby adopted. Generally
accepted accounting principles for municipalities are to be applied. (1978 Code, sec. 11-6)
Charter references–Accounting procedure, art. VI, sec. 31; required audits, art. VI, sec. 32.
Sec. 1.05.003 Processing fees for payment by credit cards
(a) The city secretary, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to accept payment by credit card for a fee,
fine, court cost or other service charge imposed by all city departments.
(b) The city secretary, or his/her designee, shall collect a processing fee for payments made by credit card.
The processing fee shall equal three percent (3%) of the amount of the fee, fine, court costs or other charge being
paid.
(c) If the payment by credit card for the fee, fine, court cost or other service charge is not honored by the
credit card company on which the funds are drawn, the city secretary, or his/her designee, shall collect a service
charge from the person who owes the charge. The service charge is in addition to the original fee, fine, court
costs, or other service charge and is for the collection of that original amount. The amount of the service charge
shall equal the fee charged for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds.
(d) The city secretary, or his/her designee, shall deposit all processing fees and service charges in the general
fund of the city.
(Ordinance 714 adopted 12/9/08)
Secs. 1.05.004–1.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Purchases and Sales*
Sec. 1.05.031 Competitive bids
It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent to give opportunity for competition on purchases and sales, except
when the nature of the purchase or sale is such that competition is impossible or impracticable. All purchases in
excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), except of real estate or rights or easements therein, shall be by
contract to the lowest responsible bidder, and all sales in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), except of
real estate or rights or easements therein, shall be made to the highest bidder after public notice and the receipt
of sealed bids, unless the governing body, by ordinance, determines that it is impossible or impracticable to
purchase or sell in such manner. All sealed bids received shall be opened in public and thereafter shall be subject
to public inspection. The purchasing agent may reject all bids and readvertise for new bids. The purchasing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/248
agent may require successful bidders to furnish security conditioned upon the faithful performance of their
contract and/or conditioned upon the payment of the wages and compensation of all laborers employed on work
for which a contract is made by the contractor, subcontractor, agent or any other person. (1978 Code, sec. 11-2)
Charter reference–Required bidding on certain contracts, execution of contracts, art. VI, sec. 33.
Sec. 1.05.032 Emergency contracts and purchases
In case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency, the city administrator may, with the consent of
the governing body, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by said
accident or avoiding said public emergency; but immediately afterwards he shall file with the mayor a certificate
showing such emergency and the necessity of such action together with an itemized account of all expenditures.
(1978 Code, sec. 11-3)
Secs. 1.05.033–1.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Economic Development Corporation
Sec. 1.05.061 Articles of incorporation adopted
The proposed articles of incorporation of the Slaton Economic Development Corporation, attached to Ordinance
581 as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference as a part hereof for all purposes, are hereby approved, and
the city commission hereby authorizes the filing of the articles of incorporation with the secretary of state in
accordance with the act (Vernon's Ann. Civil St., art. 5190.6, sec. 4A). (Ordinance 581, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/00)
Editor's note–The articles of incorporation of the Slaton Economic Development Corporation attached to Ordinance 581 are on file in
the city secretary's office.
Sec. 1.05.062 Bylaws adopted
The bylaws of the Slaton Economic Development Corporation attached to Ordinance 581 as exhibit B and
incorporated herein by reference as a part hereof for all purposes are hereby approved and may be adopted as
submitted at any corporation meeting held after the issuance of a charter by the state. (Ordinance 581, sec. 2,
adopted 1/11/00)
Editor's note–The bylaws of the Slaton Economic Development Corporation attached to Ordinance 581 are on file in the city
secretary's office.
Sec. 1.05.063 Sales and use tax authorized
There shall be and is hereby adopted and levied an additional sales and use tax within the city for the benefit of
the corporation at a rate of one-half of one percent on the sales of items at retail and a use tax at the same rate on
the use, storage or other consumption within the city of tangible personal property purchased, leased or rented
from a retailer during such time as such tax is effective within the city. Such tax shall be imposed, computed,
administered, collected and remitted in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code chapter 321, except as inconsistent
with section 4A of the act (Vernon's Ann. Civil St., art. 5190.6, sec. 4A). The effective date of the tax adopted
and levied by this section and imposed by section 4A of the act is April 1, 1999, which is the first day the tax
may be imposed after complying with the requirements of the act and the Tax Code. (Ordinance 581, sec. 3,
adopted 1/11/00)
Cross reference–Sales and use taxes, art. 11.04.
ARTICLE 1.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.06.001 Organization
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/248
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the
director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 536 adopted 3/14/95)
Sec. 1.06.002 Director's powers and duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and recommend for adoption by the city commission all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city commission. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/248
other municipalities within the county for the countywide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Texas Government Code
chapter 418.
(Ordinance 536 adopted 3/14/95)
Sec. 1.06.003 Plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this article and has the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (Ordinance 536 adopted
3/14/95)
Sec. 1.06.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge in the formation of an emergency management
council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency
management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers
necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect
the city. (Ordinance 536 adopted 3/14/95)
Sec. 1.06.005 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect,
they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may
be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 536 adopted 3/14/95)
Sec. 1.06.006 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/248
enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 536 adopted
3/14/95)
Sec. 1.06.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city commission, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city
commission unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit
public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property.
(Ordinance 536 adopted 3/14/95)
Sec. 1.06.008 Offenses and penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to do any
act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other warning device so as to simulate a warning
signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to
the penalties imposed by this article.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine as provided in
section 1.01.009 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 536 adopted 3/14/95)
ARTICLE 1.07 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY*
Sec. 1.07.001 Notice required
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal
injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the
injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such
death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days or within six (6) months for good cause shown from the date the
damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city commission of the following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property
was at the time when the injury was received.
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred.
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/248
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the
claim is presented.
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according
to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part
thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was
submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the
damage or any part thereof.
(Ordinance 486, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/86)
Sec. 1.07.002 Statement of plaintiff
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein
shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city commission
for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city
commission refused. (Ordinance 486, sec. 2, adopted 10/14/86)
Sec. 1.07.003 Service of notice
All notices required by this article shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city administrator at the
following location: 9th Street & Garza (municipal building), and all such notices shall be effective only when
actually received in the office of the person named above. (Ordinance 486, sec. 3, adopted 10/14/86)
Sec. 1.07.004 Waiver of provisions
Neither the mayor, a city commissioner, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to
waive any of the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 486, sec. 4, adopted 10/14/86)
Sec. 1.07.005 Oath of claimant
The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or
by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not
render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city commission
as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained
therein. (Ordinance 486, sec. 5, adopted 10/14/86)
Sec. 1.07.006 Knowledge of defects
The city shall never be liable on account of any damage or injury to persons or property arising from or
occasioned by any defect in any public street, highway or grounds, or any public work of the city, unless the
specific defect causing the damage or injury shall have been actually known to the mayor or the city
administrator by personal inspection for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the
injury or damage, and proper diligence had not been used to rectify the defect after actually known or called to
the attention of the mayor or the city administrator. (1978 Code, sec. 11-5)
ARTICLE 1.08 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.08.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/248
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ordinance 527, sec. I, adopted
1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The city official or employee who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of
an office of the city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to:
(1) The resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster;
(2) The re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city; or
(3) The protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules; the management of filing and
information retrieval systems; the protection of essential and permanent records; the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records; control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence; and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management committee. The committee established in section 1.08.006 of this article.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.08.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.08.007 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 527, sec. II, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.08.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city.
No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records
even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files
or use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 527, sec. III, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (Ordinance 527, sec. IV, adopted 1/14/92)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/248
Sec. 1.08.005 Designation of records management officer
The city administrator, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for
the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as
applicable. (Ordinance 527, sec. V, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.006 Committee
A records management committee consisting of the mayor, city secretary and chief financial officer is hereby
established. The committee shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing
the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and
improvements if needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control
schedules; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(Ordinance 527, sec. VI, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.007 Plan to be developed; approval; authority
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records
management plan for the city for submission to the city commission. The plan must contain policies and
procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the
essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The
plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state
law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city commission, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city; and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis
for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 527, sec. VII, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.008 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/248
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct personnel in policies and procedures of the records management program and the
requirements of state law;
(11) Direct personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of
records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of
city records is carried out in accordance with policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and estimated cost and space
savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city on the implementation of the records management plan in each
department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13); and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city commission noncompliance by department heads or other
city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 527, sec. VIII, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.009 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/248
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 527, sec. IX, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.010 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the
retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding
the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the records management officer and the members of the records management committee.
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian of the state library as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule
shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records
control schedules to the director and librarian of the state library.
(Ordinance 527, sec. X, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.011 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.08.010
shall be implemented by department heads according the policies and procedures of the records management
plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for
an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee.
(Ordinance 527, sec. XI, adopted 1/14/92)
Sec. 1.08.012 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (Ordinance 527, sec. XII, adopted 1/14/92)
ARTICLE 1.09 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/248
Secs. 1.09.001–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.09.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein:
Age. The calendar age of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or over.
Creed. Any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or
maintained by a person and entitled to constitutional protection.
Discriminatory housing practice. An act that is unlawful under section 1.09.033, 1.09.034, or 1.09.035 of this
division.
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as, a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. A single individual or group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major life activities. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Marital status. An individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person.
Parenthood. A person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of eighteen (18).
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
Physical or mental disability. Any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major
life activities.
Physical or mental impairment. Shall include:
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting
one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs;
respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome,
emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
To rent. To lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not
owned by the occupant.
Senior adult. A person fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 1, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.032 Interpretation and effect
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/248
This division shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or
substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or
the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted
to them by title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
In construing this division, it is the intent of the city commission that the city shall be guided by federal court
interpretations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit
Opportunity Act, where appropriate. (Ordinance 545, sec. 2, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.033 Discrimination in sale or rental of housing
Except as exempted by section 1.09.036, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age;
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age;
(3) Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or
advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any limitation or discrimination
based on race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital
status, parenthood or age, or any intention to make any such limitation or discrimination;
(4) Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical
or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
(5) For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin,
physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age;
(6) For profit or with the hope or expectations of profit, influence or attempt to influence, by any
words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote
the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially
integrated housing.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 3, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.034 Discrimination in financing of housing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation,
association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or
residential real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against
any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions
of such loan or their financial assistance, because of:
(1) The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital
status, parenthood or age of such person or of any person associated in connection with such loan or
other financial assistance; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/248
(2) The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital
status, parenthood or age of the present of prospective owner, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the
dwelling or dwellings for which such a loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 4, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.035 Discrimination in provision of brokerage services
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to a membership or participation in any multiple listing
service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or
participation, on account of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability,
marital status, parenthood or age. (Ordinance 545, sec. 5, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.036 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) There shall be exempted from the application of section 1.09.033 hereof all transactions involving:
(1) The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such units as his residence.
(2) The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains
and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four such rooms are
offered.
(3) The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided
that:
(A) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary
to perfect or transfer the title);
(B) The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or
written notice in violation of this division;
(C) The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of the sale;
(D) The owner does not own any interest in, nor owns or reserves, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; and
(E) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent
resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply
only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period.
(b) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or
society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, mental or physical
disability, marital status, parenthood or age.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/248
(c) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(d) Nothing in this division shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in
which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing
accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons
occupying such housing accommodation.
(e) Nothing in this division shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and
operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further
restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital
status.
(f) Nothing in this division shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located
on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of
dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that
said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental
dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the
tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this division.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 6, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.037 Administrator
The city administrator shall have the responsibility for implementing this division. The administrator may
delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 7, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.038 Complaints
(a) Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereinafter
referred to as “person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in
writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory
housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are
based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon
request.
(b) A copy of all complaints filed with the city shall also be forwarded to the Fair Housing and Equal
Opportunity Division of the Region VI office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(c) If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause
to believe that any person or persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to
which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and
in his own name and, such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a
person aggrieved.
(d) The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney
General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair
Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as
complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
(e) All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory
housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/248
complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein who allegedly committed or was
threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the
complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint.
(f) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an office authorized to administer
oaths.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 8, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.039 Investigation
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a
prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint.
(b) If the administrator determines, in writing, that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular
alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the administrator shall take no further action with
respect to that alleged offense.
(c) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaints, the
administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur,
attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory
housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this division.
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the
complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned.
(d) Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to
secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a
discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that
such violations be prosecuted in the municipal court. With such recommendations, the administrator shall refer
his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within thirty (30) days after such referral, make a
determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city
attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 9, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.040 Cumulative legal effect
This division is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the
person aggrieved may pursue. (Ordinance 545, sec. 10, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.041 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group
or business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this division, because he or they have
exercised his or their rights under this division, or enjoyed the benefits of this division, or because he or they
have made a charge, testified or assisted in any investigation or in any proceeding hereunder of have made any
report to the administrator. (Ordinance 545, sec. 11, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.042 Cooperation with federal authorities
The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968,
Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the
policies of this division. (Ordinance 545, sec. 12, adopted 3/12/96)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/248
Sec. 1.09.043 Education and public information
In order to further the objectives of this division, the administrator may conduct educational and public
information programs. (Ordinance 545, sec. 13, adopted 3/12/96)
Sec. 1.09.044 Penalty
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum as provided in section 1.01.009 of this chapter for each violation.
Each day a violation continues after passage of seventy-five (75) days from the date of the filing of the initial
complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division may be enjoined by order of a
court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision.
(Ordinance 545, sec. 14, adopted 3/12/96)
ARTICLE 1.10 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.10.001 Drilling and mining prohibited
(a) All forms of drilling and mining are permanently prohibited in any public park located within the city
limits.
(b) No previously drilled and abandoned well or mine may be reopened in any public park located within the
city.
(Ordinance 769 adopted 3/9/15)
Secs. 1.10.002–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parks and Recreation Board
Sec. 1.10.031 Established
There is hereby established the parks and recreation board for the city, hereinafter referred to as “board.” (1978
Code, sec. 17-1)
Sec. 1.10.032 Number of members; qualifications; terms
(a) The board shall consist of not less than three (3) nor more than nine (9) citizens and qualified voters of the
city, who shall be appointed by the city commission for two-year terms.
(b) Members shall serve until their successors are appointed without compensation. Places on the board shall
be numbered one (1) through nine (9) with places one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) being
appointed for two-year terms in odd-numbered years, and places six (6), seven (7), eight (8) and nine (9) being
appointed for two-year terms in even-numbered years.
(c) The city commission in making the appointments to the board shall give due consideration to the
recommendations of the Chamber of Commerce, planning and zoning commission and the school board. The
city commission, if it deems it desirable, may appoint ex officio members to the board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/248
(d) Vacancies on the board are to be filled by appointment by the city commission for the length of the
unexpired term. The board may submit recommendations to the commission for filling of vacancies.
(1978 Code, sec. 17-2)
Sec. 1.10.033 Officers; meetings; bylaws
(a) The board within thirty (30) days of appointment of members each year shall meet in regular session and
elect from the members a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary for one-year terms and until their successors
are elected.
(b) The board shall adopt bylaws to govern the holding of its meetings which at a minimum shall encompass
the following:
(1) Regular meetings shall be held at least once a month.
(2) Manner of holding and calling of special meetings.
(3) Majority of members shall constitute a quorum.
(4) Members not planning to attend a regular meeting or special meeting shall notify the parks and
recreation director or the chairman of the board by 12:00 noon of the meeting day.
(5) Any member not attending meetings regularly or exhibiting interest in the board's work shall be
reported to the city commission, which may, at its discretion, remove the board member and appoint
a replacement.
(6) Minutes of each board meeting shall be filed with the city secretary and city administrator.
(1978 Code, sec. 17-3)
Sec. 1.10.034 Duties and responsibilities
The duties and responsibilities of the parks and recreation board shall be:
(1) Act in an advisory capacity to the city commission and the parks and recreation director in all
matters pertaining to parks and recreation and cooperate with other governmental agencies, civic
groups and all citizens of the city in the advancement of sound parks and recreation planning and
programming.
(2) Recommend policies on recreation service for approval by the city commission.
(3) Advise the parks and recreation director on problems of development of recreation areas,
facilities, programs and improved recreation services.
(4) Recommend the adoption of standards for recreational areas, facilities, programs and their
financial support.
(5) Have periodic inventories made of existing services and survey of services needed and interpret
the needs of the public to the city commission and to the parks and recreation director.
(6) Aid in coordinating the recreation services with the programs of other governmental agencies
and interested groups.
(7) Review the effectiveness of the parks and recreation program with the parks and recreation
director and the city administrator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/248
(8) Interpret the policies and functions of the parks and recreation department to the public.
(9) Have the opportunity to review the annual budget of the parks and recreation department
proposed by the parks and recreation director before submission to the city administrator, and advise
the parks and recreation director on the development of long-range capital improvement programs.
(1978 Code, sec. 17-4)
ARTICLE 1.11 AIRPORTS AND AIRCRAFT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.11.001–1.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Airport Advisory Board
Sec. 1.11.031 Created; membership
There is hereby created the airport advisory board of the city to be composed of five members. All members
shall be resident citizens of the county and shall be appointed for two-year terms and until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Members of the airport advisory board shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice
and consent of the city commission. The mayor shall provide for the terms to be staggered in a manner that will
avoid, as near as possible, the entire board being reappointed in any year. No term shall exceed three years.
(Ordinance 668, sec. 4-1, adopted 7/12/05)
Sec. 1.11.032 Organization
The airport advisory board shall select from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, and it shall
adopt, subject to the approval of the city commission, such rules and regulations governing its proceedings as it
may deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city. The
advisory board shall appoint a secretary who may, but need not be, a member of the board. The secretary shall
keep a record of all transactions of the board. The city administrator shall provide the advisory board with all
information necessary for the performance of its duties. (1978 Code, sec. 4-2)
Sec. 1.11.033 Ineligibility to membership
No person having any financial interest in any commercial carrier by air or in any concession, right or privilege
to conduct any business or render any service for compensation upon the premises of the municipal airport shall
be eligible for membership on the airport advisory board. (1978 Code, sec. 4-3)
Sec. 1.11.034 Compensation of members
All members of the airport advisory board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all
expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of such board, when
authorized by the city commission. (1978 Code, sec. 4-4)
Sec. 1.11.035 Duties
The airport advisory board shall from time to time make such general studies of airport construction and
operation as may be useful in keeping the municipal airport efficient and adequate to the needs of the city and of
the air transportation industry; it shall make recommendations to the city commission in respect to construction,
expansion, improvements, and maintenance of such airport. It shall call the city administrator's attention to any
failure by personnel of the airport to carry out any orders or policies adopted by the city commission; and it
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/248
shall, acting in an advisory capacity, work toward the general improvement of the airport and the advancement
of the city as an air transportation center. (1978 Code, sec. 4-5)
Secs. 1.11.036–1.11.070 Reserved
Division 3. Joint Airport Zoning Board*
Sec. 1.11.071 Created; powers and duties
Subject to the like provisions being made by the commissioners court of the county by proper ordinance and
order, duly promulgated and entered on their minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of the Airport Zoning
Act, Texas Local Government Code, section 241.001 et seq. (Vernon 1988), there is hereby created a joint
airport zoning board to be known as the Slaton-Lubbock County Joint Airport Zoning Board, which board shall
have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in Texas Local Government Code, sections 241.002, 241.011,
241.012, and 241.014 (Vernon 1988). (Ordinance 518, sec. 1, adopted 4/9/91)
Sec. 1.11.072 Composition
The Slaton-Lubbock County Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of five (5) members, two (2)
members to be appointed by the city commission and two (2) members to be appointed by the commissioners
court of the county. The fifth (5th) member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed, and said
fifth member shall serve as chairman of the Slaton-Lubbock County Joint Airport Zoning Board. (Ordinance
518, sec. 2, adopted 4/9/91)
Secs. 1.11.073–1.11.100 Reserved
Division 4. Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning*
Sec. 1.11.101 Short title
This division shall be known and may be cited as “Slaton Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance.”
(Ordinance 519, sec. 1, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.102 Definitions
As used in this division, unless the context otherwise requires:
Airport. The Slaton Municipal Airport.
Airport elevation. The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet
from mean sea level.
Airport hazard. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft
or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or
flight at an airport, or at any installation or facility relating to flight, and tracking and/or data acquisition of the
flight craft; which is hazardous, interferes with or obstructs such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft; or which
is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles.
Airport hazard area. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not
prevented as provided in this division.
Airport reference point. The point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area
and so designated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/248
Approach surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and
upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope
set forth in section 1.11.104 of this division. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones. These zones are set forth in section 1.11.103 of this
division.
Board of adjustment. A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the city commission as provided by
Texas Local Government Code, section 241.032 (Vernon 1988).
Conical surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope
of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet.
Hazard to air navigation. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient
utilization of the navigable airspace.
Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this division and shown on the
zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation.
Horizontal surface. A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the
perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
Joint airport zoning board. A board consisting of five (5) members, two (2) members appointed by the city
commission and two (2) members appointed by the commissioners court of the county. The four (4) members so
appointed shall elect a fifth (5th) member who shall serve as chairman of said Slaton-Lubbock County Joint
Airport Zoning Board.
Landing area. The surface area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxiing of aircraft.
Nonconforming use. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent
with the provisions of this division or an amendment thereto.
Nonprecision instrument runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air
navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
Obstruction. Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height
set forth in section 1.11.104 of this division.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body
politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative.
Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard
surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the
runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of
that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the Federal
Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline. The width of the primary surface is:
(1) Two hundred fifty (250) feet for utility runways having only visual approaches.
(2) Five hundred (500) feet for utility runways having nonprecision instrument approaches.
Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/248
Structure. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to,
buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
Transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the
runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal surface.
Tree. Any object of natural growth.
Utility runway. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft twelve
thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and less.
Visual runway. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
(Ordinance 519, sec. 2, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.103 Zones
In order to carry out the provisions of this division, there are hereby created and established certain zones which
include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical
surface as they apply to the municipal airport. Such zones are shown on the hazard zoning map consisting of one
(1) sheet, prepared by the state department of aviation [now the state department of transportation] and dated
December 5, 1990, which is attached to Ordinance 519 and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one
of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The
various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1) Approach zones.
(A) Runway 18-36. Approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the ends of
runway 18-36 on the municipal airport for nonprecision instrument landings and takeoffs. The
inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of five hundred (500) feet which coincides
with the width of the primary surface at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond each end
of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of two thousand (2,000) feet at a
horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet beyond each end of the primary surface, its
centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(B) Runway 8-26. Approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the ends of
runway 8-26 on the municipal airport for visual landings and takeoffs. The inner edge of the
approach zone shall have a width of two hundred fifty (250) feet which coincides with the
width of the primary surface at each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a
width of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand
(5,000) feet beyond each end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
(2) Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surfaces
adjacent to each runway and approach surfaces as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces,
symmetrically located on either side of the runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning
map. Transitional surfaces extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and
the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) to one (1) from the sides of the primary surface
and from the sides of the approach surfaces.
(3) Horizontal zone. The area beneath a horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of five thousand
(5,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runway 18-36 and runway 8
and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/248
(4) Conical zone. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of
four thousand (4,000) feet.
(Ordinance 519, sec. 3, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.104 Height limitations
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this division, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no
tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this division to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the
zones in question as follows:
(1) Approach zones.
(A) Runway 18-36. One (1) foot in height for each twenty (20) feet in horizontal distance
beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point five
thousand (5,000) feet from the end of the primary surface.
(B) Runway 2-26. One (1) foot in height for each twenty (20) feet in horizontal distance
beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point five
thousand (5,000) feet from the end of the primary surface.
(2) Transition zone. Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height
of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is three thousand one hundred
thirty-one (3,131) feet above mean sea level.
(3) Horizontal zone. Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, or a
height of three thousand two hundred eighty-one (3,281) feet above mean sea level.
(4) Conical zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery
of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to
a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation which is three thousand four
hundred eighty-one (3,481) feet above mean sea level.
(b) Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the growth,
construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land.
(Ordinance 519, sec. 4, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.105 Use restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, no use may be made of land or water within any zone
established by this division in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ordinance 519, sec. 5, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.106 Nonconforming uses
(a) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this division shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as
of the effective date of this division (July 8, 1991) or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/248
intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this
division (July 8, 1991) and is diligently prosecuted.
(b) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon
of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city building inspector to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights
shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city.
(Ordinance 519, sec. 6, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.107 Permits
(a) Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (1) and (2) hereunder, no material change shall
be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in
any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a
permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be
determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If
such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the
provisions of this division shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection
(d).
(1) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would
extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
(2) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less
than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach
zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established
by this division except as set forth in section 1.11.104(b).
(b) Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport
hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater
hazard to air navigation, than it was on the date application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all
applications for such permit shall be granted.
(c) Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the city building inspector determines that a
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than eighty (80) percent torn down, physically
deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
(d) Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any
tree, or use his property, in violation of the regulations prescribed in this division, may apply to the board of
adjustment for a variance from such regulations in question. The application for variance shall be accompanied
by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of
air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it
is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and
the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance
with the spirit of this division. Additionally, no application for a variance to the requirements of this division
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/248
may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the
municipal airport advisory board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the municipal airport
advisory board does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the board of adjustment
may act on its own to grant or deny said application.
(e) Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable
by the city building inspector or the board of adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this division and be
reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to
allow the city building inspector to install, operate, and maintain, at the expense of the city, such markings and
lights as may be necessary.
(Ordinance 519, sec. 7, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.108 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the city building inspector to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein.
Applications for permits shall be made to the city building inspector upon a form published for that purpose.
Applications required by this division to be submitted to the city building inspector shall be promptly considered
and granted or denied. Applications for variances shall be made to the board of adjustment by first filing said
application for variance with the city building inspector who shall forthwith transmit said application to the
board of adjustment for determination. (Ordinance 519, sec. 8, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.109 Board of adjustment
(a) There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the city building inspector in the enforcement of this division;
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this division upon which such board of
adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass;
(3) To hear and decide specific variances.
(b) The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the city commission and each shall
serve for a term of two (2) years and removable for cause by the appointment authority upon written charges,
after a public hearing.
(c) The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions
of this division. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as
the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board
of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be a public record.
(d) The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon
which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement,
decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this division.
(e) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city building inspector or to decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this division, or to effect any variation in this division as
provided in the Texas Local Government Code, section 241.032(d) (Vernon 1988).
(Ordinance 519, sec. 9, adopted 7/8/91)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/248
Sec. 1.11.110 Appeals
(a) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the city building inspector made in his
administration of this division, if of the opinion that a decision of the city building inspector is an improper
application of these regulations, may appeal to the board of adjustment.
(b) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of
adjustment, by filing with the city building inspector a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city
building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(c) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the city building
inspector certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that, by reason of
the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the city building inspector, cause imminent peril
to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on
notice to the city building inspector and on due cause shown.
(d) The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice
to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear
in person or by agent or by attorney.
(e) The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this division, reverse or affirm, in
whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
(Ordinance 519, sec. 10, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.111 Judicial review
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to a
court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, Texas Local Government Code, section
241.041 (Vernon 1988). (Ordinance 519, sec. 11, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.112 Enforcement and remedies
The city commission may institute, in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action to prevent, restrain, correct,
or abate any violation of this division or of any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or
enforcement including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief as provided by the Airport Zoning Act,
Texas Local Government Code, section 241.044 (Vernon 1988). (Ordinance 519, sec. 12, adopted 7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.113 Penalties
Each violation of this division or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this chapter,
and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 519, sec. 13, adopted
7/8/91)
Sec. 1.11.114 Conflicting regulations
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this division and any
other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail
as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, Texas Local Government Code, section 241.901 (Vernon 1988).
(Ordinance 519, sec. 14, adopted 7/8/91)
Secs. 1.11.115–1.11.140 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/248
Division 5. Municipal Airport Regulations
Sec. 1.11.141 Trespass
It shall be unlawful for any person or ground vehicle to go onto, upon or across the runways, ramps, taxiways or
the service area between such runways, ramps or taxiways at the municipal airport when such person has no
legitimate or lawful right to enter such area. The term “legitimate or lawful right” shall apply to those persons
authorized to go onto, upon or across such areas by reason of their official duties in connection with the
maintenance, inspection or operation of the aircraft, airport or facilities thereon, and pilots and passengers of
aircraft lawfully thereon. (1978 Code, sec. 4-20)
Sec. 1.11.142 Ground vehicles to stay within parking areas and drives
Ground vehicles other than those regularly employed in the service of the airport, those performing services in
connection with the maintenance and operation of the airport or with the maintenance and operation of licensed
planes or aircraft or emergency vehicles engaged in the performance of their normal functions shall stay within
the limits of the parking areas, streets and drives and shall not enter the landing area, aircraft ramps or taxiways
except with the written permission of the city administrator or his authorized agent. (1978 Code, sec. 4-21)
Sec. 1.11.143 Parking of ground vehicles
The city administrator is hereby authorized to designate, by appropriate signs, areas for public parking, and he is
further authorized to limit or prohibit public parking, by appropriate signs, in such areas as he deems necessary
to facilitate safety and efficiency in the operation of the airport. He shall file a copy of such designations in the
office of the city secretary, as a public record. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any area
where such parking has been prohibited or limited by the erection of proper signs in violation of any such signs.
The city administrator is hereby authorized to remove any vehicles parked in violation of this section to the
public parking lot at the airport. (1978 Code, sec. 4-22)
Sec. 1.11.144 Smoking in certain areas
The airport manager is hereby authorized to designate, by appropriate signs, “no-smoking” areas on the airport.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry onto such area any cigarette, cigar or other flammable substance or
material while lighted or burning or to ignite same while in such areas. (1978 Code, sec. 4-23)
Sec. 1.11.145 Consumption of alcoholic beverages; intoxication
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages upon the property of the airport in areas other
than those, if any, granted to franchise holders or lessees who, by contract with the city, have been authorized to
sell and allow the consumption of such beverages in designated franchised or leased areas. It shall be unlawful
for any person to be in a state of intoxication upon any of the property of the airport. (1978 Code, sec. 4-24)
Sec. 1.11.146 Possession of firearms, knives or other weapons
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his person any pistol, rifle or other firearm of any
description, knuckles, or any knife or dagger manufactured or sold for the purpose of offense or defense, on the
property of the airport. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person in actual military service, nor to
any peace officer in the actual discharge of his official duty, nor to persons traveling on commercial airlines
when such person checks the above-described weapons with his baggage and places the same in the control of
the agents of authorized commercial airlines within a reasonable time of arriving at the airport, nor to any person
lawfully carrying the above-described weapons to or from a private aircraft, nor to any game warden, nor to any
deputy when in the actual discharge of his duties, nor to any reserve police officer in the actual discharge of his
official duty. (1978 Code, sec. 4-25)
Sec. 1.11.147 Explosives
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/248
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his person or to knowingly deliver any explosive material
or substance at the airport. Excluded from the provisions of this section are all persons who, in the actual
performance of their employment, are required to carry, handle, deliver, store or transfer any substance which is
used as a fuel for the propulsion or maintenance of aircraft operating at such airport and those persons who
obtain prior written authority from the city administrator to carry, handle, deliver, store or transfer any explosive
material or substance which is necessary to the operation of such airport or which is to be lawfully shipped.
(1978 Code, sec. 4-26)
Sec. 1.11.148 Destruction of airport property
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or wantonly deface or destroy any structure or property at the
airport. (1978 Code, sec. 4-27)
Sec. 1.11.149 Soliciting business, selling merchandise or distributing advertising matter
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit customers or patronage or funds for himself or on behalf of any
person or to sell or make delivery of any merchandise of any type or distribute advertising matter upon the
premises or property of the airport without obtaining the prior written authority of the city administrator or of the
city commission. This section shall not apply to those persons making routine deliveries of supplies or
equipment to franchise holders or lessees who operate under a valid contract with the city. (1978 Code, sec. 4-
28)
Sec. 1.11.150 Signs, posters and other advertisements–Written approval required; removal when
notified
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix or place any sign, poster or other advertisement upon the property of
the airport without the prior written approval of the city administrator. It shall be unlawful for any person who
affixes or places any sign, poster or other advertisement upon such property and who is given notice by the city
administrator to remove the same to fail or refuse to remove the same, and each day of such failure or refusal
after such notice has been given shall be deemed a separate violation. (1978 Code, sec. 4-29)
Sec. 1.11.151 Same–Permit to display
The airport manager is authorized to approve, by written permit, signed by the airport manager and approved in
writing by the city administrator, the placing of any show card, placard, advertisement or sign for the purpose of
advertising or attracting the attention of the public for a limited time stated in the permit, subject to the
regulations concerning the use of the airport. Every such permit shall be subject to revocation by the city
commission at any time and subject to revocation by the city administrator on the breach of any of the rules and
regulations concerning airport property, or the violation of any of the terms of the permit by written notice from
the city administrator. (1978 Code, sec. 4-30)
Sec. 1.11.152 Same–Removal of unauthorized advertising
The city administrator shall remove or cause to be removed from the airport property all displays, signs,
placards, handbills, posters or other advertisement of any description unless the same shall have been first
authorized as required herein. (1978 Code, sec. 4-31)
Sec. 1.11.153 Repairs in designated areas
All repairs to aircraft and engines at the airport shall be made in the area designated for that purpose and not in
any other area. (1978 Code, sec. 4-32)
Sec. 1.11.154 Solicitation of work
No person shall solicit mechanical or other work on aircraft at the airport unless allowed to do so by written
contract with the city. (1978 Code, sec. 4-33)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/248
Sec. 1.11.155 Interfering, tampering, etc., with aircraft, etc.
No person shall interfere or tamper with any aircraft at the airport or put in motion the engines of such aircraft,
or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools, without permission of the owner. (1978 Code, sec. 4-34)
Sec. 1.11.156 Starting of engines generally
No aircraft engine shall be started or run at the airport unless a licensed pilot or competent mechanic is in the
cockpit attending the controls, and aircraft shall be started and warmed up only in the place designated for such
purposes by the airport operator. (1978 Code, sec. 4-36)
Sec. 1.11.157 False reports
No person using the airport shall knowingly or willfully make any false statement or report to the city
administrator or any authorized city employee. (1978 Code, sec. 4-36)
Sec. 1.11.158 Removal of wrecked aircraft
The aircraft owner and his pilot or agent shall be responsible for the prompt disposal of wrecked aircraft and the
parts thereof so as to avoid all interference with field operations, unless directed by the airport operator to delay
such action pending investigation of the accident. If the owner, his pilot or agent fails to or refuses to remove
wrecked aircraft interfering with field operations or field regulations, the airport operator is authorized to
remove wrecked aircraft and charge the costs of removal to the owner. (1978 Code, sec. 4-37)
Sec. 1.11.159 Liability
(a) The city shall not be responsible for any damage to or loss of property at the airport, and the city shall
never be liable on account of any accident to any person or property or for any person or property by reason of
the operation of the airport, nor on account of the suspension of the use of the airport or suspension of operations
thereon. All persons using the airport shall use the same at their own risk, and subject to the control, orders and
regulations of the city and its officers and employees.
(b) The permission granted by the city to use the airport and its facilities, or to fly to, from or over the same,
shall at all times be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility thereof by every person exercising or
taking advantage of the permission. It shall be a further condition that each person, as a consideration for the use
of the airport and its facilities, shall indemnify and keep the city harmless from all claims, costs or judgments,
proximately resulting from negligence of such person.
(1978 Code, sec. 4-38)
Sec. 1.11.160 Rules concerning gasoline and oil
The following rules pertaining to gasoline and oil at the airport shall be in full force and effect:
(1) No person shall bring gasoline or oil to be used in aircraft upon the airport unless provided for
in a contract with the city.
(2) All servicing of aircraft must be done by the employees of those companies having the power
to service aircraft by virtue of a contract with the city.
(3) No gasoline shall be stored in cans or in drums in the hangars of the airport.
(4) No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine is running or being warmed by
applications of exterior heat, or while such aircraft is in a hangar or enclosed space.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/248
(5) No person shall smoke in an exposed area within one hundred (100) feet of an aircraft being
fueled or defueled.
(6) No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver or switch electrical appliances off or
on in an aircraft during fueling or defueling.
(7) During refueling, the aircraft and the fueling dispensing apparatus shall both be grounded to a
point or points of zero electrical potential.
(8) Persons engaged in the fueling and defueling of aircraft shall exercise care to prevent overflow
of fuel.
(9) No person shall use any material during fueling or defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause
a spark or be a source of ignition.
(10) Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of all persons engaged in fueling or
defueling operations.
(11) No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is any gasoline on the ground under
such aircraft.
(12) Fueling hoses and defueling equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound and nonleaking
condition.
(13) All hoses, funnels and appurtenances used in fueling and defueling operations shall be
equipped with a grounding device to prevent ignition of volatile liquids.
(14) All fueling and defueling of aircraft shall be conducted at least fifty (50) feet from any hangar
or other building.
(1978 Code, sec. 4-39)
Sec. 1.11.161 Violations
Any person operating or handling any aircraft in violation of this division, or any person refusing to comply with
the provisions of this division, may be promptly removed or ejected from the airport by the police, or under the
authority of the city administrator. Upon the order of the city administrator, such person may be deprived of the
further use of the airport and its facilities for such length of time as may be required to insure the safeguarding of
the same and the public and its interests therein. (1978 Code, sec. 4-40)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be construed to have the following meanings:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/248
Animal. Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
At large. Any animal not restrained.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-1, adopted 7/12/88)
Dangerous wild animal.
(1) A lion;
(2) A tiger;
(3) An ocelot;
(4) A cougar;
(5) A leopard;
(6) A cheetah;
(7) A jaguar;
(8) A bobcat;
(9) A lynx;
(10) A serval;
(11) A caracal;
(12) A hyena;
(13) A bear;
(14) A coyote;
(15) A jackal;
(16) A baboon;
(17) A chimpanzee;
(18) An orangutan;
(19) A gorilla; or
(20) Any hybrid of an animal listed in this definition.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Domestic animals. Those which, as a species, are naturally tame and gentle or which, by long association with
man, have become thoroughly domesticated and are now reduced to such a state of subjection to his will that
they no longer possess the disposition or inclination to escape. This definition specifically includes household
pets, such as dogs and cats.
Estray. Any stray horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinny, jack, jennet, hog, sheep, goat or head of
any species of cattle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/248
Guard dog. Any dog trained or used to protect persons, premises or property by attacking or threatening to
attack any person found within the area patrolled by the dog.
Kennel. Any place where five (5) or more dogs, cats or any combination thereof, over the age of four (4)
months, are raised, trained, boarded, harbored or kept.
Livestock. Any horse, donkey, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinny, jack, jennet, hog, sheep, goat or
head of any species of cattle.
Local health authority. Any person so designated by the city commission.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-1, adopted 7/12/88)
Local rabies control authority. The person designated by the city commission as the local health authority who
has the duties as described in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 826.017(c). (Ordinance adopting Code)
Other animal. A goose, chicken, duck, rabbit, guinea, pigeon, bird, fowl, or any other animal of domestic
barnyard variety not listed as a wild animal, domestic animal or estray.
Owner. Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, controls (physically or orally), feeds, shelters, or aids any animal,
or any person who is the owner's agent left in charge of an animal.
Quarantine. Isolation and close observation of animals to prevent transmission of certain diseases.
Residence. Any private single-family or multifamily dwelling, including hotels or motels.
Restrain. Any animal shall be deemed to be restrained when it is:
(1) Confined on the premises of the owner within a fenced enclosure, capable of confining the
animal;
(2) Fastened or picketed by a lead, rope or chain so as to keep the animal on the premises;
(3) Under the control of a person by a leash;
(4) Within a vehicle being driven or parked;
(5) At heel and obedient to oral command.
Wild animals. Those living in a state of nature and not ordinarily tame or domesticated.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-1, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.01.002 Penalty
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Each
such violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-26, adopted 7/12/88; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.003 Interference with officers
It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any city officer in the performance of his duty of enforcing this
chapter. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-3, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.01.004 Records
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/248
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records
of:
(1) Impounding and disposition. Impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into his
custody. Such records shall be kept for a period of at least three (3) years and shall give the
description of all animals impounded, date of impounding, date of sale or other disposition, the
amount of money received from the sale and the name and address of the purchaser.
(2) Bite cases. A record shall be maintained of all animal bite cases reported to the police
department.
(3) Monies received. Records regarding monies received under the provisions of this chapter shall
be open to inspection at reasonable times by persons responsible for similar records of the city and
shall be audited by the city auditor annually in the same manner as other city records are audited.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-4, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.01.005 Nuisance animals
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to own or maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public
nuisance. The following acts shall constitute a public nuisance:
(1) Failure to restrain an animal;
(2) Failure to restrain an animal with resulting property damage;
(3) Maintenance of an animal in an unsanitary environment;
(4) Permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl, crow, cackle, or make any other noise which causes
annoyance or interference with another's reasonable use and enjoyment of his premises;
(5) Herding of animals along or upon any public right-of-way, except by officers, agents or
employees of the federal, state or local government or agency thereof in the performance of official
duties;
(6) The maintenance of a kennel in violation of the zoning ordinance;
(7) Keeping of more than three (3) dogs or cats (exclusive of a puppy or kitten litter under the age
of six months) within a residentially zoned area.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep swine within the limits of the city, except for the keeping of
swine under direct supervision by and upon the premises of public and private schools, fairs or livestock shows
for a period not to exceed seven (7) days.
(c) All “other animals” authorized to be kept shall be confined to the premises of the owner or custodian of
such other animals, and it shall be unlawful for any person to allow such other animals to run or fly at large or go
upon the premises of another person. No other animals shall be kept within a front yard in a residentially zoned
area.
(d) It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dead animal which is not intended as food for human
consumption to permit or suffer such dead animal to remain upon any premises.
(e) It shall be unlawful to keep any livestock within the city limits unless such livestock is kept in private or
commercial premises as authorized in article 2.04 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-2, adopted 7/12/88)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/248
ARTICLE 2.02 DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Sec. 2.02.001 Impoundment
The animal control officer is authorized to take up all animals found not to be restrained and impound such
animals in the animal shelter. All such animals shall be confined in a humane manner. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-17,
adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.02.002 Notice of violation
Where the ownership of an animal, found not to be restrained, is known, a notice of such violation may be issued
by the animal control officer or his designee to such owner. Upon issuance of any such notice, the animal control
officer or his designee shall file a complaint with municipal court and request that the violator be summoned to
appear in municipal court and answer such charges. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-18, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.02.003 Notice to owner of impounded tagged animals
Upon impounding animals found with current vaccination or other identifying tags, the animal control officer
shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owners of such animals so impounded and of the conditions whereby
they may regain possession of such animals. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-19, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.02.004 Redemption of impounded animals
(a) Payment of impoundment fees. Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article may be
reclaimed by the owner upon the payment of all impoundment fees.
(b) Unvaccinated animals. Any animal over the age of four (4) months which does not have a current rabies
vaccination may not be redeemed, transferred or adopted until it has been vaccinated as required in this chapter.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-20, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.02.005 Disposition of unclaimed or unredeemed impounded animals
(a) After the requirements of notice as set forth in sections 2.02.002 and 2.02.003 and the expiration of three
(3) days, any impounded animal that is unclaimed or unredeemed shall become the property of the city which
shall have the following powers:
(1) Authority to transfer ownership. The animal control officer may transfer ownership of any
impounded animal that is unclaimed or unredeemed. In the event of such transfer of ownership, the
person or agency to whom ownership is transferred shall pay for such animal's food and care while in
the animal shelter and shall comply with the applicable vaccination requirements.
(2) Right to destroy. The animal control officer may, consistent with state law, humanely destroy
an impounded animal that is unclaimed or unredeemed.
(3) Transfer of ownership to humane society. The animal control officer may transfer ownership of
any impounded animal that is unclaimed or unredeemed without charge.
(b) Donated, sick, weaned or injured animals.
(1) The animal control officer may destroy any animal by a humane method if the animal is
weaned, so sick or injured that its cure is considered by the animal control officer to be impracticable
or if death is imminent; and in any of such events, such destruction may be done immediately without
notice or any waiting period.
(2) In the case of animals delivered by the owner, immediate destruction of the animal is permitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/248
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-21, adopted 7/12/88)
ARTICLE 2.03 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.03.001 Vaccination
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat over the age of four (4) months within the city limits unless the
dog or cat shall have been vaccinated with an antirabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian. The dog or cat must
receive a booster vaccination within the 12-month interval following the initial vaccination. After the first
vaccinations, all such animals shall be vaccinated at least once every three years as provided in Texas
Administrative Code title 25, part 1, chapter 169, section 169.29. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-6, adopted 7/12/88;
Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.03.002 Vaccination tag
Upon compliance with the provisions of section 2.03.001, there shall be issued to the owner a numbered metallic
vaccination tag, stamped with the number and the month and year issued, which shall be securely fastened to a
collar worn by such vaccinated dog or cat. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-7, adopted 7/12/88; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.03.003 Report of bite cases by physicians, general public
(a) It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the local health authority the names
and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be
helpful in rabies control.
(b) It shall be the duty of every person owning or having possession of an animal which has bitten a person to
report the same to the local health authority and to confine it in an enclosure or to securely hold the animal in a
closed, padlocked cage for observation and examination by the local health authority. No person having the
custody or possession of such animal shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow the local health authority to make an
inspection or examination of such animal for the purpose of determining whether such animal has rabies.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-22, adopted 7/12/88)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 824.041.
Sec. 2.03.004 Quarantine; pathological examination
(a) Animal which bites; observation period. Every animal which bites a person or which is suspected of
having bitten a person shall be promptly reported to the local health authority and shall thereupon be securely
quarantined for a period of ten (10) days.
(b) Quarantine places. Quarantining shall be at the following:
(1) State-approved rabies quarantine facility, in which case the owner of the animal suspected of
having rabies shall pay the usual impoundment fees.
(2) A licensed veterinary hospital, upon the owner's request and at his expense.
(3) Home quarantine is subject to the approval of the chief of police and the following
requirements:
(A) The owner of the animal is a resident of the city and has proper confinement facilities at
his residence in the city;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/248
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-23, adopted 7/12/88)
(B) The owner of the subject animal agrees that he shall have the animal inspected by a
licensed veterinarian at least on the first and last days of the quarantine period and agrees to
furnish the local health authority with a certificate of health showing the animal to be free of
rabies; (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-23, adopted 7/12/88; Ordinance adopting Code)
(C) The animal was not in violation of any laws or ordinances at the time of the possible
exposure;
(D) The animal is currently vaccinated;
(E) The animal can be observed daily by the local health authority.
(4) An animal of unknown ownership will be quarantined at a state-approved rabies quarantine
facility.
(c) Surrender by owner; expense. Upon demand made by the local health authority, it shall be unlawful for the
owner to fail to surrender any animal which has bitten a person or another animal or which is suspected of
having been exposed to rabies, for quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner.
(d) Release to owner. The quarantined animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon
payment of impoundment fees and upon compliance with the vaccination requirement of this chapter.
(e) Pathological examination; public health officer notified. When an animal under quarantine is diagnosed by
a licensed veterinarian as being rabid or suspected of being rabid or dies while under observation, the local
health authority shall immediately send the head of such animal to the department of state health services for
pathological examination. The local health authority shall notify the proper public health official of reports of
human contacts and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal from the pathological examination.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-23, adopted 7/12/88)
(f) Animal bitten by rabid animal. Any unvaccinated animal bitten by another animal suspected of being or
known to be rabid shall be immediately destroyed or shall be placed in strict isolation for 90 days and shall be
vaccinated immediately and given booster vaccinations during the third and eighth weeks of isolation. Any
vaccinated animal bitten by another animal suspected of being or known to be rabid shall be given a booster
rabies vaccination immediately and placed in strict isolation for 45 days. In the event the biting animal is found
not to be rabid, the bitten animal shall be released. Said animal shall be quarantined at the owner's expense. If
the animal is quarantined at the animal shelter, said expense shall be paid at the end of each month's quarantine
or the animal shall become the property of the city and shall be forthwith disposed of; provided, however, that
the chief of police may permit the quarantine of the bitten animal for the required period in a licensed veterinary
facility at the owner's option and expense. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-23, adopted 7/12/88; Ordinance adopting
Code)
State law references–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.; quarantine and
impoundment facilities generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.03.005 Citywide quarantine
(a) Condition warranting; period. A citywide quarantine may be invoked for a period of thirty (30) days by the
city commission upon the recommendation of the chief of police after the commission has been notified by the
state department of health services of a positive diagnosis of rabies of an animal or after an investigation it is
determined there exists an immediate threat of rabies.
(b) Extending time. In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the thirty-day
period of the citywide quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional reasonable period
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/248
of time.
(c) Animals in public. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal to be at large or in any
other public place during the period of quarantine.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-24, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.03.006 Killing, removing from city or disposing of carcass of rabid or potentially rabid animal
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal
suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal which has bitten a person or is suspected to have
bitten a person, except as herein provided, or to remove same from the city limits without written permission
from the chief of police.
(b) Exposure to rabies. The carcass of any dead animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall, upon
demand, be surrendered to the local health authority.
(c) Animal determined rabid. The local health authority shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be
infected with rabies.
(d) Surrender after demand. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender any animal for
quarantine, destruction or disposal as required herein when demand is made therefor by the local health
authority.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-25, adopted 7/12/88)
ARTICLE 2.04 WILD ANIMALS, ESTRAYS AND OTHER ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.04.001 Applicability of article
This article shall be applicable only to dangerous wild animals, wild animals, livestock, fowl, and other animals
and estrays as defined in this chapter.
Sec. 2.04.002 Keeping or harboring
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, or maintain within the city limits the following:
(1) Bats, skunks, poisonous reptiles, or foxes;
(2) Any wild animal whose normal mature body weight exceeds forty (40) pounds;
(3) Any dangerous wild animal as provided in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.101
et. seq; and
(4) Livestock or fowl.
(A) An owner of livestock or fowl, and the location of their maintenance itself, if such
animals are being maintained by the owner at such location (if presently listed on a register of
existing locations of animals now maintained in the office of code enforcement for the city),
shall be excepted from enforcement of this subsection (4) in the following instances and
conditions:
(i) When the owner registers, within 30 days of the date of passage, with the city office
of code compliance for certification as an existing location and expresses the desire to be
certified as a permitted use;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/248
(ii) If they submit the location to an on-site inspection by city code officers for the
purpose of identifying existing violations of law, health hazards, and critical issues
increasing the risk for breeding and proliferation of flies, insects and rodents;
(iii) If they correct all identified violations of law and areas of critical concern, bringing
the location into compliance with the requirements of law and eliminating areas of critical
concern; and
(iv) Consent in writing to annual inspections, and to inspections arising from public
complaints, at which compliance will be required. If the registrant fails to comply, the
exception granted shall be deemed forfeited.
(B) Upon compliance, these existing locations will be certified as being exempt from
prosecution until the ensuing annual inspection date.
(b) This section shall not prohibit a publicly or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo which
does not remain in the city in excess of 7 consecutive days.
(Ordinance 698 adopted 1/8/08)
Sec. 2.04.003 Impoundment, sale or disposition of estrays
(a) The chief of police or his designee may take up and impound at the animal shelter any estray found within
the city limits in violation of this chapter.
(b) The chief of police or his designee may sell any estray impounded under the provisions of this article at a
public auction after having advertised twice (2) in the local newspaper during the fifteen (15) days after the date
of impoundment. In addition, a notice of impoundment with a general description of the estray shall be posted in
the county courthouse.
(c) Final disposition of the estray shall be in compliance with this chapter.
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-11, adopted 7/12/88)
State law reference–Impoundment of estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, sec. 142.009.
Sec. 2.04.004 Impoundment of wild or other animals
Any peace officer or the animal control officer may take up and impound at the animal shelter any animal found
within the city limits in violation of Penal Code 42.11 or section 2.04.002 of this article. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-
12, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.04.005 Sale; notice of sale; disposition of proceeds
(a) Except for estrays, the animal control officer may sell any animal impounded under the provisions of this
article at public auction after having held such animal for at least five (5) days and after having published notice
of such sale together with a general description of the animal or animals to be sold. Such notice shall appear one
(1) time at least five (5) days prior to the date of the sale and shall state that such animal or animals will be sold
to defray cost if not reclaimed prior to such date. The proceeds of any such sale shall be used to defray sale
expenses and expenses of taking up and keeping of such animals. The balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner
of the animal, if known, and if such owner is unknown, such balance shall be paid into the city treasury. Within
six (6) months after such sale, an owner may, upon proof of such ownership satisfactory to the chief of police, be
entitled to receive the amount paid into the city treasury on account of such sale.
(b) The sale or disposition of any estray impounded under the provisions of this article shall be as provided in
V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, chapter 142.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/248
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-13, adopted 7/12/88; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.006 Disposition of unclaimed animals
Except for estrays, any impounded animal which is not reclaimed, or is found to be infected with rabies,
seriously injured or determined by the animal control officer to be unsalable, shall forthwith be humanely
destroyed. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-14, adopted 7/12/88; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.007 Redemption of impounded wild and other animals sold
The owner of any animal impounded and sold under the provisions of this article may redeem it by paying to the
purchaser the amount paid by the purchaser for such animal plus reasonable expenses for keeping it, provided
that the owner redeems the animal within thirty (30) days after the date of sale; otherwise, the animal becomes
the absolute property of purchaser. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-15, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.04.008 Confinement of animal by owner of private premises
If any animal is found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the
right to confine such animal temporarily pending its release to the animal control officer or to the true owner of
such animal. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-16, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.04.009 Wild animal permits
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a wild animal (as defined by section 1.101 of the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Code) within the city limits unless a special permit therefor is first obtained from the animal control
supervisor, who shall issue such permit if he finds that:
(1) The animal is at all times kept or maintained in a safe manner and that it is at all times confined
securely so that the keeping of such animal will not constitute a danger to human life or property.
(2) Adequate safeguards are made to prevent unauthorized access to such animal by members of
the public.
(3) The health or well-being of the animal is not in any way being endangered by the manner of
keeping or confinement.
(4) The keeping of the animal does not constitute a nuisance and will not harm the surrounding
neighborhood or disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) The keeping of such animal will not create or cause offensive odors or constitute a danger to
public health.
(6) The quarters in which such animal is kept or confined are so constructed that they may be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
(7) The applicant has paid the applicable permit fee.
(b) Said permit shall be renewable annually upon a finding by the animal control supervisor that the above
conditions have been met. The above provisions shall not apply to the keeping of wild animals if the owner or
possessor:
(1) Is a governmental agency or entity;
(2) Holds a circus, carnival or zoo license from the state;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/248
(3) Is an individual or a member of a nonprofit animal rehabilitation organization holding a permit
from the state parks and wildlife department;
(4) Is a research institution or an accredited educational institution; or
(5) Is an individual holding a state or federal permit to possess wildlife.
(c) Wild animals in private possession upon the enactment of this section may be retained by the owner
provided that the owner registers such animal with the public health administrator within thirty (30) days of the
final passage of this section.
(d) Any permit shall be cancelled if, in the opinion of the animal control officer, the requirements of
subsection (a) should cease to be observed, or if it is found that such an animal or reptile is being used to
facilitate criminal activity.
(e) The violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $200.00.
(Ordinance 674A adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 2.04.010 Poisonous reptiles
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a poisonous reptile within the city limits unless a special permit
therefor is obtained and maintained from the state parks and wildlife department.
(b) The violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $200.00.
(Ordinance 674B adopted 3/14/07)
ARTICLE 2.05 VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.05.001 Determination of vicious or dangerous animals other than dogs; hearing and order
If any animal within the city, other than a dog, shall bite, scratch or otherwise attack any person, and the person
so attacked was not at the time trespassing upon the property of the owner of such animal, or if it cannot be
proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the person so attacked was provoking or teasing such animal, the
municipal court shall have the authority to order and hold a hearing, and if such court shall determine at such
hearing that such animal is vicious or dangerous to persons or other animals, the court may order that such
animal be kept muzzled or that such animal be kept within a sufficient enclosure or that such animal be delivered
to the animal control officer and by him destroyed. (Ordinance 506, sec. 6-27, adopted 7/12/88; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Secs. 2.05.002–2.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Dangerous Dogs*
Sec. 2.05.031 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division:
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another dog that causes bodily injury and occurs in
a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/248
prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those
acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
Dog. A domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family.
Owner. A person who owns or has custody or control of the dog.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the city.
Unprovoked. With respect to an attack or attempt to attack by a dog, the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by a
person with any object or part of the attacked person's body nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched,
or squeezed or in any other manner provoked by the person attacked.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.05.032 Requirements for owner
(a) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person
shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with animal control;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a
secure enclosure;
(3) Muzzle the dog when it is outside the secure enclosure;
(4) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least
$100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to
a person and provides proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to
the city's animal control officer; and
(5) Have the dangerous dog spayed or neutered.
(b) If a person reports an incident described by section 2.05.031 in the definition of a “dangerous dog,” the
animal control officer may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the
animal control officer determines the dog is a dangerous dog, he or she shall notify the owner of that fact.
(c) An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is
a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control officer to the municipal court. An owner
may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as for other civil cases.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/248
(d) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dog to the animal
control officer not later than the 30th day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(e) If, on the application of any person, a justice court, county court, or municipal court finds, after notice and
hearing as provided herein, that the owner has failed to comply with subsection (a) or (c), the court shall order
the animal control officer to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control
officer shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and
humane conditions.
(f) The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the municipality or county related to the seizure,
acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dog.
(g) The court shall order the animal control officer to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied
with subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal
control officer. The court shall order the animal control officer to return the dog to the owner if the owner
complies with subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the
animal control officer.
(h) The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before
the 15th day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog.
(i) For purposes of this division, a person learns that the person is an owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in section 2.05.031 in the definition of a “dangerous
dog”;
(2) The owner receives notice that a justice court, county court, or municipal court has found that
the dog is a dangerous dog after a hearing on the matter; or
(3) The owner is informed by the animal control officer that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.05.033 Registration
(a) The animal control officer shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section
2.05.032(a)(4), current rabies vaccination, proof of sterilization of the dangerous dog; and has a
secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept that is inspected and approved by the
animal control officer; and
(2) Pays an annual registration fee as set forth in section A2.05.033 in appendix A to this code.
(b) The animal control officer shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The
owner must place the tag on the dog's collar. The collar must be of a distinctive color and design that identifies
the dog as a dangerous dog.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later
than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control officer for the area in which
the new address is located. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and
payment of a fee as set forth in section A2.05.033 in appendix A to this code, the animal control officer shall
issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar.
(d) An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the city's animal control officer of any attacks the
dangerous dog makes on any person or animal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/248
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.05.034 Attack by dog
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an
unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.
(b) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or
death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor.
(c) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog
destroyed by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian.
(d) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this division is liable for civil
penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. The city attorney may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect
the penalty. The municipality shall retain penalties collected under this division.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.05.035 Violations
(a) A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails
to comply with section 2.05.032.
(b) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor, and any person who violates any provision of this division
shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code.
(c) An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the
defendant has previously been convicted under this division.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.05.036 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.05.034 or 2.05.035 that the person is:
(1) A veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person
employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has
temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with that position.
(2) An employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law
enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes.
(3) A dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under chapter 1702, Texas Occupations
Code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.06 CARE AND TREATMENT
Sec. 2.06.001 Animal care generally
(a) No person shall expose an open trap or metal jaw trap likely to injure any domestic animal or person.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/248
(b) No person shall dye, artificially color any rabbit, baby chick, duckling or “other animal” or offer for sale
any such dyed, colored or artificially colored “other animal.”
(Ordinance 506, sec. 6-5, adopted 7/12/88)
Sec. 2.06.002 Unhealthy or dangerous restraint
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to restrict the movement of a dog or livestock by use of a chain, rope,
wire or leash affixed to a stationary object for any period of time, or in any location, in a manner that creates
either a dangerous situation to the general public or that creates a cruel or unhealthy situation for the animal.
(b) The term “dangerous situation” shall include:
(1) A situation where the tethered animal could reach either public sidewalks and rights-of-way, or
adjacent public or private property;
(2) A situation where the tethered animal is being subjected to taunts from passersby or the
infliction of abuse by third parties.
(c) The term “cruel or unhealthy situation” shall include:
(1) The infliction of pain upon or injury to the animal;
(2) Depriving the animal of adequate wholesome and sanitary food and water;
(3) Deprivation of shelter from cold below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, summer sun on days above 80
degrees Fahrenheit, or inclement weather;
(4) Exposure to harassment, stinging bites from insects or attacks from other animals;
(5) Failure to remove animal feces on a daily basis from the restricted area; or
(6) The use of a choke-type collar.
(Ordinance 632, sec. 6-37, adopted 8/14/03)
Sec. 2.06.003 Length of restraint
It shall be unlawful for any person to restrict the movement of a dog or livestock by use of a chain, rope, wire or
leash (affixed to a stationary object) less than 10 feet in length. Any such restraint shall have swivels at each end,
shall not be of sufficient length to permit the animal to attempt to jump over a fence upon the property.
(Ordinance 632, sec. 6-37, adopted 8/14/03)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Certificate of insurance required of contractors
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/248
(a) Any person or persons, firm, corporation or association seeking to acquire any permit required under this
chapter shall have in force the following insurance:
(1) $100,000 of comprehensive general liability insurance, per occurrence, including coverage for
bodily injury and property damage with products liability and completed operations coverage; and
(2) Worker's compensation coverage in accordance with the requirements of state law.
(b) Prior to issuance of any such permit, such applicant shall furnish the building official with a certificate of
insurance evidencing the required insurance coverage.
(c) The insurance coverage shall include a provision that, in the event such coverage is canceled or reduced,
the insurance carrier shall notify the building official at least ten (10) days prior to such cancellation or reduction
in coverage.
(d) An applicant's permit shall be automatically suspended during any period in which the applicant fails to
maintain in effect the required insurance coverage.
(e) This provision shall not apply to the following:
(1) A homeowner seeking a permit to work on his own residence.
(2) A homeowner seeking a permit to personally do work on other homes owned by him.
(Ordinance 482, sec. 1, adopted 7/8/86)
(3) Electrical contractors.
(4) Master plumbers.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Editor's note–The beginning of section 1 of Ordinance 482 states: “That the Code of Ordinances … is hereby amended by repealing
all requirements of bonds for general contractors, and other contractors, inclusive of installation contractors and building movers as a
condition for a building permit.”
Sec. 3.01.002 Schedule of inspection fees not otherwise specified
The city shall assess and collect the inspection fees for new building construction and remodeling of a structure
as set forth in section A3.01.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code. (Ordinance 495, sec. 7-140,
adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.01.003 Applicability
(a) This section shall apply to notice requirements in any instance of the alleged violation of the provisions of:
(1) Article 3.03;
(2) Article 3.04 and its divisions;
(3) Article 3.05;
(4) Article 3.06;
(5) Article 3.07;
(6) Article 3.08 and its divisions;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/248
(7) Article 3.09;
(8) Article 3.10;
(9) Article 3.11; and
(10) Article 3.12 and its divisions of chapter 3, Building Regulations, of the Code of Ordinances of
the city.
(b) Upon the discovery of a potential violation of regulations and the resultant need for notice to property
owners, the appropriate code enforcement official shall issue notices in the following order:
(1) By certified mail with return receipt requested to the property address if occupied; if the
property is not occupied, the notice shall be issued to the owner's address as reflected by utility
records of the city or, if none, then to the address shown by the ad valorem tax records of the
Lubbock Central Appraisal District.
If the notice is returned without delivery or acceptance, the official may issue notice under the
following subsection.
(2) By personal delivery to the person shown to have ownership as reflected in the ad valorem tax
records of the Lubbock Central Appraisal District. If that person denies ownership, the official shall
determine ownership from the real property records of the office of the Lubbock County clerk and
serve that person by certified mail or by personal delivery. If service cannot be secured in this
manner, the official may issue notice under the following subsection.
(3) By posting notice on the front door of the structure. If there is no such door, the notice shall be
posted at a location on the structure most likely to be noticed from the public right-of-way. In the
event of notice by posting, the notice:
(A) Must measure not less than 8-1/2 by 11 inches;
(B) Be printed on paper of a shade of medium red; and
(C) Be posted between 5 and 6 feet from the top of the foundation of the structure.
(c) On notices served by certified mail or by personal delivery, the notice shall have printed at, or immediately
below the city letterhead, the following paragraph:
“ACCORDING TO THE REAL PROPERTY RECORDS OF LUBBOCK COUNTY, YOU OWN
THE REAL PROPERTY DESCRIBED IN THIS NOTICE. IF YOU NO LONGER OWN THE
PROPERTY, YOU MUST EXECUTE AN AFFIDAVIT STATING THAT YOU NO LONGER OWN
THE PROPERTY AND STATING THE NAME AND LAST KNOWN ADDRESS OF THE
PERSON WHO ACQUIRED THE PROPERTY FROM YOU. THE AFFIDAVIT MUST BE
DELIVERED IN PERSON OR BY CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED, TO
THIS OFFICE NOT LATER THAN THE 20TH DAY AFTER THE DATE YOU RECEIVE THIS
NOTICE. IF YOU IX) NOT SEND THE AFFIDAVIT, IT WILL BE PRESUMED THAT YOU
OWN THE PROPERTY DESCRIBED IN THIS NOTICE, EVEN IF YOU DO NOT”
(Ordinance 696 adopted 12/11/07)
ARTICLE 3.02 BUILDING OFFICIAL
Sec. 3.02.001 Establishment of office; appointment; term; removal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/248
(a) The office of building official is hereby created, and the executive official in charge shall be known as the
building official.
(b) During temporary absence or disability of the building official the appointing authority shall designate an
acting building official.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-1; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.02.002 Duties
It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, removal,
demolition and occupancy of buildings and structures. (1978 Code, sec. 7-2)
Sec. 3.02.003 Right of entry
The building official, in the discharge of his official duties and upon proper identification, shall have authority to
enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. (1978 Code, sec. 7-3)
ARTICLE 3.03 BUILDING CODE*
Sec. 3.03.001 Adoption; amendments
(a) Adopted. That certain documents, three (2) [sic] copies of which are on file in the office of the building
official of the city, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2012 edition, including
appendix chapters, 2012 International Building Code section 101.2.1, 2012 as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the building code of the city, for the control of building and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of
said building code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Amendments. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Slaton.
Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Slaton.
Section 1612.3. Insert: Date of ordinance 9/28/2007.
Section 3412.2. Insert: Effect date shall be 30 days after passage of this ordinance.
(Ordinance 741 adopted 6/11/12)
Sec. 3.03.002 Definitions
(a) Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean this city.
(b) Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the attorney
for the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-21)
Sec. 3.03.003 Penalties
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the building code or fail to comply therewith, who shall
violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, who shall build in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/248
from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by
the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each violation
and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1.01.009 of this
Code of Ordinances. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code, sec. 7-22)
Sec. 3.03.004 Trench safety
All applicable provisions of state law pertaining to trench safety in the city as contained in V.T.C.A., Health and
Safety Code, section 756.021 et seq., are hereby incorporated by reference as fully as if printed herein.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Trench safety requirements, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 756.021 et seq.
ARTICLE 3.04 ELECTRICITY
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Installations. All electrical work of any nature performed on, in or near consumers' premises.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-40; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.002 Scope of article
This article shall govern all consumer electrical installations made in the city. (1978 Code, sec. 7-41)
Sec. 3.04.003 Article cumulative
This article shall be cumulative of all other ordinances and shall not be construed as repealing any ordinance.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-42)
Sec. 3.04.004 Exemptions
(a) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the issuance of permits to owners of dwellings for electrical
repair work in such dwellings.
(b) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the issuance of permits to owners who erect a dwelling in
which to live; provided, however, no permit shall be issued under this provision until the owner submits an
affidavit showing his ownership of the premises and his bona fide intention to live therein; and provided further,
in the event of erections, no person shall be issued a permit under the provisions of this subsection more
frequently than once each two (2) calendar years.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-48)
Sec. 3.04.005 Penalties
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article, including the electrical code herein adopted,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-49)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/248
Sec. 3.04.006 Continuing violations
Each day that any person shall continue to violate or fail to comply with a provision of this article shall be a
separate offense. (1978 Code, sec. 7-50)
Sec. 3.04.007 Repeat offenses
Upon conviction of the second violation of this article, the city commission shall, if it deems desirable, hold a
public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not said person's certificate or license should be
revoked. If revoked, it shall thereafter be void and vest no rights. (1978 Code, sec. 7-51)
Secs. 3.04.008–3.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Electrical Inspector
Sec. 3.04.041 Building inspector to serve
The building inspector of the city shall serve as the electrical inspector until such time as the city commission
shall by resolution establish an office of electrical inspector. (Ordinance 483, sec. 7-43, adopted 8/12/86)
Sec. 3.04.042 Duties and powers
(a) The electrical inspector shall inspect and test electrical installations and systems in all consumer
installations when he has reason to believe the same are unsafe, improper, or do not comply with applicable
ordinances.
(b) The electrical inspector shall inspect all installations, alterations and repairs of electrical work in consumer
installations as hereinafter set out.
(c) The electrical inspector shall, upon determining that unsafe, improper or unlawful consumer installations
exist, immediately notify the owner of said premises or his agent and/or the electrician performing work on said
premises, in writing, specifying the exact deficiency existing and shall allow said parties a reasonable time to
correct said deficiency. If corrective action is not begun immediately, or if the deficiency is not corrected within
the prescribed time, the electrical inspector shall, if he believes the public welfare is endangered, order the
electricity supply to said premises to be discontinued.
(d) The electrical inspector and his assistants shall, when in the performance of their duties and as far as may
be necessary for the performance of their duties, have the right to enter any consumer's building at all reasonable
hours for the purpose of making any tests or inspections of the electrical wiring and appliances therein
contained.
(e) The electrical inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a record of permits, licenses, and inspections
required under this article; he shall also keep a record of all condemnations of electrical installations.
(f) The electrical inspectors shall stop the installation, alteration, operation or repair of any electrical work on
or in consumers' premises whenever, in the inspector's opinion, the work is being done in a reckless, careless or
unsafe manner or in a manner which violates the provisions of this article. Upon determining that particular
work should stop, the inspector shall post a notice to that effect on the consumer's premises, and thereafter no
person shall proceed with the installation until the inspector has cancelled the stop work notice.
(g) The electrical inspector shall turn over to the city all payments received by the office of the electrical
inspector and the board of electrical examiners.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-44)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/248
Sec. 3.04.043 Liability for damages
Neither the electrical inspector nor any of his assistants shall, when acting in good faith and without malice, be
liable for damages arising by reason of duties performed under the provisions of this article. (1978 Code, sec. 7-
45)
Secs. 3.04.044–3.04.070 Reserved
Division 3. Certificates and Licenses*
Sec. 3.04.071 State examination and licensing
The requirements for examination and licensing of electricians as provided in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code,
chapter 1305, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this article as fully as if set forth herein.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.072 Illegal use of certificate or license
No person shall allow the use of his certificate of qualification or license, directly or indirectly, by any other
person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do electrical installations. In addition to the penalty provided in
section 3.04.005, any person convicted of violating this provision shall forfeit his certificate of qualification and
license and it shall thereafter be void. (1978 Code, sec. 7-62)
Secs. 3.04.073–3.04.100 Reserved
Division 4. Permits and Inspections
Sec. 3.04.101 Permit–Required; exceptions
No person using electrical power as a consumer and no person having contracted or subcontracted to install
metal siding shall begin any electrical installation or metal siding installation or begin any work of installing,
erecting or altering material, wiring fixtures or any other apparatus to be used for the utilization of electricity for
light, heat or power in or on any building or premises in the city without first securing a permit therefor from the
office of the electrical inspector; provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor electrical work such
as repairing flush and tumbler switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles; and provided
further, this section shall not apply to maintenance and repairs on the premises of a person regularly employing a
qualified maintenance electrician for that purpose. (Ordinance 521, sec. 1 (7-70), adopted 9/10/91)
Sec. 3.04.102 Same–Application; issuance
Homeowners and holders of certificates of qualification shall make application for a permit to the electrical
inspector, upon proper application for a permit; and, after payment of required inspection fees, the electrical
inspector or his representative shall issue the applicant a permit for the proposed work. (1978 Code, sec. 7-71)
Sec. 3.04.103 Inspection fees–Schedule
The schedule of electrical inspection fees is set forth in section A3.04.103 of the fee schedule in appendix A to
this code. (1978 Code, sec. 7-72; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.104 Same–Reinspection
If by reason of faulty work, negligence or omission or for any other reason a subsequent inspection must be
made in excess of the rough-in and final inspection hereinabove provided for, a charge for each reinspection
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/248
shall be as set forth in section A3.04.104 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code. (1978 Code, sec. 7-73;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.105 Notice of readiness
Permit holders whose installations are ready for inspection shall allow the office of the electrical inspector
twenty-four (24) hours after notice, Sundays and holidays excluded, before proceeding with the installations.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-74)
Secs. 3.04.106–3.04.130 Reserved
Division 5. Standards and Specifications
Sec. 3.04.131 Code adopted
Certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the building inspector and the city, being
marked and designated as the 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code, as published by the NFPA
International Codes and Standards Organization, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems in the city, on file in the office of the building
inspector are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. (Ordinance 800
adopted 9/10/18)
State law reference–National Electrical Code adopted as municipal residential electrical code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
214.214.
ARTICLE 3.05 ENERGY CODES*
Sec. 3.05.001 Energy conservation code adopted
(a) Adopted. That certain documents, three (2) [sic] copies of which are on file in the office of the building
official, and the city, being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city, for regulating
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting, and power systems
in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition,
published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the building official, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Amendments. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section C101.1 and R101.1. Insert: City of Slaton, Texas.
Section C108.4 and R108.4. Insert: Fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00.
(Ordinance 740 adopted 6/11/12)
State law reference–Adoption of building energy efficiency standards, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 388.003.
Sec. 3.05.002 State energy code adopted
In accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 388.003, the city hereby adopts the state energy
code consisting of the energy efficiency chapter of the International Residential Code, as it existed on May 1,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/248
2001, for single-family construction; and the International Energy Conservation Code, as it existed on May 1,
2001, for all other residential, commercial, and industrial construction. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Adoption of building energy efficiency performance standards, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
388.003.
ARTICLE 3.06 PLUMBING†
Sec. 3.06.001 Code adopted
That certain documents, three (2) [sic] copies of which are on file in the office of the building inspector, and the
city, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, including appendix
chapters as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city, for
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city and providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code
Council, on file in the office of the building inspector, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this article.
State law reference–Adoption of plumbing codes and amendment of codes by municipality, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec.
1301.255(d).
Sec. 3.06.002 Amendments to code
That the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Slaton, Texas.
Section 106.6.2 Insert: Fee schedule:
Inspection and other fees are set forth in section A3.06.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to
the Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.6.3 Insert: Fee refunds.
1. The full amount of fees shall be refunded that were erroneously paid or collected.
2. The full amount of fees shall be refunded when paid for a permit that has not commenced.
The building inspector shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written
request by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
Section 108.4 Insert: Violations penalties. This subsection is amended to read:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this code shall be deemed guilty of a
class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day that the violation of this code occurs or
continues and each day shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable as herein provided. Issuance or granting of a permit or approval of
plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of,
any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, insofar as the work or use, which it
authorizes, is lawful.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/248
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the administrative
authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or
from preventing construction operations being carried on hereunder when in violation of this
code or of another ordinance or from revoking any certificate of approval when issued in error.
Section 108.5 Insert: Stop-work orders. This subsection is amended to read:
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having being served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00).
Section 904.1 Insert. Roof extensions. This subsection is amended to read:
All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 10 inches above the
roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the
vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet above the roof.
(Ordinance 745 adopted 6/11/12)
ARTICLE 3.07 MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 3.07.001 Adopted
That certain documents, three (2) [sic] copies of which are on file in the office of the building inspector, and the
city, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, including appendix
chapters, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city, for
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file
in the office of the building inspector, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this article.
Sec. 3.07.002 Amendments
That the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Slaton, Texas.
Section 106.5.2 Insert: The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in section A3.07.002 of the
fee schedule in appendix A to the Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.5.3 Insert: Fee refunds. This subsection is amended to read:
The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
a. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that were erroneously paid or collected.
b. The full amount of fees shall be refunded when paid for a permit that has not
commenced. The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except
upon written request by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee
payment.
Section 108.4 Insert: Violations penalties. Shall be amended to read:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/248
Persons who shall violate a provision of the code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit of
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 108.5 Insert: Stop-work orders.
Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's
agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work
is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to
give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on
the system after being served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ordinance 746 adopted 6/11/12)
ARTICLE 3.08 RESIDENTIAL CODE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.08.001 Adopted
That certain documents, three (2) [sic] copies of which are on file in the office of the building inspector and the
city, being marked and designed ad [designated as the] International Residential Code, [2012 edition], as
published by the International Code Council and is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than
three stories in height in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Residential Code, 2012
edition, published by the International Code Council on file in the office of the building inspector are hereby
referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 3.08.002 Amendments
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1 City of Slaton, Texas.
Section R301.2(1) Shall read as follows:
Roof
Snow
Load
Wind
Speed
mph
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject to damage from Winter
Design
Temp.
Flood
Hazard
Weathering Frost
Line
Depth
Termite Decay
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/248
20 90 A Moderate 12" Slight/Moderate None/slight 15 9/18/02
(Ordinance 742 adopted 6/11/12)
Secs. 3.08.003–3.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Homeowners' Associations
Sec. 3.08.031 Registry
The city secretary shall establish and maintain a registry of homeowners' associations within the city. The
registry shall provide for each such association to register, during January of each year, the following:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of its principal contact person;
(2) A description by streets of the boundaries of the respective association;
(3) A current copy of the recorded restrictions or covenants affecting that property. The “contact
person” shall certify the copy to be the current restrictions.
(Ordinance 628, sec. 7-112, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.08.032 Notice upon application for permit
The building inspector shall, within 5 calendar days of the receipt of an application for a building permit, notify
the “contact person” for the homeowners' association for the geographical area of the address of the property for
which a permit is sought. Such notice shall be by posting a copy of the application by certified U.S. mail, return
receipt requested, to the registered address of the “contact person.” (Ordinance 628, sec. 7-113, adopted
12/10/02)
Sec. 3.08.033 Distribution of restrictions
Upon any application for permit, the building inspector shall advise the applicant of the existence of any
registered homeowners' association and shall, upon request, provide a copy of restrictions or covenants
submitted by the association. (Ordinance 628, sec. 7-114, adopted 12/10/02)
Sec. 3.08.034 Enforcement
(a) The city shall accept no responsibility for the enforcement of registered restrictions or covenants. The
association shall be responsible for reviewing the application and determining whether or not such will be
violative of the terms. Any enforcement shall be the responsibility of the association, its members, or the general
public.
(b) The question of compliance shall not be cause for the delay or denial of a permit, nor will such create
grounds for the revocation of a permit.
(Ordinance 628, sec. 7-115, adopted 12/10/02)
ARTICLE 3.09 FUEL GAS CODE
Sec. 3.09.001 Adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/248
That certain documents, two (2) copies of which are on file in the office of the building official, and the city
being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city, for the
control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said fuel gas code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 3.09.002 of
this article.
Sec. 3.09.002 Amendments
That the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Slaton, Texas.
Section 103.3 Delete title and amend title and subsection to read as follows:
Administrative authority, the administrative authority duly appointed to enforce this code shall
be the building official of the City of Slaton, however, said building official is hereby
authorized to designate qualified employees serving under his discretion and control to assist in
the discharge of such duty. These employees shall also be referred to as code officials.
Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule. Amend to read:
The fees for permits shall be referenced from the plumbing and mechanical fee schedules.
Section 106.6.3, sec.2, sec. 3 Fee refund. Amend to read:
The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as indicated in the plumbing and
mechanical ordinances.
Section 108.4 Violations and penalties. Shall be amended to read:
Persons who shall violate a provision of the code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 108.5 Stop-work orders. This section is amended to read:
Upon notice from the code official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall
be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written
notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue to work on the system after
having been served a stop-work word [order], except such work as the person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$200.00 or more than $500.00.
(Ordinance 747 adopted 6/11/12)
ARTICLE 3.10 DANGEROUS STRUCTURES*
Sec. 3.10.001 Scope
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/248
The city adopts this article in order to effectuate the control and remediation of dangerous structures as a means
of protecting the public as contemplated by the Local Government Code, chapter 214 Municipal Regulation of
Housing and Other Structures, subchapter A, Dangerous Structures, section 214.001 Authority Regarding
Substandard Buildings, et. seq. as existing or as those sections may hereafter be amended. (Ordinance 679, sec.
1, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.002 Definitions
The following terms shall be interpreted as follows:
Dangerous building. A building that is a hazard to the public health and safety in any one or combination of the
following factors:
(1) Being situated on a tract of real property whereon weeds grow in rank profusion;
(2) Failing to be in compliance with any one or combination of various codes or ordinances
pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical wiring, or the elimination of public health hazards.
Mortgagee. Those parties who hold an unreleased lien recorded in the office of either the county clerk or in the
office of the tax collector of any public entity imposing ad valorem taxes in the county.
(Ordinance 679, sec. 2, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.003 Identification
(a) A dangerous property may be identified as such from the public right-of-way if:
(1) Weeds and vegetation on the premises, viewed from the level of a motor vehicle window,
appear to the naked eye and without further inspection, to have grown to an average height of 12
inches or more in rank profusion upon the property;
(2) If the roof line of the structure has sagged in any area to a point 6 inches below the constructed
line of the roof;
(3) A hole of any size is visible in the roof at any location;
(4) A porch has partially collapsed and the roof has dropped at least 6 inches below the constructed
line of the roof;
(5) The premises present visible evidence that the plumbing system is no longer discharging
sewage from the structure to the main sewer; or
(6) Rats, vermin or cockroaches are visible from the public right-of-way.
(b) The following shall constitute due process cause to seek a search warrant pursuant to the Code of Criminal
Procedure in order to identify factors that evidence the existence of a dangerous building:
(1) Any matter or condition identified above in subsection (a);
(2) The existence of broken windows with openings large enough to permit rainwater to enter the
structure;
(3) The existence of trash, debris, or old motor vehicles without current license plates and
surrounded by weeds in rank profusion more than 12 inches in height on average within the
immediate vicinity of the motor vehicles; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/248
(4) Electrical lines that are broken or not properly connected from the service pole to the structure.
(c) Any inspector entering the grounds or the structure after the issuance of a search warrant shall document
each and every instance in which the building itself fails to comply with applicable city ordinances pertaining to:
(1) Electrical wiring;
(2) Plumbing;
(3) Water service;
(4) Structural condition and integrity; and
(5) Health and safety.
(d) Buildings found to be in violation shall be referred to the office of the municipal court for a determination
as to whether or not such building constitutes a dangerous building.
(Ordinance 679, sec. 3, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.004 Minimum standards
Minimum standards for continued use and occupancy of the building shall be:
(1) An electrical service and system that is in full compliance with the electrical code and building
code;
(2) A plumbing system that is in full compliance with the plumbing code and operates to efficiently
discharge sewer water from the property itself to the sewer main;
(3) A structure with sufficient structural integrity that there is no reasonable expectation of roof or
wall collapse simply from the weight of the building exposed to a 50 mile [per hour] wind; and
(4) A structure free of rodents, vermin and cockroaches or their feces.
(Ordinance 679, sec. 4, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.005 Determination of ownership
Upon the identification of a structure believed to constitute a dangerous building, the city inspector shall
determine the names and addresses, where available, of the owners of the property, any entity claiming a lien on
the property, any tenant, and the taxing authority if ad valorem taxes are delinquent. In order to secure the names
and addresses, the inspector shall search the following records:
(1) Lubbock County real property records;
(2) Tax appraisal district records;
(3) Records of the Secretary of State;
(4) Lubbock County assumed name records;
(5) City ad valorem tax records; and
(6) Municipal utility records.
(Ordinance 679, sec. 5, adopted 8/8/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/248
Sec. 3.10.006 Notice of noncompliance
The city shall cause notice to issue by certified mail to each identified owner, tenant, and lienholder that a
hearing, on a date, time and location certain and disclosed in the notice, shall be held in the municipal court in
order to determine whether or not a structure is a dangerous building. That notice must include a statement that
advises the owner, tenant or lienholder as to what proof they must submit to the court as to the scope of any
work that may be required to bring the structure into compliance and the time it will take to reasonably perform
each step of remediation or demolition. Newspaper notice may be utilized consistent with section 214.001(a) of
the Local Government Code. (Ordinance 679, sec. 6, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.007 Hearing; order; time schedule
(a) At the time of the noticed hearing the court shall consider the evidence presented from both the city and
owner, tenant, or lienholder as to the condition of the property and shall enter a finding as to whether or not such
structure constitutes a dangerous building. Should the court find that the structure constitutes a dangerous
building the court shall hear evidence from such owner, tenant, or lienholder as to their desire to either demolish
or remediate the property and any proposed timetable for completion.
(b) In entering an order on a hearing authorized under this section, the municipality shall require the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee of a dangerous building to within 30 days:
(1) Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and
(2) Repair, remove, or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder established at the
hearing that work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
(c) If the municipality allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or
demolish the building, the municipality shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a
reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the hearing
official.
(d) A municipality may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or
demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee:
(1) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(2) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days
because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(e) If the municipality allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of
the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the municipality shall require the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the municipality to demonstrate compliance with
the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the hearing official or the hearing official's designee to
demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property,
including structures or improvements on property, within the municipal boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in
total value, the municipality may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an
amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing, or demolishing a building under this subsection. In
lieu of a bond, the municipality may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from
a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the municipality. The bond must be posted, or
the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the municipality
issues the order.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/248
(Ordinance 679, sec. 7, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.008 Filing of order
Within 10 days of entry of the order, a copy of such order shall be filed in the office of the municipal secretary
and the city shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a statement of:
(1) The street address or legal description of the property;
(2) The date the hearing was held;
(3) A statement of the result; and
(4) Instructions where a copy of the order may be secured.
(Ordinance 679, sec. 8, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.009 Notice by mail
(a) The order shall be posted by U.S. mail, certified, to each owner, tenant or lienholder.
(b) The validity of any notice or order mailed in accordance with this article to a property owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee is not affected by a return of the notice by the United States Postal Service as “refused” or
“unclaimed” and the notice or order shall be considered as delivered.
(Ordinance 679, sec. 9, adopted 8/8/06)
Sec. 3.10.010 Failure to comply with order
Should the owner, tenant or lienholder fail to comply with the terms of the order in that there is a failure to
vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish as directed by the order, the city may proceed at its own expense to
bring the property into compliance with the order, and assess its cost upon the property and impose its lien for
recovery, consistent with section 214.001 et. seq., of the Local Government Code as it exists or may hereafter be
amended. (Ordinance 679, sec. 10, adopted 8/8/06)
ARTICLE 3.11 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
Sec. 3.11.001 Baselines
8th Street through the city from north to south and Garza Street, and the westward extension of Division Street
and its continuation by imaginary line through the city, from east to west, are hereby established as the baselines
from which all buildings are to be numbered in the city. (1978 Code, sec. 19-1)
Sec. 3.11.002 Directional prefixes
The letters “N,” “E,” “S” and “W,” indicating the four (4) cardinal points of the compass, shall be added,
respectively, as a prefix to the names of all streets, avenues and thoroughfares in the city, as their direction from
the baseline may indicate. (1978 Code, sec. 19-2)
Sec. 3.11.003 Numbering from baselines
All buildings shall be numbered from the baseline of the street on which they are located; a number shall be
assigned each fifty (50) feet on such street, in regular order; the even numbers to be on the north and east sides
of the streets, and the odd numbers to be on the south and west sides of the streets. (Ordinance 685 adopted
5/10/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/248
Sec. 3.11.004 Assignment of numbers
It shall be the responsibility of the city to assign the proper numbers for all buildings. The owner shall state the
name of the street, lot number, block number, side thereof upon which is situated, and the direction and exact
distance from the nearest cross street. A complete record of the numbering of all buildings shall be kept by the
city; such record shall be supplemented and amended from time to time, when necessary. Building numbers shall
be public property and subject to change by the city, with or without notice. (1978 Code, sec. 19-4)
Sec. 3.11.005 Owners to place numbers
Owners of buildings in the city are required to place or have placed thereon the proper street number as
designated by the city, in some conspicuous place so that the same can be plainly seen and read from the street.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-5)
Sec. 3.11.006 Size of numbers
The numbers shall be at least three (3) inches high, and composed of some bright metal, plastic, or similar
durable material, or painted thereon, and same shall, as aforesaid, be placed in a conspicuous place on the house.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-6)
ARTICLE 3.12 MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.12.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Hard surface. A weatherproof surface that will not soften when exposed to water and is or sufficient strength
and thickness not to crack or deteriorate under normal wheel loads.
Home or vehicle space. A plot of land within a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park designated
for the accommodation of a single manufactured home or recreational vehicle.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-1, adopted 6/11/02)
HUD-code manufactured home. A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in
the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width, 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is
320 or more square feet, which is built on a permanent chassis, and which is designed for use as a dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as
that term is defined by 24 CFR section 3282.8(8).
Manufactured home or manufactured housing. A HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-1, adopted 6/11/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
Manufactured home park. Any tract of land of not less than five acres in size under single ownership where
accommodation is provided for manufactured home use, whether or not a charge is made for such use. It shall
include any building, structure or enclosure used or intended for use in such manufactured home park.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-1, adopted 6/11/02)
Mobile home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width, 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/248
on site is 320 or more square feet, which is built on a permanent chassis, and which is designed for use as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. (Ordinance 610, sec. 14-1, adopted
6/11/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular-type portable structure without a permanent foundation that can be towed,
hauled, or driven, which is designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping, and travel
use, and which includes but is not limited to travel trailers, truck-campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled
motor homes.
Recreational vehicle park. Any tract of land of five acres or more, where accommodation is provided for
transient use by owners of recreational vehicles.
Space width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to such side lot lines at
a point midway between the front and rear of such lot. When different results are obtained by measuring for
different side lot lines, the shortest distance shall be considered the space width.
Vacation travel trailer or camping trailer. A recreational vehicle.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-1, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.002 Use of manufactured homes or recreational vehicles for dwellings
(a) Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles may be used for dwelling purposes only in the following
instances:
(1) When located in a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park licensed by the city as
hereinafter provided;
(2) When located at a retail manufactured home or recreational vehicle sales or service business in
a B-2 zoning district; this shall be limited to one such residence per business;
(3) When used as temporary living quarters for guards at construction sites when approved by the
building official;
(4) When located in zoning districts designated for use of a manufactured home as a dwelling
according to the city zoning regulations and when an approved sidewalk and driveway, meeting
specifications contained in the subdivision regulations of the city, is placed prior to placement of any
manufactured home on property which is adjacent to a paved street with curb and gutter. Said
sidewalk should be adjacent to the curb except when adjoining property has existing sidewalks that
are set back from the curb. When sidewalks are set back from the curb, said new sidewalk should
connect with existing sidewalks in a manner approved by the building inspector;
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-2, adopted 6/11/02)
(5) When approved by the city commission in any zoning district, providing that an approved
metallic skirting is placed completely covering the space from floor level to ground level around the
entire perimeter of the manufactured home or recreational vehicle itself. In case of noncompliance
with these provisions the owner of the manufactured home or recreational vehicle will be notified by
mail of their duty to comply within 30 days from the date of such letter. On failure of compliance
within such 30-day period, the permit shall automatically become null and void and the owner of the
trailer subject to prosecution for violation of the other provisions of this chapter. (Ordinance 683
adopted 2/13/07)
(b) Mobile homes may not be used as dwellings except those placed prior to existence of this article (June 11,
2002) and that conform to all other requirements. (Ordinance 610, sec. 14-2, adopted 6/11/02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/248
(c) Any manufactured home that is used as a residence and was in existence in any R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, or B-2
use district on June 11, 2002 (a list of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city secretary), and not in
violation of a city ordinance at that time shall be allowed to be used as a residence, by the owner, until such time
said premises may be determined by the building inspector to be substandard or in violation of other ordinances
affecting health, safety or building codes. Ownership may be transferred without removing said manufactured
home. This subsection does not apply to homes placed legally within a manufactured home park or recreational
vehicle park. (Ordinance 621, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/02)
(d) In all of the above instances all utility connections shall conform to the pertinent ordinances of the city.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-2, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.003 Office use of manufactured home or recreational vehicle
A manufactured home or recreational vehicle shall not be used as an office or for business building purposes in
any zoning district except in the following instances:
(1) When used as an office on the site in connection with a bona fide recreational vehicle park
licensed by the city as hereinafter provided; or
(2) When used as an office on the site in connection with a bona fide retail manufactured home or
recreational vehicle sales or service business in a B-2 zoning district and used as the office of such
business.
(3) When used as a temporary construction office when approved by the building inspector.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-3, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.004 Parking or storage of recreational vehicles
The parking or storage of a recreational vehicle shall be permitted in any zoning district, provided that such shall
not be used for dwelling purposes and provided, further, that such shall not be permitted to be parked on the
street or parkway. (Ordinance 610, sec. 14-4, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.005 Grounding of manufactured homes and recreational vehicles–Required
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must be grounded according to applicable codes. (Ordinance 610,
sec. 14-5, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.006 Same–Placement without connection
Placement of a manufactured home or recreational vehicle without approved electrical ground equipment shall
be a violation of this article. (Ordinance 610, sec. 14-6, adopted 6/11/02)
Secs. 3.12.007–3.12.040 Reserved
Division 2. Manufactured Home Park or Recreational Vehicle Park
Sec. 3.12.041 Location
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park within the
city except as permitted by the zoning ordinance and amendments thereto of the city. (Ordinance 610, sec. 14-7,
adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.042 Site plan
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/248
A site plan shall be filed with the city secretary prior to the approval of any site as a manufactured home park or
recreational vehicle park and shall show the following:
(1) The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with identification of location and boundaries;
(2) The number, location and size of all home or vehicle spaces;
(3) The location, width and specifications of driveways, roadways and walkways;
(4) The location and specifications of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
(5) The location and details of lighting, electrical and gas systems;
(6) The location and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the
park;
(7) Existing and proposed topography of the park;
(8) The location of fire mains, including the size, the hydrants and any other equipment which may
be provided;
(9) Such other information as the municipal reviewing official may reasonably require.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-8, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.043 Building permits and code compliance
(a) All new construction permitted hereby shall comply with the requirements and standards set out in all
relevant sections of this code, and appendices, including but not limited to subdivision regulations, building
code, plumbing code, electrical code, sidewalk regulations and zoning ordinance.
(b) Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks in existence upon the effective date of this article
(June 11, 2002) shall comply with this article when updating their existing facilities.
(c) Updating shall mean major remodeling or replacement of existing facilities, but shall not include normal
maintenance.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-9, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.044 License
(a) Required. An annual license is required for each manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-10, adopted 6/11/02)
(b) Fee. The annual fee for each park shall be as set forth in section A3.12.044 of the fee schedule in appendix
A to this code. (Ordinance 610, sec. 14-10, adopted 6/11/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Approval. This annual license can be issued when the owner shows written evidence that the mobile home
park or vacation travel trailer park and its facilities have been inspected and approved by the city not more than
thirty (30) days prior to the date of license application. This nontransferable license may be obtained at city hall.
(d) Display. The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office located on the premises of the
manufactured home park or recreational vehicle part at all times.
(e) Revocation. The license to maintain and operate a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park
shall be revoked by the city secretary upon ten (10) days' notice when recommended by the building official or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/248
fire department on the finding of a violation of any provision of this article. A new license may be issued if the
circumstances leading to revocation have been remedied and new license fee paid.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-10, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.045 Layout and facilities generally
All manufactured home parks or recreational vehicle parks constructed in whole or in part after the effective date
of this article (June 11, 2002) shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Density. The following maximum densities shall apply to the manufactured home park or
recreational vehicle park:
(A) Manufactured homes, 7 per acre.
(B) Vacation travel trailers, 12 per acre.
(2) Minimum size. Initial development of any manufactured home park shall not be less than five
acres fully improved with serviced spaces. All site plans shall define the initial development are.
(3) Setback and spacing. Manufactured home and recreational vehicle minimum setback and
spacing requirements:
Manufactured
Home
Recreational
Vehicle (RV)
Spacing
Between structures 15' 10'
End to end parking 10' 6'
Setbacks
From permanent structures (excluding
individual storage structures, patio, roofs, and
carports)
10' 5'
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/248
From patio, roof or carport of one structure to
adjacent structures
3' 3'
Rear and side park property lines 10' 5'
Front park property lines 25' 15'
From interior streets 15' 10'
From cul-de-sac streets 25' 10'
Space width 35' 25'
(4) Additional construction. Manufactured home and recreational vehicle spaces may have an open
unenclosed patio, roof and carport of metal, fiberglass or other incombustible materials, constructed
to withstand wind velocities of seventy (70) miles per hour.
(5) Utilities.
(A) Water supply. An adequate supply of potable water for domestic and fire protection
purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the park. Manufactured home and
recreational vehicle spaces shall be provided with a water hookup at least four (4) inches above
the ground and hose connection, equipped with an antisiphon device for lawn maintenance.
(B) Sewage disposal. Waste from showers, bathtubs, toilets, lavatories in manufactured
homes, recreational vehicles and service or other buildings within the park shall be discharged
into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances. In the event public
services are not available such waste shall be discharged into a private disposal system
approved by the city-county health department.
(C) Natural gas. Manufactured home and recreational vehicle spaces shall be provided with a
natural gas hookup at least four (4) inches above the ground.
(D) Electrical service. Underground service shall be provided throughout manufactured home
and recreational vehicle spaces, and service to individual manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles shall meet the requirements as set forth in the ordinances of the city. All electric meters
shall be permanently installed in a location accessible from an interior street, alley or allweather
walkway.
(6) Lighting.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/248
(A) Entrances and exits to manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks shall be lighted
with one (1) or more luminaires (or fixtures) totaling seven thousand seven hundred (7,700)
lumens.
(B) The interior area of the manufactured home and recreational vehicle park shall be lighted
to five-tenths (0.5) candle average maintained. All luminaires shall be mounted fifteen (15) feet
to twenty-five (25) feet above ground level.
(7) Walks. All interior walks or manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks shall be allweather
and not less than four (4) feet in width. Walks provided adjacent to interior streets shall be
three (3) feet concrete gutter walks. Walks provided adjacent to public streets shall comply with
applicable city ordinances.
(8) Interior streets. Interior asphalt or concrete streets shall be provided to service manufactured
home and recreational vehicle spaces. All spaces shall abut upon such paved interior street which
shall connect with a public street. Interior streets where on-street parking is permitted shall not be
less than thirty-five (35) feet in width. In manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks where no
on-street parking is permitted, the interior streets shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. All
streets shall have standard curb and gutter except where three-foot gutter walks or drives are situated.
No cul-de-sac street shall be over two hundred fifty (250) feet from the center of the turnaround to
the nearest curbline of the street it abuts. At the end of each cul-de-sac, a six-foot wide, open,
unobstructed firefighting easement shall be provided. This easement shall not be more than two
hundred (200) feet in length and shall abut and open onto a private or public street other than a culde-
sac. Gates may be installed in such opening, provided breakaway locks are used.
(9) Ingress and egress. All manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks shall have a double
drive entrance separated by a thirty-foot median and a secondary access street at least three hundred
(300) feet from this double entrance. Such streets shall have standard curb and gutter and shall not be
less than twenty (20) feet in width. Secondary access streets can be chained for control as long as a
breakaway lock is used. Entrances and exits must comply with provisions of the ordinances of the
city.
(10) Driveway or accessway. A driveway or accessway shall be reserved from the street to the
manufactured home and recreational vehicle space.
(11) Parking. Two (2) off-street paved parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured
home space and two (2) additional guest paved parking spaces shall be provided in a common area
for each three (3) manufactured homes in the park. Such parking spaces shall not be over three
hundred (300) feet from the manufactured homes they serve. Recreational vehicle parks shall provide
one (1) automobile parking space for each recreational vehicle space, and one (1) additional guest
parking space shall be provided in a common area for each four (4) recreational vehicle spaces in the
park. Such parking spaces shall not be over two hundred (200) feet from the recreational vehicle they
serve.
(12) Recreation area. A landscaped recreation area or areas totaling not less than eight (8) percent
of the total manufactured home park site shall be provided. Such recreation area shall be provided in
a central recreation area per five (5) acres of gross mobile home park area. Regardless of location
each recreation area's smallest dimension shall be not less than fifty (50) feet. Community buildings
and community use facilities, adult recreation and child play areas, and swimming pools may be
included in these recreation areas. This area shall be protected from traffic hazards.
(13) Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park
shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/248
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-11, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.046 Sanitation facilities
Recreational vehicle parks shall provide toilets, baths or showers, and other sanitation facilities which shall
conform to the following requirements:
(1) Buildings. The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be either in
separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. Such service
buildings shall be well lighted and ventilated at all times with screened openings. These service
buildings shall be maintained in clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that could
menace the health of any occupant. Service buildings shall be located not closer than five (5) feet nor
farther than two hundred (200) feet from any recreational vehicle space.
(2) Hot water. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in any required
service buildings, and for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities.
(3) Toilet facilities.
(A) Males. Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for every
fifteen (15) recreational vehicles, one (1) urinal for every fifteen (15) recreational vehicles, and
one (1) shower with individual dressing accommodations for every ten (10) recreational
vehicles.
(B) Females. Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than one (1) flush toilet for
every ten (10) recreational vehicles, and one (1) shower with individual dressing
accommodations for every ten (10) recreational vehicles.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-12, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.047 Disposal of garbage and rubbish
An asphalt or concrete surface shall be supplied for municipal garbage containers in sufficient amounts so that
no patron shall travel more than three hundred (300) feet, one way, in order to deposit garbage in said container.
A minimum of one three-yard capacity container is required per each six (6) vehicle spaces. (Ordinance 610,
sec. 14-13, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.048 Fire protection
(a) Manufactured home.
(1) Each manufactured home shall contain a five-pound CO2 or ABC fire extinguisher at all times.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be installed so that no manufactured home space will be over three hundred
(300) feet from a hydrant sitting on an eight-inch water main.
(3) There shall not be any storage under the manufactured home.
(4) Fences around manufactured homes shall not be over thirty-four (34) inches high across the
front of the space.
(b) Vacation travel trailer.
(1) Each recreational vehicle shall contain a five-pound CO2 or ABC fire extinguisher at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/248
(2) Fire hydrants shall be installed so that no recreational vehicle space will be over two hundred
(200) feet from a hydrant sitting on an eight-inch water main.
(3) There shall not be any storage under the recreational vehicle.
(c) Maintenance. The manufactured home park and recreational vehicle park licensee shall be responsible for
maintaining the conditions of this section. The city fire marshal shall make periodic inspections of these parks to
insure the above conditions are maintained.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-13, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.049 Supervision
A responsible attendant or supervisor, owner or operator shall be in charge at all times to keep the manufactured
home and recreational vehicle park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition, and
he shall be answerable, with the licensee, for any violation of the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 610, sec.
14-15, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.12.050 Register of occupants
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all manufactured home and
recreational vehicle owners and occupants located within the park. This register shall be kept for a period of
seven (7) years and shall be readily available for inspection by law enforcement officers, public health officials
and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register
shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of each occupant.
(2) The make, model and year, license number and state of registration of all automobiles, existing
mobile homes, manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
(3) The date of arrival and departure of each existing mobile home, manufactured home and
recreational vehicle.
(Ordinance 610, sec. 14-16, adopted 6/11/02)
ARTICLE 3.13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.13.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has in V.T.C.A., Water Code, section 16.315, delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city commission does
ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.13.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which might result in loss of life and
property, create health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, and require
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/248
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
Sec. 3.13.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.13.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.13.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meanings they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a
request for a variance.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/248
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Elevated building. A nonbasement building:
(1) Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have
the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level a
minimum of 12 feet by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water; and
(2) Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood
of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X,
D, “elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with opening sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the
case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated building” also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of “elevated building,” even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway
walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Existing construction. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMS effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be
referred to as “existing structures.”
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the flood; mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas
having special hazards have been designated as zone A, M, and/or E.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/248
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term
“manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground,
as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
(2) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purpose of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state
inventory of historic places.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, however, does not permit construction or development in a manner
otherwise inconsistent with the principal goals of this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/248
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
Sec. 3.13.006 Lands to which article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.13.007 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Department of Homeland Security's Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) as published in the Federal Register at Vol. 71, Page 15135 on March 27, 2006,
and revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.13.008 Establishment of development permit
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.13.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.13.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.13.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.13.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Secs. 3.13.013–3.13.040 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.13.041 Designation of floodplain administrator
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/248
The city administrator is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CRF (National Flood Insurance Program
regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.13.042 Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably
safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval
is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall made the necessary interpretation.
(6) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(7) When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with section 3.13.007,
the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of division 3 of this article.
Sec. 3.13.043 Permit procedures
(a) Application for development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished
by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location
of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.13.072(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.13.042(1).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/248
(b) Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
Sec. 3.13.044 Variance procedures
(a) The city commission shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of
this article.
(b) The city commission shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error
in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or person aggrieved by the decision of the city commission may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of onehalf
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.13.043(b) of this division have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the city commission may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
this article (section 3.13.003).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/248
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will
be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(j) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Secs. 3.13.045–3.13.070 Reserved
Division 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.13.071 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/248
(5) All new replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewer shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Sec. 3.13.072 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in section
3.13.007, section 3.13.042(7), or section 3.13.073(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 3.13.043(a)
(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (1).
Sec. 3.13.073 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with
section 3.13.002, 3.13.003, and 3.13.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and subdivisions
shall meet development permit requirements of section 3.13.008, section 3.13.043, and the provisions of this
division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is less,
if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.13.007 or section 3.13.042(7) of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/248
(d) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(Ordinance 687 adopted 9/11/07)
Secs. 3.13.074–3.13.090 Reserved
Division 4. Lake Areas
Sec. 3.13.091 Water holding capacity maintained
The water holding capacity of any lake area shall not be decreased by reason of a cut and fill, redesign of lake
area or by the addition of water which is not natural runoff water.
Sec. 3.13.092 Dumping
The dumping or other placing of any dirt, debris or other solid materials in any lake area shall constitute a
nuisance, and any person who shall dump, place or permit to be placed any such material therein shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the construction of or to any person
engaged in the construction of any public work, the extension of any public utilities or the paving of any
roadway in any public park in any lake area, when the project is planned and the work or contract is approved by
or is done under the supervision of the city engineer and the project or work is not designed or calculated to
decrease the water-holding capacity of the lake area involved.
Sec. 3.13.093 Transporting dirt, etc., to area
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or to direct the transportation of any dirt, debris or other materials
over any of the streets or alleys in the city for the purpose of dumping or otherwise placing any such materials in
any lake area; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to persons making fills in accordance with
section 3.13.101 of this code, nor shall it apply to the construction of or to any person engaged in the
construction of any public work, the extension of public utilities or the paving of roadways in any public park in
a lake area, when the project is planned and the work or contract is approved by or is done under the supervision
of the city engineer and the project or work is not designed or calculated to decrease the water-holding capacity
of the lake area involved.
Sec. 3.13.094 Use of fill
It shall be unlawful for any person to spread, or use for filling purposes or cover over, or otherwise use or permit
to be used upon any land within a lake area any dirt, debris or other solid materials which have been transported
or moved in any manner to a lake area from outside the lake area, and whoever violates any part of this
provision shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance; provided, however, that this section shall not apply when a
cut and fill plan has been duly provided by the city engineer and the planning and zoning commission which
allows the use of solid materials from outside the lake area to be exchanged for solid materials that have been
removed from the lake area and when such cut and fill plan is not designed or calculated to decrease the waterholding
capacity of the lake area involved. Any appeal of a decision of the city engineer and planning and
zoning commission shall be made to the city council.
Sec. 3.13.095 Existence of fill declared nuisance
It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person or persons jointly or severally owning, or having
possession or control or any other interest in, any land located in any lake area in the city to permit, allow or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/248
suffer any dirt, debris or other solid materials or objects hauled, carried or otherwise transported from outside
any such lake area, onto land within a lake area, to remain upon the land of any such person within a lake area,
and any such person who violates any part of this provision shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
Sec. 3.13.096 Duty to remove dirt, etc.
It shall be the duty of every person having ownership, control, possession or the right to possession of any lake
area in which dirt, debris or objects or other solid material has been dumped or otherwise placed in such manner
as to constitute a nuisance, to proceed at once to remove or abate same as soon as its presence comes to his
knowledge.
Sec. 3.13.097 Notice to owners, etc.; order to abate
Whenever a nuisance defined in this article is found to exist within the city, the code enforcement officer shall
cause notice in writing to be given to the owner and the proprietor or occupant, if any, of the premises whereon
such nuisance exists. Such notice shall be made by letter addressed to such owner, proprietor or occupant, at his
post office address, with return receipt requested, or by publication as many as two (2) times within ten (10)
consecutive days, if personal service may not be had as aforesaid, or if the owner's address be not known. Such
notice shall contain an order to such owner, proprietor or occupant of such premises to remove or cause the
removal of such nuisance within ten (10) days.
Sec. 3.13.098 City may abate; expenses to create lien, etc.
If a nuisance defined in this article is not abated within the time set by the notice of the preceding section, the
city shall cause such nuisance to be abated or removed and shall defray the expenses thereof out of any money in
the city treasury available for such purpose. All expenses so incurred shall be charged against the owner and
shall be a lien on the land and premises whereupon such nuisance exists to the extent and in the manner
authorized by article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas.
Sec. 3.13.099 Filing of expense statement
Upon the abatement or removal of a nuisance defined in this article by the city, a statement of the expenses
incurred by the city in such action shall be signed and acknowledged by the mayor and filed with the county
clerk of the county. A copy of such statement shall be filed with the city attorney, who shall be authorized to
timely file suit to foreclose the lien for such expenses as provided by article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas, or as such article is amended.
Sec. 3.13.100 Duty to comply with notice; penalty
It shall be the duty of any owner, proprietor or occupant to comply with the provisions of the notice authorized
by this article. Any owner, proprietor or occupant who, within ten (10) days after written notice thereof, shall
neglect, fail or refuse to abate the nuisance defined in section 21-66 [sic] shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 3.13.101 Fills generally
(a) The city engineer is authorized to issue permits to owners to make uniform fills in the lake areas below the
estimated high-water line; provided, that such fills are made with dirt excavated from below the estimated highwater
line, and the fills produce a ground surface above the estimated high-water level, for all and in such areas
intended to be improved for human habitation if the plans therefor have been approved by the planning and
zoning commission and the water-holding capacity of the lake area is not thereby decreased. The perimeter
shown on such plats of any such lake area shall be modified by the city engineer to conform to such fills, and
building permits may be issued when the ground surface has in fact been raised to an elevation above the
estimated high-water level.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/248
(b) When the planning and zoning commission approves any plat or replat of any tract of land in a lake area
affected by an estimated high-water line, and such plat is supported by plans and specifications for making
uniform fills below the estimated high-water level by using dirt excavated from below the estimated high-water
level for all land intended to be improved for human habitation, and the water-holding capacity of the lake area
will not be thereby decreased, the perimeter of such lake area plat shall be modified by the city engineer to
conform thereto, and building permits may be issued when the ground surface has in fact been raised to an
elevation above the estimated high-water level.
(Ordinance 719 adopted 8/11/09)
ARTICLE 3.14 BILLBOARDS, SIGNBOARDS AND BULLETIN BOARDS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.14.001 Using structures without authority
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any sign or advertisement upon any structure, other than an
authorized billboard, signboard or bulletin board; provided, this shall not apply to any person using his own
premises therefor, in compliance with law, or when such sign or advertisement merely advertises the business
conducted on the premises. (1978 Code, sec. 3-20)
Sec. 3.14.002 Leaving paste, etc., and old material from billboards
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter, daub or leave any paste, glue or like substance used for affixing
bills upon any sidewalk or street within the city or to scatter or throw any old bills or waste material removed
from billboards on the surface of any public street or on the surface of any other public or private property
within the city. (1978 Code, sec. 3-21)
Sec. 3.14.003 Hazardous, unsightly or unsanitary structures
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any billboard, bulletin board or signboard in such condition as to
be dangerous to the life or limb of any person using the streets or sidewalks of the city, or the property upon
which the same is located, or to maintain any such billboard, signboard or bulletin board in such condition for
lack of paint or torn or defaced condition of the matter affixed thereon as to be unsightly and in violation of the
sanitary provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 3-22)
Sec. 3.14.004 Removal by city
Upon the failure of any person required to remove any billboard, bulletin board or signboard, the city
commission may have the same removed as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 216,
subchapter A. (1978 Code, sec. 3-23; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.14.005–3.14.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 3.14.031 Required
No person shall engage in or carry on the business or occupation of billposting, bulletin painting, distributing,
card or banner tacking or any similar business within the city, without first having been licensed to carry on such
business and having complied with the provisions of this article. (1978 Code, sec. 3-24)
Sec. 3.14.032 Bond; issuance; fee; duration; renewal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/248
Any person desiring to engage in any of the occupations enumerated in section 3.14.031 shall file with the city
commission his application for a license therefor, accompanied by a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), to be approved by the city commission, with a solvent surety company authorized to
do business in the state as surety, conditioned that such person will save and keep harmless the city from all
damages caused in the conduct of such occupation or business, and will observe and obey all of the provisions of
this code and other ordinances now in force or hereafter to be passed by the city commission regulating in any
manner the conduct of such business. If a license applied for under this section is granted by the city
commission, the city secretary shall issue such license upon the payment of a license fee to the city in the
amount as set forth in section A3.14.032 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code, which fee shall entitle
such person to pursue such business or occupation for the remainder of the calendar year in which issued, unless
the license is sooner revoked. Such license may be annually extended for the period of one (1) calendar year on
the first day of January of each year by the payment of an annual license fee in the amount as set forth in section
A3.14.032 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code, which fee shall entitle such person to pursue such
business or occupation for the remainder of the calendar year in which issued, unless the license is sooner
revoked. The annual license fee shall be a fixed annual fee and shall not be prorated for any period less than one
(1) year, but the licensee shall be required to pay the same for the full period of one (1) year, or any portion
thereof, within which such licensee desires to engage in the business. No refund or rebate shall be allowed
thereon. (1978 Code, sec. 3-25; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.14.033 Revocation; suspension
In addition to any of the remedies provided by this article, the city commission may revoke any license issued
hereunder for violations of the provisions of this article. Before revoking such license, notice shall be given to
the licensee and he shall be entitled to a hearing with his witnesses at a regular meeting of the city commission
or a special meeting called for that purpose. If the city commission determines after hearing all the facts that the
licensee is willfully failing to comply with the provisions of this article, it may revoke his license or may
suspend the same for any period less than a year. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business
enumerated in section 3.14.031 of this division after his license has been revoked by the city commission or
during the time the same has been suspended. (1978 Code, sec. 3-26)
Secs. 3.14.034–3.14.060 Reserved
Division 3. Highway Beautification*
Sec. 3.14.061 Short title
This division shall be known as the highway beautification ordinance. (1978 Code, sec. 3-30)
Sec. 3.14.062 Definitions
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Erect. To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw or in any other way bring into
being or establish except when performed incidental to the change of an advertising message or to normal
maintenance or repair of an existing sign.
Freeway. A divided highway with full control of access.
Main-traveled way. The through traffic lanes exclusive of frontage roads, auxiliary lanes and ramps.
Official signs. Directional and other official signs authorized by law, including signs pertaining to natural
wonders and scenic and historic attractions, and signs which have as their purpose the protection of life and
property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/248
On-premises signs. Signs advertising the sale or lease of the property on which they are located, and signs
advertising activities conducted on the premises upon which they are located.
Sign. An outdoor sign, light, display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard or
other thing which is designated, intended or used to advertise or inform.
Traveled way. That portion of the roadway used for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders and
auxiliary lanes.
(1978 Code, sec. 3-32)
Visibility triangle. The visibility triangle shall have as its sides the right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets
extending away from the point of intersection of the two right-of-way lines a distance of 40 feet to a point, with
a straight line connecting the two points to form the third side of the triangle. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.14.063 Standards
(a) Signs shall not imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device.
(b) Signs shall not be erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural
features.
(c) No sign shall exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in area.
(d) No sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
(e) No sign shall exceed sixty (60) feet in length.
(f) All dimensions include border and trim, but exclude supports.
(g) Double-faced, back-to-back, or V-type signs shall be considered as one sign.
(h) Signs which exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet in area may not be double-faced (stacked or side
by side).
(i) Signs may not be located in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, signal or device, or to obstruct or interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
(j) Signs may not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any public park, public forest, public
playground or scenic area so designated by a governmental agency, which is adjacent to the highway.
(k) Signs may not be erected closer than one hundred (100) feet apart on the same side of the highway.
(l) Adjacent to freeways, signs may not be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet apart on the same side
of the freeway.
(m) Signs may be located closer than the spacing requirements established herein, provided such signs are
separated by buildings, natural surroundings or other obstructions so that only one sign located within the
specified spacing is visible at any one time.
(n) Signs which contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights are
prohibited, except those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or similar
information.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/248
(o) Lights which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any
portion of the traveled ways of the highways, and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to
impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a
motor vehicle, are prohibited.
(p) No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic
sign, device or signal.
(q) Portable or wheeled signs are prohibited.
(r) Any signs which emit sound, odor or visible matter which serves as a distraction to persons within the
public right-of-way are prohibited.
(s) Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign for each freestanding building in commercial areas not to exceed
one freestanding sign per development lot shall be permitted only as indicated below:
(1) Districts with frontage on a thoroughfare.
(A) Area. The area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed an amount equal to 0.40 square
feet per front foot of lot and in no case shall this sign area exceed two hundred fifty (250)
square feet.
(B) Height. For lots with frontage of zero (0) through ninety-nine (99) feet, sign height shall
not exceed five (5) feet. For lots exceeding ninety-nine (99) feet of lot frontage, the sign height
shall not exceed five (5) feet, plus one foot of sign height for each twenty (20) feet of lot
frontage. In no case shall sign height exceed thirty (30) feet.
(C) Setback. Setbacks shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet or one and forty-three onehundredths
(1.43) feet for each foot of sign height, whichever is greater.
(D) Spacing. Freestanding signs shall not be placed closer to a side lot line than a distance
equal to one-fourth of the lot frontage.
(2) Districts with frontage on expressway right-of-way.
(A) Area. The area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed an amount equal to 0.40 square
feet per front foot of lot and in no case shall this sign area exceed two hundred fifty (250)
square feet.
(B) Height. For lots with frontage of zero (0) through ninety-nine (99) feet, sign height shall
not exceed twenty (20) feet. For lots exceeding ninety-nine (99) feet of lot frontage, the sign
height shall not exceed twenty (20) feet, plus one foot of sign height for each forty (40) feet of
lot frontage. In no case shall sign height exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
(C) Setback. Setbacks shall be a minimum of one and twenty-two one-hundredths (1.22) feet
for each foot of sign height.
(D) Spacing. Freestanding signs shall not be placed closer to a side lot than a distance equal
to one-fourth of the lot frontage.
(3) All freestanding signs permitted in this subsection shall comply with the following:
(A) On corner lots, that frontage on the major or primary street shall be construed to be the
development lot frontage, and no more than one sign shall be permitted, except on a
development lot located at the intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares or two (2)
expressways or a major thoroughfare and an expressway, a freestanding sign shall be permitted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/248
on each such thoroughfare or expressway or one sign, of the same size, height and setbacks,
may be placed on the corner, provided it is not within the visibility triangle.
(B) No sign shall be placed within the “visibility triangle” as defined in this article.
(C) To compute the allowable square footage of sign area, only one side of a double-faced
sign shall be considered.
(D) Development lot frontage shall be defined as that frontage under one development at the
time of application for sign permit.
(E) Freestanding signs may rotate not more than six (6) revolutions per minute.
(F) Freestanding signs may be placed on the roof of a building provided the height, setback,
square footage and location requirements of this section are met.
(1978 Code, sec. 3-33)
Sec. 3.14.064 Applicability
Signs shall not be located within any “R” zoning district of the city. Every sign erected within the city and within
six hundred sixty (660) feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of interstate and federal-aid primary
highways shall comply with the standards established by this division, with the following exceptions: (1978
Code, sec. 3-34; Ordinance adopting Code)
(1) Official signs.
(2) On-premises signs.
(3) Signs which are not visible from any point on the main-traveled way viewed from a height of
not more than six (6) feet above any such point.
(1978 Code, sec. 3-34)
Sec. 3.14.065 Compliance with other regulations
Every sign regulated by this division shall also comply with the zoning ordinance, building code and all other
applicable codes and ordinances of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 3-35)
Sec. 3.14.066 Licenses, permits and fees
The building official shall issue building permits for signs regulated by this division only to persons who own
valid licenses issued by the state transportation commission pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, chapter 391. The minimum fee for said building permit shall be as provided in section
A3.14.066 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code. (Ordinance 495, sec. 3-36, adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 3.14.067 Billboards
Outdoor advertising signs of this type shall be permitted in the “I” industrial districts, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Billboards shall be constructed to meet the construction standards as established in the city
building code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/248
(2) Billboards located in an industrial district shall be a minimum of eighty (80) feet from any
residentially zoned property line.
(3) The maximum area of any billboard located in an industrial district shall be three hundred (300)
square feet.
(4) The maximum area of any billboard located in an industrial district shall be seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet.
(5) There shall be a minimum separation of two hundred (200) feet between all billboards on the
same side of a street; provided, however, this shall be increased to five hundred (500) feet on
expressways.
(6) Billboards shall have a setback of not less than the greater of:
(A) Forty-three (43) feet; or
(B) The greatest setback of all the front buildings on the lot on which the billboard is located,
or if none, then that of the lots contiguous to the lot upon which the billboard is located.
(7) Billboards shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
(8) All lighting of billboards shall be so shielded as not to produce intensive or excessive light or
glare on adjacent property.
(9) Billboards shall be prohibited from being placed within the boundaries of blocks 61, 62, 63, 64,
65, 79, 81, 90, 91, 92 and 93, original town addition to the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 3-38)
ARTICLE 3.15 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.15.001 Removal of gravel, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without first having obtained the permission of the city commission, to dig,
remove or carry away, or cause the same to be done, from any street, alley or other public place any sod, stone,
earth, sand or gravel. (1978 Code, sec. 19-14)
Sec. 3.15.002 Depositing dirt, gravel, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or allow to spill any dirt, loam, sand, gravel or any other such
matter or substance in, on or about any street, alley or other public way in the city. (1978 Code, sec. 19-15)
Sec. 3.15.003 Injuring or destroying public improvements
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to injure or destroy, or assist in injuring or destroying, any bridge
appurtenance, signboard, culvert, causeway, gutter or other public improvement in the city. (1978 Code, sec. 19-
16)
Secs. 3.15.004–3.15.030 Reserved
Division 2. Excavations*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/248
Sec. 3.15.031 Permit required; fee
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate across, along, in or about any public street, alley or other public
way without first having obtained a permit for such purpose from the city secretary. A fee as set forth in section
A3.15.031 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code will be paid to the city secretary for each permit herein
provided for and shall be paid at the time such permit is delivered. (1978 Code, sec. 19-8; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 3.15.032 Backfilling
Any person having done any excavation across, along, in or about any public street, alley or other public way in
the city shall refill any excavations according to specifications for such work, which shall include the following
specifications:
(1) Gravel streets will be backfilled with compacted road gravel.
(2) Asphalt streets will be backfilled with sand water jetted; then a five-inch concrete cap
extending a minimum of one (1) foot over each side of the ditch; then surfaced with the existing
amount of hot mix asphaltic concrete, type D.
(3) Concrete streets will meet the same specifications as subsection (2) above, except that
“concrete” is substituted for “hot mix asphaltic concrete,” which concrete may be combined with the
cap.
(4) When it is necessary to cross an existing street with a utility line, the road crossing will be
bored where it is possible. Should it not be possible to bore the street or if the utility main is in the
existing street, the street may be open cut and the ditch backfilled as outlined above.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-9)
Sec. 3.15.033 Dirt streets excluded
Nothing in sections 3.15.031 and 3.15.032 is intended to apply to any portion of any street, alley or other public
way, except that portion which is covered with gravel, asphalt, concrete, cement or any mixture or compound of
either, and same shall only apply to the portion that is covered by gravel, asphalt, concrete, cement or a mixture
of one or more surfacing materials. (1978 Code, sec. 19-10)
Sec. 3.15.034 Notice in case of street closing
Any excavation requiring the closing of a street must be reported to the police and fire departments prior to
closing. (1978 Code, sec. 19-11)
Sec. 3.15.035 Warning devices required
The person working in the street, alley or other public way shall be responsible for providing all warning devices
and signs to provide for the safety of both pedestrians and vehicular traffic. (1978 Code, sec. 19-12)
Sec. 3.15.036 Guarding required
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any public or private improvement or building in the city to
leave any hole, ditch or excavation of any kind in the surface of the earth in or adjoining any public square,
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, without guarding or covering same in such manner as to protect
persons and animals from injury. (1978 Code, sec. 19-13)
Secs. 3.15.037–3.15.070 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/248
Division 3. Sidewalks*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.15.071 Sidewalk widths
All sidewalks constructed in the city on any street that is eighty (80) or more feet in width shall be constructed a
full twelve (12) feet wide, or in such manner that the edge of such walk farthest from the property line abutting
thereon shall be twelve (12) feet from such property line, and such distance shall include the curb, if there is any
curb; provided, however, in sections of the city having streets eighty (80) or more feet in width, which sections
are commonly known and recognized principally and chiefly as residential sections, and not principally and
chiefly as business sections, such sidewalks may be of a width of four (4) feet, in which cases the sidewalk
proper, together with the parking space or tree bank space, measured at right angles from the line of the property
abutting thereon, shall be a total of twelve (12) feet in width. (1978 Code, sec. 19-27)
Sec. 3.15.072 Construction on vacant lot
No permit shall be issued for the construction of improvements on a vacant lot unless the application requires, as
a condition of construction, that a concrete sidewalk of a minimum width of 48 inches, and a minimum thickness
of 4 inches, be constructed and completed prior to the commencement of other construction. “Construction of
improvements” includes the placement of a manufactured home. This does not relieve responsibility of
subdivision developers to provide sidewalks as specified in the city subdivision regulations. (Ordinance 607, sec.
19-17, adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 3.15.073 Scaffolding on or over sidewalk
All scaffolding erected over or on a sidewalk shall be constructed in a good, workmanlike, substantial manner so
as to prevent injury to persons passing thereunder or working thereon. (1978 Code, sec. 19-21)
Sec. 3.15.074 Construction or repair to provide handicapped access
(a) All sidewalks repaired or constructed on corner lots shall provide sloping rampways from street level at
curbside to the level of the sidewalk on a slope as required by federal guidelines for handicapped access.
(b) No permit shall be issued except for construction in compliance with this section.
(Ordinance 470, secs. 1 (19-28), 2, adopted 3/19/85)
Secs. 3.15.075–3.15.100 Reserved
Part II. Posts in Sidewalks
Sec. 3.15.101 Permit required; fee
(a) No person shall erect or maintain any post in the sidewalk without having first obtained a permit from the
building official.
(b) The permit fee shall be as prescribed by the building code.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-18)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/248
Sec. 3.15.102 Specifications
No permit shall be issued except in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Posts shall be constructed at least four (4) feet in a perpendicular measurement from the
building. All posts shall be in a straight line parallel to the street and/or sidewalk.
(2) All provisions of the building code including the requirements that any projections such as
awnings, balconies and such be supported entirely by the building and have a noncombustible
framework are applicable to this section.
(3) The construction must be securely erected and maintained so that there will be no danger of the
same being dislodged by ordinary winds or falling from other cause. No construction shall be
allowed that would constitute a traffic hazard.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-19)
Sec. 3.15.103 Indemnification for damage
The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable in any manner to the permittee for or on account of
damage caused by the construction, erection and maintenance of any post or sign in the sidewalks. The permittee
hereby releases the city and agrees to hold it free and harmless and to indemnify it from all damages, claims or
demands that may result from the construction, erection or maintenance of any post or sign on the sidewalks. All
parties receiving a permit shall provide as a condition to receiving same a bond or indemnity insurance policy or
add the city to its liability insurance as an additional insured in the amount of at least one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) to indemnify the city for any loss or damage or liability that may result from the
construction or maintenance of such posts. This bond or indemnity insurance shall be renewed annually and kept
in full force and effect. Failing to continue to comply with this section and section 3.15.102 shall cause the
permit and license to be revoked and the owner shall be required to remove said posts. If the owner fails to
remove said posts within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the city to remove, the city shall have the
right to remove same. (1978 Code, sec. 19-20)
Secs. 3.15.104–3.15.130 Reserved
Division 4. Obstructions*
Sec. 3.15.131 Obstructing streets with articles
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to unnecessarily obstruct any street or alley with a wagon, cart, delivery
truck, or vehicle of any kind, or with boxes, lumber, timber, firewood, posts, awnings, signs, merchandise or
other substances in any manner whatsoever, so as to prevent free passage thereon.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not be construed to prohibit any person who may be engaged in building, removing or
improving any building or other improvement from occupying with lumber, stone, brick or other material that
portion of a public street or alley which is adjacent to such improvement or building; provided, however, such
material shall not occupy a space larger than one-third (1/3) of the street or alley adjacent to such improvement
or building, nor shall such material be placed on such space more than ten (10) days before construction of such
building or improvement begins; nor shall the owner of such building or improvement allow any surplus lumber,
stone, brick or other rubbish to remain in said street or alley more than five (5) days after the completion of such
building or improvement.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-22)
Sec. 3.15.132 Obstructing sidewalks with articles
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/248
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any article whatsoever upon any sidewalk in
such a manner as to obstruct free passage upon same; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent merchants and dealers from placing packages of goods, wares or merchandise which they
may be receiving or shipping on any sidewalk, if the same do not occupy more than one-half (1/2) the width
thereof, and do not remain thereon more than six (6) hours; nor shall anything in this section prevent merchants,
dealers or auctioneers from occupying a space on the sidewalk adjoining their place of business, two (2) feet or
less in width (measured from the inside of the sidewalk), and the length of the property line, with signs, samples
or other articles; nor shall anything in this section prevent any building craftsmen or builder from occupying
with materials or temporary construction a space not larger than one-half (1/2) the width of the sidewalk
adjoining any improvement or building they may be erecting or in any way working upon; nor shall such
persons be prevented from crossing or passing over any sidewalk with materials used in the construction of said
improvement or building.
(b) If any obstructions mentioned in this section are not removed within ten (10) days after notice to do so is
given by the chief of police, the offender will be subject to penalization hereunder, and upon conviction will be
fined in accordance with the penalty herein provided, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which such obstruction remains after the expiration of such notice, and such obstruction
shall be removed by the city at the expense of the person so convicted.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-23)
Sec. 3.15.133 Opening or leaving boxes on sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in any business to open any box, case or package of merchandise on
the sidewalks or to leave any box, case or package of merchandise on said sidewalks for a longer period than one
(1) hour. (1978 Code, sec. 19-24)
Secs. 3.15.134–3.15.160 Reserved
Division 5. Driveway Construction
Sec. 3.15.161 Obstructing drainage
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any driveway from abutting property to a street in such a way as
to obstruct or impede the drainage of water in such street. (1978 Code, sec. 19-25)
Sec. 3.15.162 Access driveway regulations of state adopted
(a) The 1960 revised booklet of “Regulations for Access Driveways to State Highways,” prepared in
accordance with instruction and policy of the state highway commission minute order #34719, dated September
23, 1953, designed to accomplish a coordinated development between the highway and the abutting property for
the safe movement of traffic, are adopted for the public safety and protection of the city and of the citizens
thereof, and all of the provisions therein shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
(b) Any person who shall violate or disregard any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009.
(1978 Code, sec. 19-26)
Secs. 3.15.163–3.15.200 Reserved
Division 6. Management of Public Right(s)-of-Way*
Sec. 3.15.201 Statement of purpose; scope and construction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/248
(a) Purpose. Public and private uses of public right(s)-of-way for location of facilities employed in the
provision of public services should, in the interests of the general welfare, be accommodated; however, the city
must insure that the primary purpose of the right(s)-of-way, passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is
maintained to the greatest extent possible. In addition, the value of other public and private installations,
roadways, city utility systems, facilities and properties should be protected, competing uses must be reconciled,
and the public safety preserved. The use of the public right(s)-of-way corridors by private users is secondary to
these public objectives and to the movement of traffic. This article is intended to strike a balance between the
public need for efficient, safe transportation routes and the use of public right(s)-of-way for location of public
and private facilities. The article thus has several objectives:
(1) To insure that the public safety is maintained and that public inconvenience is minimized.
(2) To protect the city's infrastructure investment by establishing repair standards for the pavement,
facilities, and property in the public right(s)-of-way, when work is accomplished.
(3) To facilitate work within the public right(s)-of-way through the standardization of regulations.
(4) To maintain an efficient permit process.
(5) To conserve and fairly apportion the limited physical capacity of the public right(s)-of-way
held in public trust by the city.
(6) To establish a public policy for enabling the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological
development.
(7) To promote cooperation among the service providers and the city in the occupation of the
public right(s)-of-way, and work therein, in order to eliminate duplication that is wasteful,
unnecessary or unsightly, lower the service providers' and the city's costs of providing services to the
public, and preserve the physical integrity of the streets, alleys, easements and highways by
minimizing pavement cuts.
(8) To assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
(b) Scope. This article does not grant any rights to use or occupy the city's right(s)-of-way but is intended to
impose reasonable regulations on the use of the public right(s) of-way by persons authorized by license and hold
harmless agreements, franchises and/or by law to place and maintain equipment and facilities within the public
right(s) of-way.
(c) Construction. In the event of a conflict between this division and either chapter 284 of the Texas Local
Government Code or the design manual adopted by the city in accordance with that statute, then those other
documents shall prevail as to an entity, facility, or right regulated by chapter 284.
Sec. 3.15.202 Definitions
For the purposes of this division the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section.
Backfill. The placement of new dirt, select fill, or other material in an excavation, or the return of excavated dirt,
select fill or other material to an excavation.
Backhaul data provider. A generic term used in this division to be inclusive of every type of business, provider,
service, and facility that is contemplated or regulated by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended. A backhaul data provider is a service provider.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/248
City. The City of Slaton, its officers, employees and departments.
City engineer. The city engineer or his/her designee(s).
Closure. A complete or partial closing of one (1) or more lanes of traffic for any period of time.
Common user. Service provider(s) who uses conduits or ducts in public right(s)-of-way in common with other
service provider(s).
Construction. Any of the following activities performed by any person within a public right(s)-of-way:
(1) Installation, reconstruction, laying, placement, repair, upgrade, maintenance or relocation of
facilities or other improvements except service lines, whether temporary or permanent;
(2) Modification or alteration to any surface, subsurface or aerial space within the public right(s)-
of-way;
(3) Performance, restoration, or repair of pavement cuts or excavations; or
(4) Other similar construction work.
Contractor. A person hired or retained to do construction for a service provider.
Duct or conduit. A single enclosed raceway for cables, fiber optics, wires or other similar facilities.
Emergency. Any event which may threaten public health or safety, including, but not limited to, damaged or
leaking water or gas piping systems, damaged, plugged, or leaking sanitary sewers or storm sewers, damaged
electrical and telecommunications facilities, unsafe overhead pole structures or any other condition that requires
immediate repair or replacement of facilities to restore service to a customer.
Emergency activity. Circumstances requiring immediate construction or operations to:
(1) Prevent imminent damage or injury to the health or safety of any person or to the public
right(s)-of-way;
(2) Restore service; or
(3) Prevent the loss of service.
Excavate or excavation. To dig into or in any way remove or penetrate any part of a right(s)-of-way.
Facilities. Any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, nodes, conduits, pipes,
connections, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plants, and appurtenances
and all associated physical equipment placed in, on, or under the public right(s)-of-way of the city. Facilities
specifically exclude service lines, landscaping materials, irrigation systems, and materials used by the United
States Postal Service or any other governmental entity.
Pavement cut. An excavation in a sidewalk or improved surface of the public right(s)-of-way.
Person. An individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint
venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity who owns, installs, maintains, or controls
facilities or service lines.
Public right(s)-of-way. The surface of, and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway,
land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held
by or under the control of the city to which the city holds any property rights in regard to the use for utilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/248
The term does not include the airwaves above public right(s)-of-way with regard to wireless
telecommunications. The term is synonymous with “street,” “road,” “public way,” “right of-way,” and public
utility easement.
Service line. Line connecting the service provider's utility or meter to the customer's point of utilization or
consumption.
Service provider. Any person using the public right(s)-of-way including, but not limited to, any wholesale or
retail electric utility, gas utility, telecommunications company, cable company, water utility, stormwater utility,
or wastewater utility, backhaul data provider, wireless data or voice tower or node installer, regardless of
whether or not the service provider is publicly or privately owned or required to operate within the city pursuant
to a franchise. The term “service provider” includes persons performing installation or maintenance of service
lines, poles of all types, nodes of all types, and other facilities of chapter 284, Texas Local Government Code
that are not owned by a service provider.
Thoroughfare. A public right(s)-of-way that is a public traffic arterial or collector street, including all streets in
the central business district.
Sec. 3.15.203 Public right(s)-of-way construction
No person shall commence or continue with the construction of facilities within the public right(s)-of-way in the
city except as provided by the ordinances of the city and the directives of the city engineering department. All
construction activity in public right(s) of-way will be in accordance with this division.
Sec. 3.15.204 Registration
In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all service providers must register with the city.
Registration will be issued in the name of the person who owns the facilities. Registration must be renewed
every five (5) years. For utilities with a current franchise or license, the franchise or license will be evidence of
renewal. If a registration is not renewed and subject to sixty (60) day notification to the owner, the city shall
refuse to grant further construction permits until the registration is renewed. When any information provided for
the registration changes, the service provider will inform the city of the change no more than thirty (30) days
after the date the change is made. Registration shall include:
(1) The proper name of the service provider and any other assumed name;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of people who will be contact person(s) for the
service provider;
(3) The name(s) and telephone number(s) of a contact(s) who shall be available twenty-four (24)
hours a day;
(4) Proof of insurance and surety bond:
(A) A service provider must provide acceptable proof of insurance in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the city's registration form. The city will accept certificates of selfinsurance
issued by the state, or letters written by applicant in those instances where the state
does not issue such certificates, which provide the same coverage as required herein so long as
the service provider demonstrates that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured
entity.
(B) A service provider shall provide an annual surety bond which will be valid each year for
which construction will occur and for one (1) full year after completion of the construction. The
bond must be from a surety company authorized to do business in the state and in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost to restore the right(s)-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/248
the event the service provider leaves the jobsite in the right(s)-of-way unfinished, incomplete or
unsafe, as determined by the city engineer. This requirement may be waived upon providing
city engineer with acceptable evidence of financial assets or reserves sufficient to cover the
amount of the bond.
(C) A service provider shall submit the required proof of insurance and surety bond at the
time it registers with the city and maintain such throughout the term of period of the
registration.
(D) All proof of insurance and the surety bond will be filed with the city engineer.
Sec. 3.15.205 Construction permit
(a) No service provider or any other person shall perform any construction in the public right(s)-of-way
without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. The permit will be issued in the name of
the person who owns or will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit application must be completed and
signed by the owner of the facilities to be constructed.
(1) Emergency repairs related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a
permit in accordance with section 3.15.215 below.
(2) The phrase “construction” does not include the following:
(A) Installation and maintenance of a service line;
(B) The vertical installation, maintenance; repair or replacement by a registered service
provider of wooden poles not exceeding fifteen (15) inches in diameter, sixty (60) feet in length
and which are not buried more than eight (8) feet deep into the public right-of-way and which
are located within twenty-eight (28) inches of the border of the public right-of-way line;
(C) Repair and maintenance of existing facilities unless such repair or maintenance requires a
pavement cut, the closure of a traffic lane for a period greater than six (6) hours, excavation or
boring;
(3) Notwithstanding the exceptions provided in subsection (2) above, service provider or other
person working in the public right(s)-of-way shall comply with all applicable requirements of this
division.
(b) The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, estimated dates and
times work is to take place and any other conditions set out by the city engineer.
(c) The service provider applying for a permit will provide the city engineer with documentation in the format
specified by the city engineering department describing:
(1) The proposed location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the design
plan for public right(s)-of-way construction.
(2) Plans which will be on a scale acceptable to the city engineering department.
(3) Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use.
(4) Detail of all known facilities in approximate relationship to applicant's proposed route.
(5) Detail of what applicant proposes to install, such as conduits, ducts, pipe and duct size, number
of interducts, valves, pull boxes, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/248
(6) Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt, brick or concrete in streets, alleys, and
easements. Plans will include city standard construction details.
(7) Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals,
etc. including depth located in public right(s)-of-way.
(8) Handholes and/or manholes typical of the type of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to
use or access.
(9) Complete legend for drawings submitted by applicant, or a legend standard may be filed with
city engineer for reference.
(10) The construction methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures,
and facilities within or adjacent to the public right(s)-of-way, and the dates and times work will
occur, all (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the city engineer.
(11) A written schedule identifying the planned work and, anticipated phasing if applicable.
(12) If required by law, two (2) sets of plans prepared by a licensed professional engineer must be
submitted with permit application.
(d) All construction in the public right(s)-of-way shall be in accordance with the construction permit. The city
engineer shall have access to the work and to such further information as the city engineer may reasonably
require to ensure compliance with the permit.
(e) Prior to commencement of any work under the permit service provider shall provide the city engineer with
the name, address and phone number of the contractor(s) and subcontractor(s) who will perform the actual
construction together with the name and phone number of an individual with the contractor(s) and
subcontractor(s) who will be available at all times during construction.
(f) A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction
site and made available for inspection by the city engineer at all times when construction work is occurring.
(g) All construction work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction
permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, an extension from the city engineer may
be requested. If the request for an extension is made prior to the expiration of the permit, work under the permit
may continue while the request for an extension is pending.
(h) A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-ofway
located in the city, must be provided if the work will extend into the public right(s)-of-way.
(i) An application for a permit must be submitted before the commencement of the proposed work as follows.
These required time periods may be waived by the city engineer:
(1) Five (5) business days for projects requiring no permanent structure(s) and less than one
thousand (1,000) linear feet of facilities; and
(2) Ten (10) business days for all other projects.
(j) Applications for permits will be approved or disapproved by the city engineer before the date indicated for
commencement of work.
(k) The city engineering department or the applicant can request a preconstruction meeting with the
construction contractor.
Sec. 3.15.206 Service line permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/248
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person except service provider's registered under this division to excavate
and/or make pavement cuts in any public right(s)-of-way for the purpose of service line installation or
maintenance without first:
(1) Making application for a service line permit from the city street department agreeing to the
repair and restoration of the public right(s)-of-way in accordance with the prescribed city
specifications and securing from the city street department a written permit therefor;
(2) Providing a plan for the service line excavation and restoration of said public right(s)-of-way;
and
(3) Posting a performance surety bond or cash-equivalent security in an amount representing the
estimated cost of restoring the public right(s)-of-way surface to prescribed city specifications and
providing evidence of insurance as required by the permit application.
(b) The city street department, upon investigation of the location, purpose, extent and time of the disturbance
of the surface of the public right(s)-of-way may grant or, for an expressed reason, refuse permission for the
service line permit. The applicant must be notified by the city street department whether the permit is granted or
refused within one (1) business day after the application has been made.
(c) All excavations and/or pavement cuts in public right(s)-of-way shall be maintained and repaired in
accordance with section 3.15.212 hereof.
(d) The person doing the excavation and/or pavement cuts shall be fully responsible for safeguarding persons
and property from damages or injury.
(e) If applicable, persons doing excavation and/or pavement cuts shall minimize disruptions to access to
adjacent property by coordinating their schedule with other persons in the vicinity working in the public right(s)-
of-way. When coordination conflicts occur, the city street department shall coordinate the work to reduce access
problems.
Sec. 3.15.207 General public right(s)-of-way use and construction
(a) Minimal interference. Work in the public right(s)-of-way shall be done in a manner that causes the least
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of adjacent property users, owners, and residents.
Service provider's facilities shall be constructed or maintained in such a manner as not to interfere with sewers,
water pipes, or any other property of the city, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures, or
other facilities that have been constructed in the public right(s)-of-way by, or under, the city's authority. The
service provider's facilities shall be located, erected, and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the
lives of persons, obstruct the free use of the public right(s)-of-way or other public property, and shall not
interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public during the construction, repair, or removal thereof
except as authorized by this division or the city engineer. This subsection shall not be construed to require
relocation of any facility that was completed or under construction on the effective date of this division,
provided nothing in this subsection reduces or restricts the city's right to require a service provider to relocate
facilities as required by other law.
(b) Locations and notifications.
(1) A permit does not relieve a service provider of the responsibility to coordinate with other
utilities and to protect existing facilities. A service provider working in the public right(s)-of-way is
responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the public
right(s)-of-way prior to any excavation.
(2) The service provider will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical,
of all facilities. When required by the city engineer, the service provider shall verify location by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/248
potholing, hand digging or another method approved by the city engineer prior to any excavation or
boring.
(3) In verifying location of facilities in the public right(s)-of-way in preparation for construction
under a permit, service provider shall provide to city engineer a copy of any written information
obtained regarding its or any other facilities in the public right(s) of-way related to a particular permit.
The service provider shall not be responsible for the accuracy of any information provided.
(4) Before beginning excavation in any public right(s)-of-way, a service provider shall contact the
Texas Underground Facility Notification Corporation to the extent required by V.T.C.A., Utilities
Code chapter 251, make inquiries of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, local
governments, and all other service providers that might have facilities in the area of work to
determine possible conflicts.
(5) The service provider shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, ducts, poles, wires,
structures, pavement, other apparatus and equipment and property improvements and landscaping
which may be affected by the work from damage during construction or settlement of trenches
subsequent to construction.
(c) Underground construction versus use of poles.
(1) In areas where all facilities are installed underground at the time of service provider's
construction, all service provider's facilities shall also be placed underground at no expense to the
city, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Related equipment, such as pedestals, must be
placed in accordance with the city's applicable code requirements and rules, including all visibility
easement requirements. In areas where existing facilities are aerial, the service provider may install
aerial facilities.
(2) For aboveground facilities, the service provider shall utilize existing poles wherever
reasonable.
(3) Should the city desire to place its own facilities in trenches or bores opened by the service
provider, the service provider shall cooperate with the city in any construction by the service provider
to the extent practicable and feasible, provided that the city has first notified the service provider in
some manner that it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area in which the service
provider's construction is occurring, and provided city agrees to pay the incremental increase in cost
of the trenching and boring. The city shall be responsible for maintaining its respective facilities
buried in the service provider's trenches and bores under this subsection. Service provider(s) shall
have reciprocal rights in city trenches or bores except trenches and bores for water and sewer lines
and when prohibited by applicable ordinances or codes. The city may install or affix and maintain its
own facilities for city purposes in or upon any and all of service provider's ducts, conduits, or
equipment in the public right(s)-of-way and other public property, at a charge to be negotiated
between the parties (but in no event greater than the best price charged by service provider to any
other user), to the extent space therein or thereon is reasonably available.
(d) Common users.
(1) The public right(s)-of-way have a finite capacity for containing facilities, yet municipalities are
increasingly not allowed to exclude a new service provider from the market. Accordingly, there is a
paramount public interest in maximizing the use of the capacity of the use of existing public right(s)-
of-way. Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to jointly trench or share bores or cuts, the
service provider shall work with other, licensees, service providers, contractors and franchisees so as
to reduce as much as possible the number of public right(s)-of-way cuts within the city. Whenever the
city determines it is impractical to permit construction of an underground conduit system by any
other entity which may at the time have authority to construct or maintain conduits or ducts in the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/248
public right(s)-of-way, but excluding entities providing services in competition with service provider
and unless otherwise prohibited by federal or state law regulations, the city may require service
provider to afford to such entity the right to use service provider's surplus ducts or conduits in
common with service provider, pursuant to the terms and conditions of an agreement for use of
surplus ducts or conduits entered into by service provider and the other entity. When the service
provider and entity are unable to agree on the terms and conditions for use, the city may require them
to default to the following: share a rental rate equal to the portion of the costs based on the space to
be encumbered at a rate of capital installation costs plus ten (10) percent amortized over a period of
ten (10) years. Nothing herein shall require service provider to enter into an agreement with such
entity if, in service provider's reasonable determination, such an agreement could compromise the
integrity of the service provider's facilities.
(2) Service provider shall give a common user (with a copy to the city engineer) a minimum of one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days notice of its need to occupy a conduit and shall propose that the
common user take the first feasible action as follows:
(A) Pay revised conduit rent designed to recover the cost of retrofitting the conduits or ducts
with space-saving technology sufficient to meet service provider's space needs;
(B) Pay revised conduit rent based on the cost of new conduits or ducts constructed to meet
service provider's space need;
(C) Vacate the needed ducts or conduits; or
(D) Construct and maintain sufficient new conduits or ducts to meet service provider's space
needs.
(3) When two (2) or more common users occupy a section of conduit, the last user to occupy the
conduit shall be the first to vacate or construct new conduit unless otherwise agreed to by common
users. When conduit rent is revised because of retrofitting, space-saving technology or construction
of new conduit, all common users shall bear the increased cost.
(4) All facilities shall meet all applicable local, state, and federal clearance and other safety
requirements, be adequately grounded and anchored, and meet the provisions of contracts executed
between service provider and the other common user. Service provider or contractor may, at its
option, correct any attachment deficiencies and charge the common user for its costs. Each common
user shall pay for any fines, fees, damages or other costs the common user's attachments incurs.
(e) Excavation safety. On construction projects in which excavation exceeds a depth of four (4) feet, the
service provider must have detailed plans and specifications for excavation safety systems. The term excavation
includes trenches, structural or any construction that has earthen excavation subject to collapse. The excavation
safety plan shall be designed in conformance with state law and Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) standards and regulations.
(f) Erosion control. The service provider shall be responsible for providing stormwater management and
erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines.
Sec. 3.15.208 Joint planning and construction; coordination of excavations
(a) Excavations in public right(s)-of-way disrupt and interfere with the public use of the city streets and alleys
and damage the pavement and landscaping. The purpose of this section is to reduce this disruption, interference
and damage by promoting better coordination among service providers making excavations in public right(s)-ofway
and between these service providers and contractors and the city. Better coordination will assist in
minimizing the number of excavations being made wherever feasible and will ensure the excavations in public
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/248
right(s)-of-way are, to the maximum extent possible, performed before, rather than after, the reconstruction of
the streets and alleys by the city.
(b) Utility coordination meeting.
(1) The city may hold a utility coordination meeting a minimum of once per year. The purpose of
the meeting is for the city to inform service providers of proposed and current capital improvement
projects in the city and also for the service providers to inform each other and the city of current and
future projects. Each service provider shall make reasonable efforts to attend and participate in the
meetings of the city, in which the service provider will be made aware of public right(s)-of-way
issues that may impact its facilities.
(2) Except in an emergency the city will notify the service providers at least four (4) months before
construction will start on a major city project. Preliminary engineering plans will be available for
inspection to the service providers at least two (2) months before the project is to start construction.
Final engineering plans will be made available to the service providers at least one (1) month before
the project is to start construction.
(c) Excavation plan. In addition to participating in the utility coordination meetings, every service provider
owning, maintaining or installing facilities in public right(s)-of-way shall meet annually with the city engineer,
at the city engineer's request, to discuss service provider's planned or reasonably anticipated excavations to occur
in the calendar year of the meeting and for the next two (2) calendar years. Between the annual meetings to
discuss planned excavation work, service provider shall inform the city engineer of any substantial changes in
the planned excavation work discussed at the annual meeting.
Sec. 3.15.209 Minimizing the impacts of work in the public right(s)-of-way
(a) Each service provider and contractor shall conduct work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary
inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. In the performance
of the work, the service provider and contractor shall take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust, and
unsightly debris. No work shall be done on Saturday, Sunday and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Monday through Friday, except with the written permission of the city engineer, or in case of an emergency.
(b) Each service provider and contractor shall maintain the work site so that:
(1) Solid waste and construction materials are contained on the construction site.
(2) Solid waste is removed from a construction site daily so that it does not become a health, fire,
or safety hazard.
(3) Solid waste receptacles and storage or construction trailers shall not be placed in any public
right(s)-of-way without specific approval of the city engineer.
(c) Each service provider and contractor shall protect trees, landscape, and landscape features. All protective
measures shall be provided at the expense of the service provider or contractor.
(d) Backhoe equipment outriggers shall be fitted with pads to avoid damage whenever outriggers are placed
on any paved surface. Tracked vehicles are not permitted on paved surfaces unless effective precautions are
taken to protect the surface. Service provider and contractor shall be responsible for any damage caused to the
pavement by the operation of such equipment and shall repair such surfaces. Failure to do so will result in the
use of the service provider's performance guarantee pursuant to section 3.15.220 hereof by the city to repair any
damage, and possibly mandating, the requirement of additional guarantee(s).
(e) Each service provider and contractor shall protect from injury any public right(s)-of way and adjoining
property by taking all necessary measures. Service provider or contractor shall, at its own expense, shore up and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/248
protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the work and shall be
responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting from failure to properly protect and carry out
work in the public right(s)-of-way.
(f) As the work progresses, all public right(s)-of-way and private property shall be thoroughly cleaned of all
rubbish, excess dirt, rock, and other debris. All clean-up operations shall be done at the expense of the service
provider or contractor. Service provider or contractor shall restore any disturbed area to its original condition.
(g) Each service provider and contractor shall make provisions for employee and construction vehicle parking
so that neighborhood parking adjacent to a work site is not adversely impacted.
(h) Each service provider and contractor shall maintain a public walkway approved by the city engineer
around a construction site that blocks a public sidewalk or path.
Sec. 3.15.210 Facility locations
(a) All facilities in new developments shall be located in accordance with the development policy manual
unless an alternative location has been approved by the city engineer. Such utility locations are hereby adopted
as standard locations for utilities in new developments. The intent of these items is that they serve as a standard
for service providers whose routine business requires the installation, repair, or relocation of utilities.
(b) Facilities to be installed in previously developed streets and alleys should be located the same as in new
developments when possible. If the location shown cannot be used by the service provider, another service
provider's location can be used, provided the substitution is approved by the other service provider. If no
agreement can be made, the decision of the city engineer will be final. Other locations must be approved by the
city engineer. Facilities may be located at less depth than shown provided they receive prior written approval
from the city engineer and a concrete cap is constructed over the installation.
(c) Guy wires, anchors, and other above-ground facilities shall not be less than seven (7) feet in height over a
sidewalk area and shall be located not less than two (2) feet from the back of street curbs or edge of street
paving. If an encroachment can be located adjacent to the public right(s)-of-way line and is in another service
provider's location, written approval from the other service provider is required. If no agreement can be made,
the decision of the city engineer will be final. If an encroachment is less than seven (7) feet in height over a
sidewalk area, the sidewalk must be widened at service provider's or contractor's expense to provide the
necessary clearance as approved by the city engineer.
(d) Temporary facilities may be located in nonstandard locations as authorized by the city engineer.
(e) Any encroachment of a facility within the sidewalk or path area of a public right(s) of-way must comply
with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act at the expense of service provider.
Sec. 3.15.211 Traffic control
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, no person, service provider or contractor may partially or completely
close or obstruct a public street or alley without notifying the city engineer at the time an application for either a
construction or service line permit is made unless an emergency exists.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the person, service provider or contractor to notify the city engineer of the
closure or obstruction of a street or alley. The city engineer shall notify the police department, fire department,
transit department, solid waste department and ambulance services, as appropriate, of the closure or obstruction.
(c) All traffic-control barricading and methods shall comply with the most recent version of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices or any successive publication thereto. No person, service provider or
contractor shall block access to and from private property, block vehicles, block access to fire hydrants, fire
stations, fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve housing structures, or any other vital equipment
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/248
unless the person, service provider or contractor provides the city engineer with written verification of written
notice delivered to the owner or occupant of the facility, equipment, or property at least forty-eight (48) hours in
advance, except in case of an emergency.
(d) When necessary for public safety the service provider or contractor shall employ flag persons whose duties
shall be to control traffic around or through the construction site.
(e) The person, service provider or contractor shall not prevent the flow of traffic on thoroughfares and alleys
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday unless approved by
the city engineer.
Sec. 3.15.212 Requirements for excavations and pavement cuts
(a) Permanent repairs of pavement cuts in right(s)-of-way will be completed by the person, service provider or
contractor in accordance with city standard specifications for utility construction in city right-of-way and
easements. Failure to do so will result in the use of the person's or service provider's performance surety bond or
cash equivalent security and, possibly mandating, the requirement of additional surety bond(s) and/or the denial
of future permits.
(b) The person, service provider or contractor shall be responsible for maintaining all excavations and
pavement cuts in such a manner as to avoid a hazard to vehicular and pedestrian traffic until permanently
repaired.
(1) Person, service provider or contractor will be required to maintain the interim repairs until final
repairs are completed.
(2) When further repairs are deemed necessary by the city engineer to correct a hazardous situation
the person, service provider or contractor responsible for the excavations and/or pavement cuts shall
be notified immediately. If the person, service provider or contractor does not make the repair or
provide an acceptable schedule within eight (8) hours of being notified, the repairs can be performed
by the city and billed to the person, service provider or contractor.
(c) All damage caused directly or indirectly to the street surface or subsurface outside the pavement cut area
shall be regarded as a part of the pavement cut. These areas, as established by the city engineer, will be included
in the total area repaired.
(d) The person, service provider or contractor shall notify the city engineering department immediately of any
damage to other facilities as well as the owner of the affected facility.
(e) The city engineering department, in conjunction with the city street department, shall regulate the cutting
and restoration of street, sidewalk, and alley pavements in the city. These requirements shall apply equally to
any person, service provider or contractor who makes cuts and repairs pavement cuts in the city.
(f) When a service provider or contractor is installing more than five hundred (500) continuous linear feet of
underground facilities, the service provider or contractor shall notify in writing all individual occupants along
the route. This notification shall give information about the project, including, but not limited to, the proposed
location of the facilities, the time length for construction, and a twenty-four-hour contact person to report any
problems. The service provider or contractor shall ensure a prompt response to any occupant inquiries and
concerns.
Sec. 3.15.213 Construction and restoration standards for newly constructed or overlayed streets and
alleys
(a) No service provider or contractor shall allow an open trench excavation or potholing of facilities in the
pavement of any public right(s)-of-way for a period of three (3) years from the completion of new street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/248
construction or overlay of streets except in compliance with the provision of this section.
(b) Any application for a construction permit to excavate in public right(s)-of-way subject to the requirements
of this section shall contain the following information:
(1) A detailed and dimensional engineering plan that identifies and accurately represents the public
right(s)-of-way and property that will be impacted by the proposed excavation, as well as adjacent
streets, and the method of construction.
(2) The street or alley width including curb and gutter over the total length of each city block that
will be impacted by the proposed construction.
(3) The location, width, length, and depth of the proposed excavation.
(4) The total area of existing street or alley pavement, and/or improved surfaces in each individual
city block that will be impacted by the proposed excavation.
(5) A written statement addressing the criteria for approval set forth in subsection (c) below.
(c) No construction permit for excavation in the public right(s)-of-way of newly constructed or overlayed
streets or alleys shall be approved unless the city engineer finds that all of the following have been met:
(1) Boring or jacking without disturbing the pavement is not practical due to physical
characteristics of the street or alley or other facilities.
(2) Alternative facilities alignments that do not involve excavating the street or alley are found to
be impracticable.
(3) The proposed construction cannot reasonably be delayed until after the three year deferment
period has lapsed.
(d) The streets or alleys shall be restored and repaired in accordance with design and construction standards
provided by the city engineer or as established and adopted by the city.
Sec. 3.15.214 Abandonment of facilities
Any service provider that intends to abandon its use of any facilities within the public right(s)-of-way shall
notify the city engineer in writing of the intent to abandon facilities. Such notice shall describe the facilities to be
abandoned, a date of abandonment (which date shall not be less than thirty (30) days from the date such notice is
submitted to the city engineer), and the method of removal of the facilities and for restoration of the public
right(s)-of-way.
Sec. 3.15.215 Emergency procedures
Any service provider maintaining facilities in the public right(s)-of-way may proceed with emergency repairs
upon existing facilities without a permit when circumstances demand that the work be done, but they must apply
to the city for a permit on or before the third working day after such work has commenced. All work will require
immediate telephone notification to the city police, engineering, and fire departments. Emergency maintenance
operations shall be limited to circumstances involving the preservation of life, property, or the restoration of
customer service. Any service provider or contractor commencing operations under this section shall submit
detailed engineering plans and construction methods no later than ten (10) business days after initiating the
emergency maintenance operation. In case of emergency service line excavations, such as leakage or loss of
service, the city street department shall be notified by the person doing the excavation within twenty-four (24)
hours after the service line excavation has been commenced.
Sec. 3.15.216 Record plans
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/248
(a) If installations do not follow the plans originally submitted under section 3.15.205 above, the service
provider will provide the city engineer with updated construction drawings within ninety (90) days of
completion of facilities in the public right(s)-of-way. Users who have facilities in the right-of-way on the date of
passage of this division who have not provided record plans shall provide one (1) quarter of the information
concerning facilities in right-of-way within one (1) year after the passage of this division and an additional one
(1) quarter each six (6) months thereafter. The plans shall be provided to the city with as much detail and
accuracy as available to the service provider. The detail and accuracy must concern issues such as location, size
of facilities, materials used, and any other health, safety and welfare concerns. The detail will not include
matters such as capacity of lines, customers, or competitively sensitive details. If information submitted includes
information designated as trade secrets or as confidential, the information may not be disclosed by the city
without the consent of the public service provider unless it is compelled to disclose the information by the Texas
Attorney General pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act or by a court order.
(b) This requirement, or portions of this requirement, may be waived by the city engineer for good cause.
Sec. 3.15.217 Conformance with public improvements
Whenever by reasons of widening or improvements to public right(s)-of-way, water or sewer line projects, or
other public works projects, (e.g. install or improve storm drains), it shall be deemed necessary by the city to
remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a public right(s)-of-way user
to another part of the public right(s)-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at its
expense (unless provided otherwise by state law) within the time limits set by the city engineer working in
conjunction with the owner of the facilities, or if no time can be agreed upon, within ninety (90) calendar days
from the day the notice was sent to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the
city engineering department. Facilities not moved after ninety (90) calendar days or within the approved
schedule, as same be extended from time to time, shall be moved by the city at owner's expense.
Sec. 3.15.218 Improperly installed facilities
(a) Any person doing work in the public right(s)-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain
facilities.
(b) Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property;
(2) At the time of installation the facilities did not meet applicable city, state or federal codes;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices;
(4) The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with
the permit and engineering plans approved by the city engineer.
(c) Facilities determined by the city engineer to have been improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or
maintained shall be properly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained immediately upon receipt of notice
from the city engineer.
Sec. 3.15.219 Restoration of property
(a) Users of the public right(s)-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a
condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of work.
(b) Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer. The restoration shall include, but
not be limited to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/248
(1) Replacing all ground cover and other landscaping with the type of ground cover and other
landscaping damaged during work, or better, either by planting, sodding, or seeding, as directed by
the city engineer;
(2) Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required;
(3) All bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled in, covered, or barricaded
daily, unless other safety requirements are approved by the city engineer;
(4) Compaction and leveling of all trenches and excavations;
(5) Restoration of site to city specifications;
(6) Restoration of all sprinkler systems, retaining walls, planters, and other improvements.
(c) All locate flags shall be removed during the cleanup process by the service provider or contractor at the
completion of the work.
(d) Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by approved city engineering department
schedules and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. If restoration is not satisfactory or performed in a timely
manner all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but not
completed may be halted and a hold may be placed on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete.
Sec. 3.15.220 Performance surety bond
(a) Service provider's performance surety bond provided in accordance with section 3.15.204(4)(B) shall serve
as security for the performance of work necessary to repair the public right(s)-of-way if the service provider or
contractor fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the work under the permit.
(b) The service provider's performance surety bond guarantees complete performance of the work in a manner
acceptable to the city and guarantees all work done for a period of one (1) year after the date of written
acceptance. Service provider shall respond upon demand and make all necessary repairs during the one-yearperiod
as a result of:
(1) Defects in workmanship.
(2) Settling of fills or excavations.
(3) Any unauthorized deviations from the approved permits and engineering plans.
(4) Failure to clean up during and after performance of the work.
(5) Restoration of improvements including, but not limited to landscaping, irrigation, ground
cover, and other improvements.
(c) The one-year-period shall run from the date of the city's acceptance of the work which shall be the date of
the letter of acceptance issued by the city to the service provider and/or contractor. If repairs are required during
the one-year guarantee period, those repairs need only be guaranteed until the end of the initial one-year-period.
It is not necessary that the guarantee period be extended for repairs after acceptance except as provided.
(d) At any time prior to completion of the one-year guarantee period, the city may notify the service provider
or contractor of any needed repairs. Such repairs shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours if the defects
are determined by the city to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. All other repairs
shall be completed within ten (10) business days after notice.
Sec. 3.15.221 Indemnification
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/248
(a) Each service provider and contractor placing facilities in the public right(s)-of-way shall agree to promptly
defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses, or expenses for the
repair, replacement or restoration of property, equipment, materials, structures, and facilities that are damaged,
destroyed, or found to be defective as a result of the service provider's or contractor's acts or omission, from and
against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for:
(1) Damage to or loss of the property of any service provider or person; and/or
(2) Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person,
arising out of, incident to, concerning, or resulting from the negligent or willful act of omissions of
the service provider or contractor, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of
activities pursuant to this division.
(b) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence or willful
misconduct of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractor, or subcontractors.
(c) The provision of this indemnity is solely for the benefit of the city and is not intended to create or grant
any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity.
(d) A service provider that is regulated as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 283 or
chapter 284 shall provide the indemnity provided in those statutes, as amended.
Sec. 3.15.222 Denial, suspension, revocation, or extension of permit
(a) Denial of a permit. A permit (construction and service line) may be denied for any one (1) of the following
reasons:
(1) Not having proper insurance for the required amounts.
(2) Consistently failing to perform in accordance with the requirements of this division.
(3) Requesting to cut a city-maintained street that can be crossed by jacking, boring or tunneling.
(4) Proposing barricading, channelizing, signing, warning or other traffic-control procedures or
equipment that does not comply with the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices.
(5) The activity or the manner in which it is to be performed will violate a city ordinance or a state
or federal law.
(6) Failure to furnish all of the information required under this division or, except for good cause
shown, to file the registration or construction or service line permit applications within the time
prescribed.
(7) Misrepresenting or falsifying any information in the registration or construction or service line
permit applications.
(8) Failing to provide a surety bond or other acceptable security or comply with the performance
guarantee.
(9) Owing outstanding debts to the city.
(10) Lack of available space in the public right(s)-of-way.
(11) Proposed activity will substantially interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and no
procedures have been implemented to minimize the interference.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/248
(b) Suspension of a permit. The city engineer may suspend any or all permits granted to allow work in the
public right(s)-of-way for the following reasons subject to the procedural guidelines noted in section 3.15.213
and any agreement that applies to the service provider using the public right(s)-of-way, as well as any limitations
imposed by federal or state law:
(1) Failing to comply with an order of the city engineer;
(2) The recognition that a permit was issued in error;
(3) Failing to comply with restrictions or requirements placed on the permit by the city engineer;
(4) Any safety violation which create peril to the public; or
(5) Violating any provision of this division.
(c) Reinstatement of a permit. The city engineer may reinstate a previously suspended permit when the
conditions that caused such permit to be suspended are remedied to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
(d) Revocation of a permit. If no work has begun on a permitted project within thirty (30) calendar days of
issuance of the permit, the permit shall be null and void, and a new permit shall be required.
(e) Extension of a permit. The city engineer may grant an extension of a permit for a period not to exceed
sixty (60) days if requested by the permit holder. Such a request must be made before the permit expires. If no
call for the cancellation of a permit or for an inspection is received within sixty (60) days of a permit being
issued, a city engineering department project representative will be sent to the location to determine the status of
the permitted work.
Sec. 3.15.223 Appeal from denial, suspension, or revocation of permit
(a) A person may, within ten (10) business days from the date of notification of the decision of the city
engineer, appeal a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a permit to a panel consisting of the director of public
works, the director of community services, the director of utilities and the city traffic engineer. The appeal must
be in writing and shall specifically state the basis for the challenge to the decision of the city engineer. Should
the decision of the city engineer be appealed, the city engineer shall transmit to the panel all the papers
constituting the record by which the original permit was denied, suspended or revoked.
(b) The panel will meet with the person within ten (10) business days of reviewing the written appeal. The
panel will consider all information provided in making its decision. All decisions of the panel will be made
within five (5) business days of the meeting.
(c) Any person who is dissatisfied with the findings of the panel may within ten (10) business days from the
date of notification of the ruling file a written appeal with the city secretary that the decision of the panel be
heard and considered by the city commission. The city secretary shall schedule a time for a hearing before the
city commission and shall notify the person and any one indicating an interest in the hearing.
(d) A hearing by the city commission shall be held within thirty (30) business days of receipt of the written
appeal. Decisions of the city commission shall be final.
Sec. 3.15.224 City engineer's authority; enforcement; offenses
(a) The city engineer is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this division and to promulgate
regulations to aid in its administration and enforcement that are not in conflict with other provisions of this code,
or state or federal law.
(b) The city engineer is authorized to enter upon a construction site for which a permit is granted or, where
necessary, private property adjacent to the construction site, for purposes of inspection to determine compliance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/248
with the provisions of the permit and this division.
Sec. 3.15.225 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Performs, authorizes, directs, or supervises work in the public right(s)-of-way without a valid
permit;
(2) Violates any other provision of this division;
(3) Fails to comply with restrictions or requirements of the permit; or
(4) Fails to comply with an order or regulation of the city engineer.
(b) A person commits an offense if, in connection with the performance of work in the public right(s)-of-way,
the person:
(1) Damages the public right(s)-of-way beyond what is incidental or necessary to the performance
of the work;
(2) Damages public or private facilities or improvements within or adjacent to the public right(s)-
of-way; or
(3) Fails to clear debris associated with the work from a public right(s)-of-way during work or
after work is completed.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(2) if the person complied with all of the requirements
hereof and state and federal law and caused the damage because:
(1) The facility in question was not shown or indicated in a plan document, plan or record, record
construction plan, field survey, or on-site staking or marking; and
(2) Could not otherwise have been discovered in the public right(s)-of-way through the use of due
diligence.
(d) A person commits an offense if, while performing an activity along or within a public right(s)-of-way
(whether or not a construction or other permit is required for the activity), the person:
(1) Damages the public right(s)-of-way, or public or private facilities or improvements within or
adjacent to the public right(s)-of-way; or
(2) Fails to clear debris associated with the activity from a public right(s)-of-way.
(e) A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense hereunder. A person who violates a provision of
this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, authorized, directed or permitted. An offense under this division is punishable by a fine of
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(f) The provision hereof may be enforced by civil court action in accordance with state or federal law. This
section is in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, the city has for a violation of provisions of this
division.
(g) Prior to initiation of civil enforcement litigation, the service provider or any other person who has
committed a violation under this section shall be given the opportunity to correct the violation within the time
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/248
frame specified by the city engineer. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the city engineer or the
city from taking enforcement action as to past or present violations, notwithstanding their correction.
(Ordinance 790 adopted 8/21/17)
ARTICLE 3.16 RAILROAD BOXCARS ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sec. 3.16.001 Placement
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or entity whatsoever to place or have placed upon
public or private property within the city a railroad boxcar, with or without wheels, for any purpose whatsoever.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or entity to transport into the city any railroad boxcar
with or without wheels, for the purpose of placing such upon any public or private property.
(Ordinance 478, secs. 1, 2, adopted 3/13/86)
Sec. 3.16.002 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Railroad cars on the Santa Fe Railway tracks as they now exist or may hereafter be established;
or
(2) Boxcars located in or transported into a district zoned as industrial when all property owners
and residents within 300 feet consent in writing.
(Ordinance 478, sec. 3, adopted 3/13/86)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Exemptions
Nothing in this chapter herein shall be construed to impose any occupation tax upon any theatrical, dramatic,
musical comedy show or other performance or amusement, theater, opera house or airdome, when such
performance, show or exhibition is given for instruction only, or entirely for charitable purposes, and when not
given for private profit. (1978 Code, sec. 15-14)
ARTICLE 4.02 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4.02.001 State license and permit fees
There is hereby levied and assessed against every person holding a state license or permit for the sale of
alcoholic beverages, as defined by state law, within the city, a fee equal to one-half (1/2) of the fee levied by the
state for said license or permit as authorized in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sections 11.38 and 61.36,
and being subject to the exceptions contained in said sections. (1978 Code, sec. 5-1; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/248
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee
authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
Sec. 4.02.002 Proximity of business to churches, schools and hospitals
(a) The sale of any alcoholic beverages is hereby prohibited within the city where the place of business of any
such dealer is within three hundred (300) feet of any church, school or public hospital existing at the time of
commencement of such business, or any “proposed” church, school or public hospital, the proposal of which
may exist at the time of commencement of business; provided, however, that said church, school or public
hospital or “proposed” church, school or public hospital shall exist before the date of the filing of the application
with the alcoholic beverage commission for a permit to engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages; the
measurements to be along the property lines of street fronts and from front door to front door and in direct line
across intersections where they occur.
(1) The term “proposed” used herein shall apply only to the proposed construction or remodeling
of any building to be used for a school, church or public hospital and further providing that a building
permit shall have been issued by the city for said construction or remodeling, and that the actual
construction shall begin within thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of said permit and
prosecuted with due diligence thereafter. In the event the construction or the remodeling is delayed
for any period greater than thirty (30) days, same shall not be construed as “proposed” construction
or remodeling.
(2) The phrase “from front door to front door” refers to any door of the church, school, public
hospital or dealer's place of business as said institutions and dealer's place of business may have
several front doors and may face on two (2) or more streets.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require the cancellation of a license or a permit of
any dealer engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages where dealer's place of business is less than three hundred
(300) feet from a church, school or public hospital; provided, however, that dealer's place of business was
established prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived (December 12, 1960) or the
application for a dealer's permit or license was filed with the alcoholic beverage commission before the building
of any future church, school or public hospital or “proposed” church, school or public hospital as provided
herein.
(1978 Code, sec. 5-2)
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Sec. 4.02.003 Extended hours of sale and consumption
Consistent with the provisions of chapter 105 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code of the state, which provides for
extended hours of sale and consumption of beer, wine, and liquor by the glass, such sales and consumption are
hereafter allowed at any place permitted by the state for sales of those alcoholic beverages, between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 2:00 o'clock a.m. (Ordinance 799 adopted 9/10/18)
ARTICLE 4.03 ITINERANT VENDORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Itinerant vendor. Any person, as well as agents and employees of such person, who engages in the temporary or
transient business of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, food or merchandise or of exhibiting the same
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/248
or samples thereof for the purpose of taking orders for such sale. Provided, however, the term “itinerant vendor”
shall not include or be construed to include anyone who engages in interstate commerce, nor anyone upon whom
the provisions of this article would impose a direct and unlawful burden on interstate commerce.
Temporary business. Any such business transacted or conducted for which definite arrangements have been
made for the hire, rental or lease of fixed premises in the city for a period of at least ninety (90) days in, upon or
from which such business is to be operated or conducted.
Transient business. Any vendor engaged in such a business as may be operated or conducted by a person, or by
the agents or employees of such person, who resides or is located away from the city or who has a fixed place of
business other than in the city, and who moves stocks of goods, wares, food or merchandise or samples thereof
into the city for sale or exhibition with the intention of removing them or the unsold portion from said city
before the expiration of forty (40) days.
(1978 Code, sec. 15-50)
Sec. 4.03.002 Exclusions
This article shall not be construed to include any of the following:
(1) Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to
parties engaged in the business of buying and dealing in goods, wares or merchandise in the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 15-54)
However, ordinary commercial travelers shall be required to obtain permits in business areas,
but without the requirement of a permit fee. (Ordinance 648 adopted 5/11/04)
(2) Vendors of farm produce, poultry stock or agricultural products in their natural state and who
actually produce said products on their own premises, whether within or without the city.
(3) Sales of goods, wares or merchandise donated for sale by the owners thereof, the proceeds
whereof to be applied to charitable or philanthropic purposes.
(1978 Code, sec. 15-54)
(4) Persons engaged in interstate commerce. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.03.003 Doing business from other than named vehicle
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for
the sale thereof, any goods, wares, food, merchandise, subscriptions to magazines or newspapers, or photographs
to be taken in the future in the city from any vehicle not mentioned in the application to the city secretary for a
permit as an itinerant vendor. (1978 Code, sec. 15-55)
Sec. 4.03.004 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 for each sale, offer for sale, and exhibit for the purpose
of taking orders for the sale thereof, each of which shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code, sec. 15-56)
Secs. 4.03.005–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/248
Sec. 4.03.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for
the sale thereof any goods, wares, food, merchandise, subscriptions to magazines or newspapers, or photographs
to be taken in the future, in the city, without an effective itinerant vendor permit. (1978 Code, sec. 15-51)
Sec. 4.03.032 Conditions of issuance; fee; application; transfer; bond
(a) The city secretary shall issue to any itinerant vendor a permit authorizing such itinerant vendor to sell,
exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof in the city his goods,
wares, food, merchandise, subscriptions to magazines or newspapers, or photographs to be taken in the future,
only after such itinerant vendor shall have fully complied with all provisions of this article and made payment of
the sum as established from time to time by resolution of the commission for said permit, which sum shall be
compensation to the city for the services herein required of it as well as enabling the city to partially defray the
expenses of enforcing this article and of properly policing and inspecting such itinerant vendor periodically,
provided the applicant shall have complied with this section. (1978 Code, sec. 15-52; Ordinance adopting Code;
Ordinance 763 adopted 12/9/13)
(b) The itinerant vendor shall make application to the city secretary in the form of a sworn affidavit stating the
full name and address of its officers if it is a corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses
of all partners if such itinerant vendor is a representative of a partnership. Such application shall further state the
following:
(1) The kind and character of goods, wares, food or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale, or
exhibited;
(2) A certified copy of the charter and permit to do business in the state if the itinerant vendor is a
representative of a corporation incorporated under the laws of any other state of the United States;
(3) The license number of any vehicle to be operated by such itinerant vendor;
(4) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of an offense pertaining
to dangerous drugs or narcotics as defined by the statutes of the state;
(5) A bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) signed by some surety company
authorized to do business in the state, payable to the mayor of the city and his successors in office for
the use and benefit of all persons entitled thereto and conditioned for the final delivery of goods,
wares, food, merchandise, magazines, newspapers, or photographs in accordance with the terms of
such order obtained and also conditioned to indemnify all purchasers or customers for all defects in
material or workmanship if they exist in the article sold by the principal in said bond, at the time of
delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within thirty (30) days after
delivery, and which bond shall be for the further use and benefit of all persons, firms or corporations
that may purchase or give any order to the principal on said bond; and
(6) A written statement that the city will be given credit with the comptroller of the state for all
sales taxes due upon sales made within the city for which such tax is collectible. If any such itinerant
vendor should fail to properly account for such sales tax, no further permits shall be issued to such
itinerant vendor.
(c) No such permit shall be effective until the passage of seventy-two (72) hours from the date such
application is filed with the city secretary.
(d) Such permit provided for herein shall not be transferable, nor give authority to more than one (1) person to
conduct business as an itinerant vendor within the city, but any such person having obtained such license may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/248
have the assistance of one (1) or more persons in conducting said business if the holder of the permit is
personally present.
(1978 Code, sec. 15-52)
Sec. 4.03.033 Period; display
The permit provided for herein shall be issued for a term of thirty (30) days from and after the effective date
thereof and shall be permanently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the sale or exhibit is
being conducted and shall remain so displayed so long as any goods, wares, food or other merchandise is being
sold or exhibited. In the event that the holder of any permit as provided herein has no temporary place of
business, but conducts said business on or from any horse-drawn or motor-powered conveyance, then said
permit shall be permanently displayed in a conspicuous place on said conveyance where such sale or exhibit is
being conducted and shall remain so displayed so long as any goods, wares, food or other merchandise are being
sold or exhibited. (1978 Code, sec. 15-53)
ARTICLE 4.04 BUYERS OF JUNK, VEHICLE PARTS, USED GOODS AND SECONDHAND
CLOTHING*
Sec. 4.04.001 Permit required; period; fee; transfer
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the buying and selling of junk, wreckage from vehicles, used tires
where bought outright, and used goods and secondhand clothing to buy or sell this said class of merchandise
within the city without first obtaining a permit to buy and sell such goods or junk and wreckage, which permit
shall be good for one (1) year from the date that the same is issued and shall be renewed from year to year. Such
permit shall not be transferable or assignable. Such permit shall cost the sum as set forth in section A4.04.001 of
the fee schedule in appendix A to this Code. (1978 Code, sec. 15-1; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.04.002 Record of transactions
At the time of the issuance of the permit the applicant shall have a book, in which said permittee shall keep a
true record of the date of all goods, junk and wreckage bought; the name of the seller of said goods; his address
and age; an exact description of the goods bought; and an exact statement of the price paid for each article. Said
book shall at all times be open for inspection to the officers of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 15-2)
Sec. 4.04.003 Purchases from minors
No dealer as that term is herein defined shall buy any junk, wreckage from vehicles or used goods from any
minor under the age of seventeen (17) years, without at that time having the parent or guardian of said minor
present and a party to such sale. (1978 Code, sec. 15-3)
ARTICLE 4.05 TAXICABS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Conduct a taxicab business. The use of one or more taxicabs within the city by the owner thereof, for the
purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the same himself or having the same driven by some
other person, provided that this definition shall not apply to any licensed chauffeur hired as a driver by any
person holding a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/248
Taxicab. Any vehicle carrying passengers for hire, except motorbuses or motor coaches operated by bus lines
over designated routes in and through the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 20-1)
Sec. 4.05.002 Applicability of article
This article shall not apply to passenger buses operating under the regulations of the state railroad commission,
and coming into or passing through the city, for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. (1978 Code,
sec. 20-2)
Sec. 4.05.003 Penalty
Any person who shall conduct a taxicab business in the city without a valid permit as required by this article or
who shall fail to have all vehicles used by him as a taxicab lettered and painted as provided in this article or who
shall use or employ as a driver of any taxicab owned by him any person who does not have a valid permit from
the city to drive a taxicab or any person who parks or stands a taxicab on the streets of the city, except when
loading or unloading passengers, or any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009, and each day of such
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code, sec. 20-14)
Sec. 4.05.004 Insurance
The holder of any permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city shall at all times during the life of such permit
keep each vehicle operated by him under his permit insured in a company authorized to do business in the state,
indemnifying the permittee in the sum required by state law for injury or death or property damage resulting
from any accident, through and by reason of the operation of his taxicabs; and such policies or certificates of
insurance shall be approved by the attorney for the city, and filed and left with the city secretary. Said policies of
insurance shall not be cancelled or surrendered, except upon written notice to the city secretary. Failure of any
permittee to procure and file policies of insurance as required by this section shall immediately forfeit and make
null and void such permit, and all rights thereunder shall at once cease. (1978 Code, sec. 20-8)
Sec. 4.05.005 Lettering of vehicle
Every holder of a permit granted under the terms of this article shall have and keep painted in fast colors,
contrasting with color of vehicle, on each side of each vehicle used by him as a taxicab, the words: “Taxi–Permit
No. ” filling the blank with the figures denoting the serial number of his permit. The letters and figures shall
be not less than five (5) inches in height. (1978 Code, sec. 20-9)
Sec. 4.05.006 Vehicle condition
Every holder of a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city shall have each taxicab used in his business
inspected once each month and shall file with the city secretary, on or before the first day of each month, a
statement in writing signed by a competent resident mechanic showing that he has inspected such vehicle, the
date of such inspection, the license number of such vehicle, the name of the permittee and the serial number of
his permit; and that lights, brakes and steering apparatus of all such vehicles so inspected by him are in good
mechanical condition. (1978 Code, sec. 20-10)
Sec. 4.05.007 Ownership of vehicle
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a taxicab business in the city to use or operate, or cause to be used
or operated, as a taxicab, any vehicle not owned by him. (1978 Code, sec. 20-11)
Sec. 4.05.008 Cruising
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/248
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab to drive or cruise about or on the streets of the city seeking
passengers, who have not theretofore ordered or called for a taxicab. (1978 Code, sec. 20-12)
Sec. 4.05.009 Parking on streets
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit under the terms of this article, or the agent, servant or employee
of such permittee, to park or leave standing any taxicab on the streets of the city, except while loading and
unloading passengers into and from such taxicab. (1978 Code, sec. 20-13)
Secs. 4.05.010–4.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.05.041 Filing application; contents of application
Before any person shall conduct a taxicab business in the city, he shall file with the city secretary an application
to the city commission for a permit to conduct such business in the city. The application shall state the name and
address of such applicant, whether the applicant is an individual, firm or corporation, and if a firm the name and
address of each member thereof and the number of vehicles proposed to be operated under such permit. (1978
Code, sec. 20-3)
Sec. 4.05.042 Fee; statement as to vehicles
At the time of issuance of a permit, the permittee shall pay to the city secretary the sum as set forth in section
A4.05.042 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code for the first vehicle, and if more than one vehicle is
proposed to be operated as a taxicab, the sum as set forth in section A4.05.042 of the fee schedule in appendix A
to this code for each additional vehicle. At the time of filing the application for said permit, the permittee shall
file with the city secretary a statement in writing under oath signed by him, showing the number of vehicles
proposed to be operated by him, model, motor number and state license number of each. If at any time the holder
of a taxicab permit shall desire to use any additional vehicles under the permit, he may do so only after he has
made application to the commission for and been granted a permit to use such additional vehicles, and he shall
furnish to the city secretary the same information regarding such additional vehicles as is required in this section
regarding those covered by the original permit, and shall pay to the city secretary the sum as set forth in section
A4.05.042 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code for each such additional vehicle. (1978 Code, sec. 20-
4; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.05.043 Action on application
It shall be the duty of the city secretary, when an application for a permit is filed with him, at the next regular
meeting of the commission following the filing of such application, to call the attention of the commission
thereto; and upon consideration of such application, the commission may grant or refuse such permit, as in its
discretion may seem to the best interest of the citizenship of the city, and the public in general. (1978 Code, sec.
20-5)
Sec. 4.05.044 Form; period
All permits for the conduct of a taxicab business in the city shall be issued and signed by the city secretary and
sealed with the seal of his office. It shall be dated on the date of its issuance; shall bear a serial number; shall
show the name and address of the permittee; and that the permittee has been authorized by the commission to
conduct a taxicab business in the city until the expiration of the thirty-first day of December next following the
date of issuance; and that said permit is subject to cancellation at any time by the commission. (1978 Code, sec.
20-6)
Sec. 4.05.045 Nontransferable; revocation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/248
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be nonassignable and may be revoked by the
commission at any time it shall appear to the commission that the permittee has violated any provision of this
article or failed to comply with any requirements hereof. (1978 Code, sec. 20-7)
ARTICLE 4.06 WRECKING YARDS AND JUNKYARDS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article:
Junk. Old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old
rubber, old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be
prepared to be used again, in some form; but “junk” shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a
person as byproducts, waste, or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and
used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing process.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind with three
(3) or more inoperable vehicles located on the same premises.
Wrecking yard and junkyard. Any yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building,
containing junk, items of salvage, wrecked or dismantled automobiles, upon which occurs one or more acts of
buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such items of junk or salvage, or
wrecked automobiles, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose.
Wrecking yard operator and junkyard operator. Any person who operates a wrecking yard or junkyard within
the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 23-1)
Sec. 4.06.002 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, in addition to any other measures provided herein,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1.01.009. (1978 Code, sec. 23-15)
Sec. 4.06.003 Inspection
All appropriate officers and inspectors of the city shall be granted permission to enter upon the premises of a
wrecking yard or junkyard, during business hours, for the purpose of making an inspection of such premises to
assure compliance. Failure to grant entry for inspection shall be grounds for license revocation, at the option of
the city. (1978 Code, sec. 23-7)
Sec. 4.06.004 Operating requirements
In addition to securing a license, all operations of wrecking yards and junkyards shall meet the requirements set
forth in the zoning ordinances, building code, fire and police regulations. (1978 Code, sec. 23-8; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.005 Screening fence
A six-foot high screening fence of wooden or masonry construction or cyclone fence with opaque slats, all as
described on a detailed site plan approved by the planning and zoning commission and the city commission,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/248
shall be constructed entirely surrounding the property and permanently maintained except where a permanent
building is erected. Said building shall constitute a portion of the screening fence. A display area may be
provided adjacent to the fronting street provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the fronting street.
(2) A screening fence as described above shall be constructed on the sides and rear of such display
area.
(3) The total area to be used for display shall not exceed five (5) percent of the total development
lot area.
(4) Display of parts and/or used cars which are for resale may be displayed in this area. Said used
cars must be complete with no parts removed and no more than five (5) used cars may be displayed.
(1978 Code, sec. 23-9)
Sec. 4.06.006 Stacking
No item of junk, salvage, or other merchandise shall be stacked or permitted to be stacked or stored in excess of
the height of the enclosing fence or wall nor nearer than two (2) feet thereto, except that wrecked vehicles may
be stacked two (2) high provided said vehicles are stacked a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line.
(1978 Code, sec. 23-10)
Sec. 4.06.007 Access
Such junk, salvage, or other merchandise on the premises shall be arranged to provide reasonable inspection of
or access to all parts of the premises, and all such premises shall be open for inspection to and meet the
requirements of the city's fire, police, health, and building authorities. (1978 Code, sec. 23-11)
Sec. 4.06.008 Drainage easement
Any drainage requirements, as required by the city engineering department, shall be met. (1978 Code, sec. 23-
13)
Sec. 4.06.009 Advertising
No advertising shall be permitted on screening fences. (1978 Code, sec. 23-14)
Secs. 4.06.010–4.06.040 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.06.041 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a wrecking yard operator or junkyard operator in the city, whether
personally, by agents or employees, without first obtaining a license therefor from the city secretary in
accordance with the provisions of this article. (1978 Code, sec. 23-2)
Sec. 4.06.042 Application and qualifications
(a) An applicant for a license to operate a wrecking yard or a junkyard shall make application to the city
secretary for a license upon forms furnished by the city secretary which contain such information as may be
required to ascertain qualifications for such license.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/248
(b) An applicant, to qualify for a license issued by the city, as provided in subsection (a), shall have the
following permits and licenses issued by the state:
(1) Resale permit.
(2) Dismantling permit.
(3) Store license.
(4) Sales tax permit.
(5) Dealer's license.
(1978 Code, sec. 23-3)
Sec. 4.06.043 Issuance; fee
The city secretary upon receiving an application for a license and the payment of an application fee, as set forth
in section A4.06.043 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code, to cover investigation and processing, shall
refer such application to the zoning administrator, building inspector, police chief, fire marshal and any other
appropriate city departments for review, inspection and approval or disapproval in regards to compliance with
this article and all appropriate city ordinances. Upon assurance of compliance with this article, and the payment
of all license fees, the city secretary shall issue a wrecking yard/junkyard license. One license shall permit both
operations combined or one only as the operator chooses. (1978 Code, sec. 23-4; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.044 Duration
The license issued herein shall be valid for a period of one year, renewable on or before January 1st of each year.
There shall be no license fee. (1978 Code, sec. 23-5)
Sec. 4.06.045 Revocation
The city secretary, upon notice from any department of the city that an operator of a wrecking yard or junkyard
has, after notice, failed to comply with requirements for such operation, may revoke such operator's license.
Reinstatement of an operator shall be by the same method as securing an initial license. (1978 Code, sec. 23-6)
ARTICLE 4.07 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.07.001 Defined
A sexually oriented business is defined in chapter 243 of the Local Government Code, section 243.002, or as
amended. The city intends hereby to regulate, within that definition, those businesses or business activities,
whether in public, semipublic, or private premises (limited by constitutional standards as determined by the
Supreme Court of the United States of America) which offer to a patron the opportunity to describe, feel, handle,
touch, paint, be in the presence of or be entertained by the unclothed body of another person, or by a person
unclothed only as to human genitals or buttocks, or offer the opportunity to photograph or view photographs of
any such person or activity.
Sexually oriented business.
(1) An establishment or enterprise selling or renting videos, tapes, cassettes, photographs, books,
magazines, or other periodicals which are distinctive in that they predominantly emphasize, depict,
describe, or relate to “specific sexual activity” or “specific anatomical areas” as defined in this
article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/248
(2) An establishment or enterprise offering to patrons live entertainment intended to or resulting in
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification through dancing, posing, modeling or acting where any
such activity is characterized by a predominant emphasis on “specific sexual activity” or “specific
anatomical areas.” This definition includes those permitted or licensed pursuant to the Alcoholic
Beverage Code and offering alcohol beverages for sale.
(3) An establishment or enterprise displaying, to patrons in automobiles or motorized
transportation, motion picture films, videocassettes, television or other visual media, when such
media is characterized by a predominant emphasis on “specific sexual activity” or “specific
anatomical areas.”
(4) An establishment or enterprise offering a venue for patrons to congregate or associate with
employees who engage in “specific sexual activity” within the presence of or in view of such patrons
or who display “specific anatomical areas” in the presence of or in view of such patrons.
(5) An establishment or enterprise which offers to its patrons rooms or enclosures provided with
television, film, motion picture, videocassette, slide, or photographic or other visual media which are
distinctive in their portrayal of “specific sexual activity” or “specific anatomical areas” and which
establishment or enterprise has a sign visible from any public right-of-way and advertises availability
of such visual media. This shall be interpreted as including an establishment or enterprise which:
(A) Offers a room or enclosure to its patrons for less than a five-hour period; or
(B) Generally permits its room or enclosure patrons to sublet a room or enclosure for less
than a five-hour period.
(6) An establishment or enterprise whose inventory or stock of trade items, products, equipment, or
paraphernalia is distinctive by virtue of a predominant emphasis on “specific sexual activity” or
“specific anatomical areas,” including those where members of the public or its patrons are excluded
from access to portions of the premises by reason of their age, if the inventory or stock is distinctive
in its predominant emphasis on “specific sexual activity” or “specific anatomical areas.”
(7) An establishment or enterprise offering to its patrons the opportunity to view from film,
videotape, or other visual media, within an enclosure with a capacity for 5 or more persons, visual
material distinctive in its depiction of “specific sexual activity” or “specific anatomical areas.” This
shall be interpreted as including those establishments or enterprises having electrical or mechanical
devices which project such visual media into a viewing area obscured by a curtain, door, wall or
other enclosure, if the media depicts “specific sexual activity” or “specific anatomical areas” for
observation by 5 or fewer patrons.
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-20, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.002 Exemptions
Exempted from regulation as a “sexually oriented business,” are the following:
(1) Any business operated by or employing counselors, psychologists, physical therapists, athletic
trainers, licensed masseuse, cosmetologists, or barbers, licensed by the state, performing functions
authorized under the license held.
(2) Any business operated by or employing physicians, acupuncturists, osteopaths, chiropractors,
or nurses, licensed by the state, engaged in practicing the healing arts.
(3) Any retail establishment whose major business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to
customers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/248
(4) Any school, class or business which offers as part of a regular [course] painting, sketching, or
photographing of a person(s), whether nude or seminude, and such classes are offered for the purpose
of artistic study of the human form.
(5) Any business which offers as a service tattooing or body piercing.
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-21, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.003 Specific sexual activity defined
For the purposes of this article, specific sexual activities are defined as:
(1) Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, acts of bestiality; or
(3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-22, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.004 Specific anatomical areas defined
For the purposes of this article, specific anatomical areas are defined as either:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(A) Human genitals, pubic region;
(B) Buttock;
(C) Female breast below a point which is immediately above the top of the areola; or
(2) Human genitals in a discernible erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-23, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.005 Regulation of location
(a) A sexually oriented business shall be situated more than 1,000 feet from a church, hospital, public or
private school, a public park, or a residential dwelling unit. (Ordinance 634, sec. 16-24, adopted 9/11/03;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The distance shall be determined utilizing a straight line in all directions from the structure housing the
sexually oriented business to the nearest property line on any residentially zoned district, or any lot used for
church, school, park, hospital or residential purposes. The measurements for a structure shall be taken from the
furthest point that a structure extends in any direction, including overhanging roofs and all other projections or
portions of said structure.
(c) If the sexually oriented business is located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where the
sexually oriented business is clearly separated from other portions of the structure (for example, an adult
bookstore in a shopping center), the sexually oriented business structure's measurements shall be taken from the
boundaries of the space in which the sexually oriented business is housed or confined (not the entire shopping
center, motel, or structure).
(d) If the sexually oriented business is located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where said
sexually oriented business is situated above the ground level of a multistory structure and is clearly separate
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/248
from other activities within the structure (for example, an adult bookstore on an upper level of an office tower or
hotel), the sexually oriented business measurements shall be taken from the nearest entry to that portion of the
structure housing the sexually oriented business, thence to the nearest point of egress (elevator or stairs), thence
to the nearest ground floor exit, thence in a straight line to the nearest point on any lot in a residential district or
any lot or tract used for church, school or hospital purposes, and any structure housing a sexually oriented
business.
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-24, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.006 Specific use permit
(a) A sexually oriented business shall be required to hold a specific use permit issued by the city. No such
permit shall issue to a sexually oriented business located within an R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district. Additionally,
each sexually oriented business applying for a permit shall submit a site plan setting forth the dimensions,
configuration, and location for such sexually oriented business. The applicant shall certify that the location is
more than 1,000 feet from any church, hospital, public or private school, public park or residence.
(b) Any permit may be revoked by the city for failure to comply with the terms of this article.
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-25, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.007 Exemptions from location requirements
(a) The owner of a sexually oriented business may apply to the planning and zoning commission for an
exemption from the location requirements for section 4.07.005, supporting such application with explanatory
detail of any grounds or reasons for exemption. Upon receipt of any such application such shall be heard by the
planning and zoning commission within not less than 30 days, following notice to all property owners within
500 feet of the proposed location.
(b) After considering the application and any opposition, the planning and zoning commission shall make a
recommendation to the city commission to grant or deny the exemption.
(c) The city commission may, in it discretion, grant an exemption from the location restrictions if it makes the
following findings:
(1) That the location of the adult entertainment enterprise will not have a detrimental effect on
nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(2) That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article;
(3) That the location of the adult entertainment enterprise will not diminish the property values or
quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;
(4) That the location of the adult entertainment enterprise will not be inconsistent with any
program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or
restoration;
(5) That all outer applicable provisions of this article will be observed.
(d) The city commission shall grant the exemption only by a majority vote of the entire commission. Failure
to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city commission is final.
(e) If the city commission grants an exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the city
commission's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, an adult entertainment enterprise will be in violation
of the location restrictions of subsections (a) and/or (b) and the nonconforming use shall be illegal and shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/248
terminate, unless the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. Such application shall be made with
the city secretary at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the exemption.
(f) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the application from any other provision of this article other
than the location restriction of subsections (a) and (b).
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-26, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.008 Interior requirements
(a) Areas where “specific sexually activity” or the viewing of “specific anatomical areas” is to be conducted,
viewed or permitted shall be constructed only as directed by this section. The interior of an adult arcade and/or
viewing booth shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of every interior area of
the adult arcade and/or viewing booth to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. This
unobstructed view shall be from the manager's station, then at any of the manager's stations there shall be at least
one unobstructed view to any interior area of the viewing booth or arcade. The view required in this section must
be in direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(b) Areas where “specific sexually activity” or the viewing of “specific anatomical areas” is to be conducted,
viewed or permitted shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access so that any patron may be observed from the manager's station.
(Ordinance 634, sec. 16-27, adopted 9/11/03)
Sec. 4.07.009 Penalty
A person commits an offense if he operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business in violation of
the terms of this article. (Ordinance 634, sec. 16-28, adopted 9/11/03)
ARTICLE 4.08 COIN-OPERATED MACHINES*
Sec. 4.08.001 Occupation tax; amount; registration
(a) Every owner who exhibits or displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in the city any coinoperated
machine, now defined in chapter 2153 of the Occupations Code of the state, or as hereinafter amended,
shall pay an annual occupation tax on each coin-operated machine in the amount established from time to time
by resolution of the commission. (Ordinance 676, sec. 1, adopted 3/14/06; Ordinance 764 adopted 12/9/13)
(b) All occupation taxes for coin-operated machines are payable in advance. Prior to payment of the tax every
owner shall register each machine by make, model, and serial number with the city secretary or designated
agent. (Ordinance 676, sec. 1, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.002 Exemptions from tax
Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending
machines, merchandise vending machines, and cigarette vending machines which are now subject to an
occupation or gross receipts tax, stamp vending machines, and “service coin-operated machines,” as that term is
defined, are expressly exempt from the tax levied herein, and the other provisions of this article. (Ordinance 676,
sec. 2, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.003 Display and issuance of decal payment
(a) The decal issued by the city secretary to evidence payment of the tax levied herein shall be securely
attached with its own adhesive to a fixed part of the coin-operated machine so as to be easily seen by the public.
The decal shall be attached to the machine in a manner that will require the continued application of steam and
water to remove the decal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/248
(b) During the month of December of each year, owners shall pay the occupation tax, register the machines
taxed, and receive a decal for each coin-operated machine to be within the city on January 1 of the following
year.
(Ordinance 676, sec. 3, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.004 Sealing machine to prevent operations
The city secretary or authorized representative may seal any such machine upon which the tax has not been paid
in a manner that will prevent further operation. The city secretary shall charge a fee in the amount as set forth in
section A4.08.004 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code for the release of any machine sealed for
nonpayment of tax. The fee shall be paid to the city secretary by cashier's check or money order. It shall be
unlawful to break the seal affixed in the name of the city or exhibit, display or remove from location any
machine on which the seal has been broken. (Ordinance 676, sec. 4, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.005 Article does not authorize illegal machines
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any
machine, device, table or coin-operated machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, displaying or maintenance
of which is illegal or in violation of any article of the Penal Code of this state, or the constitution of this state.
(Ordinance 676, sec. 5, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.006 Operator's permit
(a) Any business operating one or more coin-operated machines for skill, pleasure, or gaming purposes shall
obtain from the city secretary a permit for that purpose;
(b) The fee for such a business shall be payable annually to the city secretary in an amount to be determined
periodically by resolution of the city commission;
(c) Each time a location is changed, or any machine moved to another location, the operator shall advise the
city secretary and shall pay a location change fee for each machine moved in an amount to be determined
periodically by resolution of the city commission; and
(d) An application for the renewal of an operator's permit must be made to the city secretary by December
31st of each year to avoid a penalty of $3.00 for each day of delinquency.
(Ordinance 787 adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 4.08.007 Application
(a) An operator's permit application may be obtained at the city secretary's office.
(b) The applicant shall be required to furnish the following information:
(1) The name of the business and the address of the location where the machines are to be located.
(2) The name of the owner of the business where the machines are to be located and his address.
(3) The name and address of the local agent if the operator is not a resident of the city.
(4) The maximum number of skill or pleasure coin-operated machines to be located at the business.
(c) An operator's permit shall not be issued unless:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/248
(1) The parking ratio of one parking space per fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area is provided
on the development lot;
(2) The legal description of the property of the business where the machines will be located is
provided on the application form; and
(3) The location is zoned for the operation of coin-operated machines.
(d) A business that existed on or before January 1, 2006, and has remained in continuous operation shall be
permitted to obtain an operator's permit under this article without complying with subsection (c)(1), provided
that no structural alterations are made except those required by law or ordinance. Compliance with subsection
(c)(1) of this section shall be required when an exempted business is added to or enlarged. This requirement may
be satisfied upon the granting of a variance by the zoning board of adjustment.
(Ordinance 676, sec. 7, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.008 Revocation of operator's permit
Any operator's permit issued under this article shall be subjected to revocation by the city secretary for the
following reasons:
(1) The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city secretary, in the case of a check or bank
draft, honored with payment upon presentation;
(2) Failure to comply with the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 676, sec. 8, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.009 Appeals
Any applicant or operator whose permit is denied or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this article may
appeal such denial or revocation to the city commission. (Ordinance 676, sec. 9, adopted 3/14/06)
Sec. 4.08.010 Penalty for violation
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ordinance 676, sec. 10, adopted
3/14/06)
ARTICLE 4.09 WRECKER CONTRACTOR
Sec. 4.09.001 General Provisions
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this contract, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
Abandoned vehicle. A vehicle that meets the legal criteria, as determined by the chief of police to be declared an
abandoned vehicle under the state and local laws and regulations regarding abandoned vehicles.
Accident disabled vehicle. A vehicle damaged as a result of any accident which is incapable of safe or legal
operation and is directed by a law enforcement officer to be removed from public or private property.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or his designated representative.
Good working conditions. Free from mechanical defects with particular reference, but not limited to lights,
brakes, tires, and steering apparatus.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/248
Impounded vehicle. A vehicle whose driver has been arrested, an illegally parked vehicle, a vehicle that is a
traffic hazard, or a vehicle that is taken into custody during the investigation of a criminal offense.
Mechanically disabled vehicle. A vehicle which is inoperable due to equipment failure and which must be
removed from public right-of-way or public property at the request of a law enforcement officer under the
direction of the chief of police.
Payment method. Method in which an owner/operator shall be permitted to pay the operator of the tow truck the
fee required for towing the vehicle. Owner/operator shall be allowed to make payment with cash or credit card.
(b) Compliance with laws. Contractor agrees to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws in the performance of his duties under this article.
(c) Waiver. The exercise of any remedy provided for by this article does not waive or exclude any other
remedy available to the chief of police or his designated representative.
(d) Performance bond. Each contractor under this article shall provide the city with a performance bond in the
amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) guaranteeing the good and faithful performance of services
provided. Legal action to collect such bond shall not preclude the city from exercising any other legal remedy
that it may have to make itself as a whole.
(e) Indemnification. The contractor shall indemnify and hold the city, its officers and employees harmless
from any and all claims for damages or other liability of any nature whatsoever arising from performance of the
contractor providing the services.
(f) Insurance. The contractor shall procure and maintain in force at all time policies of insurance in at least the
minimum amounts required by the laws of the state and all such policies of insurance shall name the city as a
primary additional insured.
Sec. 4.09.002 Insurance
(a) Requirements.
(1) The contractor shall furnish a completed insurance certificate to the city, which will be
completed by his agent authorized to bind the named underwriter(s) to the coverage limits. The city
shall have no duty to pay for service or perform under this article until such certificate shall have
been delivered to the city.
(2) The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements of this section at any time and
to require the adjustment of insurance coverages and their limits when deemed necessary and prudent
by the city based upon changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry
as well as any vendor.
(3) Subject to the vendor's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts as are
approved by the city, the vendor shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect at vendor's sole
expense, insurance coverage written by companies approved by the state and acceptable to the city, in
the following type(s) and amount(s):
(A) Comply with TDLR requirement of $500,000.00 in liability insurance to work accidents
or nonconsent towing.
(B) Garagekeepers liability insurance, $100,000.00 (combined single limit).
(C) Worker's compensation and employers liability insurance. Contractor may elect to obtain
workers compensation coverage pursuant to section 406.002 of the Texas Labor Code. Further,
contractor shall comply with all provisions of title 5 of the Texas Labor Code. The contractor
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/248
may maintain occupational accident and disability insurance in lieu of workers compensation.
In either event the policy must be endorsed to include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the
city.
(b) Additional police endorsements. The city shall be entitled, upon request, and without expense, to receive
copies of the policies and all endorsements thereto and may make any reasonable request for deletion, revision,
or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations, or exclusions (except where policy provisions
are established by law or regulation binding upon either of the parties hereto or the underwriter of any such
policies). Upon any request by the city, the vendor shall exercise reasonable efforts to accomplish such changes
in policy coverages, and shall pay the cost thereof.
(c) Additional required provisions. The contractor agrees that with respect to the above required insurance, all
insurance contracts and certificate(s) of insurance will contain and state, in writing, on the certificate or its
attachment, the following required provisions:
(1) Name the city and its officers, employees, and elected representatives as primary additional
insureds, (as the interest of each insured may appear) as to all applicable coverage;
(2) Provide for 30 days notice to the city for cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change;
(3) Provide for notice to the city at the address shown by registered mail;
(4) The contractor agrees to waive subrogation against the city, its officers, employees, and elected
representatives for injuries, including death, property damage, or any other loss to the extent same
may be covered by the proceeds of insurance.
(5) Provide that all provisions of this article concerning liability, duty, and standard of care
together with the indemnification provision, shall be underwritten by contractual liability coverages
sufficient to include such obligations within applicable policies.
Sec. 4.09.003 Termination
The failure of the contractor to comply with any provision of this article shall result in the contractor being
disqualified to provide services within the city until they become in compliance with this article and can provide
sufficient evidence or proof that the contractor is in compliance with this article, all in the discretion of the chief
of police.
Sec. 4.09.004 Contractor's records and reports
The contractor will maintain a complete and updated record file of all vehicles towed pursuant to this article.
The chief of police or his designated person may audit all records and conduct inventories, inspections, and other
assessments of vehicles, facilities, and records at any time. The contractor further agrees to give full cooperation
to the chief of police or his designated representative and to provide such information as may be required.
Furthermore, the contractor will be responsible for any additional documentation and reports as may be required
by the chief of police from time to time. However, the contractor shall not collect or disseminate information
determined by the chief of police as unnecessary for the performance of this article. Failure to allow inspection
or audit, submit reports or records, falsification of records or reports, or the collection of or dissemination of
information not necessary for the performance of this article, may result in the contractor being denied the
ability to provide services within the city. The contractor will retain and maintain all business records relating to
this article not less than thirty-six months.
Sec. 4.09.005 Requirements of employees
The contractor hereby authorizes the chief of police to conduct a background investigation, including a criminal
history check, to determine the suitability of contractor and contractor's employees to perform services under
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/248
this article. Pursuant to this requirement, the contractor and each of his employees who perform such duties or
services shall execute a background investigation release on forms provided by the chief of police. The chief of
police may require the contractor and/or the contractor's employees to be fingerprinted and provide information
sufficient to conduct a complete background investigation. The contractor hereby agrees that any employee who
will not submit the required information or release information for the background investigation within ten (10)
calendar days shall not be allowed to provide services for the contractor within the city. The contractor agrees to
honor all requests of the chief of police that a particular employee not be assigned duties to provide services
under this article.
Sec. 4.09.006 Contractor's facilities/hours of operation
(a) The contractor shall provide adequate office space and storage facilities within one mile of the city limits
for storage of towed vehicles. The storage facilities shall be secured to protect towed vehicles/impounded
vehicles against theft and vandalism. The contractor shall be responsible for all vehicles and their contents while
they are under his custody and control.
(b) The contractor shall pay any claims from vehicle owners of theft or vandalism within ten (10) days. The
contractor may deny such claim and advise the individuals who assert that their vehicles or the contents
contained therein have been stolen or vandalized that they may file an incident report with the city police
department advising items missing from towed vehicle. The city police department then will investigate the
incident to determine if a criminal offense of theft or burglary of vehicle was committed. If after the
investigation is completed it is found that a criminal offense occurred the offense will be filed with the Lubbock
County District Attorney's Office.
(c) The contractor shall not permit alcoholic beverages to be possessed or consumed by any on duty employee
working at his storage facilities or operating a tow truck.
(d) The contractor shall be required to have an attendant available to come to the storage facilities for vehicle
releases within one (1) hour of notification at all times.
(e) The contractor shall be responsible for the upkeep, maintenance and cleanliness of the facilities, including
removal of debris and garbage. Grass and weeds on the premises will be kept mowed and trimmed to a height
not exceeding 12 inches. Contractor shall immediately clean the premises and effect any repairs to the same
when requested by the chief of police.
(f) The contractor shall provide all necessary equipment to perform operations, including but not limited to
telephone service, fax service and computers. The contractor shall ensure that all equipment used for towing
services is in good repair and conforms with state standards.
Sec. 4.09.007 Services to be provided by the contractor
(a) The contractor shall tow and store all vehicles designated by the chief of police in a safe and secure
manner so as to avoid damage to the vehicles or danger to any motorists, pedestrians or contractor's employees.
The contractor shall respond to all tow requests from the chief of police within thirty (30) minutes of receiving
such requests unless otherwise specified in this article. If contractor cannot respond within the specified time
period (30 minutes), the chief of police or his representative is authorized to contact another contractor to
perform the service.
(b) The contractor agrees to stand ready to ably, professionally and promptly respond to any and all tow
requests made by the chief of police regardless of the time of such requests or the number of such requests. The
chief of police reserves the right to use tow trucks owned by other towing services should the contractor be
unable or unwilling to respond to a tow request by the chief of police in a timely manner.
(c) In responding to tow requests from the chief of police, the contractor shall use authorized vehicles and
equipment, which he owns or leases unless such vehicles and equipment are not available for use. In such an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/248
event, the contractor may then use authorized vehicles and equipment from other towing services pursuant to
agreements he may have with such other services, provided the vehicles and equipment comply with all state,
federal and local laws, rules, and regulations necessary to perform such tows and the requirements of this article.
(d) Neither the city nor the owner of a towed vehicle shall be required to pay any additional fees or charges
when the contractor utilizes another towing service or another towing service's equipment. Furthermore, the
contractor shall ensure that all other towing services whose vehicles and equipment are utilized by the contractor
under this section comply with the following requirements:
(1) Every tow truck which is utilized for the benefit of the contractor shall contain magnetic or
other signs on each side of the vehicle approved by the chief of police and which legibly identifies
the contractor, his phone number and that the tow is being performed for him.
(2) Every vehicle towed by another towing service shall be delivered to the contractor's storage
facility unless otherwise designated by the vehicle owner to the chief of police. Before a tow is
performed by another towing service on behalf of the contractor, the operator of the tow truck must
provide written notice to the owner of the towed vehicle and a law enforcement officer, if present, of
the contractor's name, storage facility address and telephone number.
(3) The chief of police must receive advance notice that a tow will be performed by a towing
service other than the contractor.
(e) The contractor acknowledges that the owner or person in lawful possession of any vehicle which has been
damaged or incapacitated shall have the right to call the towing service of his or her choice unless a law
enforcement officer on the scene directs the contractor to tow the vehicle because of public safety or time of
response concerns. Further, the owner or person lawfully in charge of the vehicle at the place of accident or
place of incapacity shall be given the opportunity to have the vehicle towed to a location other than the
contractor's storage facility.
(f) The contractor shall provide for towing and storage of vehicles and trailers removed from public or private
property at the request of the chief of police at a rate not greater than the applicable rates specified.
(g) The contractor agrees that neither he nor his employees shall solicit personal business from the owners of
vehicles stored at the contractor's facilities.
(h) The contractor shall notify the chief of police of any unclaimed property removed from any vehicle at the
time of its release from the storage facilities, and the contractor shall immediately notify the chief of police if the
contractor believes that a vehicle contains stolen property, controlled substances, or flammable or explosive
products.
(i) The contractor shall maintain in good operating condition at all times a service fleet of wreckers including
at least one rollback type. The tow trucks must be designed to tow a vehicle without placing stress on the body
or frame of the towed vehicle. Sling-type towing devices shall not be used. The contractor agrees to tow all
vehicles in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation for the particular make and model. All tow
trucks shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances at all times.
Sec. 4.09.008 Abandoned vehicles
(a) The contractor shall remove, preserve and store any and all abandoned vehicles upon written request of the
chief of police. Such vehicles shall be removed by contractor within forty-eight (48) hours after the contractor
receives the written request for removal, preservation and storage, unless the vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard.
If the abandoned vehicle presents a traffic hazard then the contractor must comply with the thirty (30) minute
response time stated in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/248
(b) The contractor shall make his storage facilities available for an abandoned vehicle auction to be conducted
by contractor. The contractor will honor all reasonable requests by the chief of police intended to ensure that
such auctions are conducted in the fairest possible manner. The contractor shall receive any and all proceeds
from said auction to cover contractors towing and storage fees.
Sec. 4.09.009 Billing procedures
(a) The chief of police shall have the right to cancel a request for towing services, and no charge shall be made
to the city or the owner/operator of the vehicle when a request is cancelled. In the event that an owner/operator
arrives at the location of the vehicle after it has been lifted by contractor's tow truck, the owner/operator shall be
permitted to pay the operator of the tow truck the towing fee permitted by this article and receive custody of the
vehicle. Should the owner/operator be unable or unwilling to pay the towing fee, the vehicle shall be towed to
the contractor's storage facilities.
(b) The contractor may charge waiting time after the first hour that a tow truck spends at the location of a
towing assignment, provided that the contractor has remained available to commence the tow during the entire
time period.
(c) No charges, fees or costs other than those specified by this article may be charged for towing services
requested by the chief of police or his designated person. The contractor will bill the city for services performed
in connection with vehicles owned or leased by the city at the rate specified in this article.
(d) Any vehicle towed or stored pursuant to this article will be released without towing or storages fees upon
written authorization from the chief of police.
(e) The city shall have no obligation to the contractor for charges incurred in connection with wrecker services
for vehicles towed at the city's request other than: (1) vehicles owned or leased by the city; (2) abandoned
vehicles; and (3) junked vehicles. The contractor must seek payment for any tows or towing services not
specifically described in this subsection solely from the owner of the person responsible for each such vehicle.
(f) All invoices for towing city-owned or leased vehicles shall be consecutively numbered and sent to a person
or persons designated by the chief of police to receive such invoices. The contractor will give a detailed receipt
containing itemized listing of all charges to persons whose vehicles are towed.
Sec. 4.09.010 Charges by contractor
The following fees are the maximum fees for services provided under this article adopted by the city:
(1) Impounded vehicles and accident disabled vehicles:
(A) Towing charge.
(i) $150.00 per accident disabled vehicle.
(ii) $150.00 per impounded vehicle.
(iii) $30.00 per city-owned or leased vehicle.
(B) Dollies. $15.00 per vehicle. To charge a dolly fee, the vehicle must be removed from the
location where it was impounded or disabled on dollies.
(C) Supplemental charges. $75.00 per hour. Beginning one (1) hour after arrival on the scene
of a tow, contractor may assess such charges for each thirty (30) minute interval that he is
required to remain at the scene in order to safely and properly discharge his obligation under
this article or in compliance of state law; however, supplemental charges may not be assessed if
delay in towing a vehicle is due to time expended by the contractor preparing to tow other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/248
vehicles. All loss or damage sustained by the contractor and arising out of the nature of the
work to be performed under this article, or from unforeseen circumstances, unusual obstructions
or difficulties which may be encountered in the prosecution of such work, shall be borne by the
contractor at his own cost and expense.
(D) Impound fee. $20.00 (unless state law requires a different amount).
(E) Notification fee. $50.00 one-time fee (unless state law requires a different amount).
(F) Storage fees. $20.00 per impounded vehicle or accident disabled vehicle.
(G) Vehicle custody fee. $35.00 fee for owner/operator to gain custody of vehicle after tow
truck is on the scene and $150.00 fee if vehicle has already been hooked up or loaded by
contractor.
Sec. 4.09.011 Occupational license fees
Those contractors desiring to hold a permit to be a wrecker operator within the city shall apply to the city
secretary. No license shall be issued until applicant has been approved and has paid a license fee of $75.00; the
applicant/contractor and fee must be renewed on an annual basis.
(Ordinance 727 adopted 3/9/10)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.01.001 Riding on fire apparatus
It shall be unlawful for any person, not a member of the fire department, to get upon and ride a fire truck or other
fire apparatus when the same is en route to a fire or answering an alarm, except upon the request of the driver or
other officer in charge of said truck or other fire apparatus. (1978 Code, sec. 12-6)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created
The office of fire marshal is hereby created, the fire marshal reporting directly to the mayor and city
commission. Such office shall be filled by appointment of the mayor and city commission. The fire marshal shall
be properly qualified for the duties of his office. He shall receive an annual salary as specified by the city
commission. (1978 Code, sec. 12-20)
Sec. 5.02.002 Investigating fires; records
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin within twenty-four (24) hours, not
including Sundays, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/248
together with all facts, statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss,
which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (1978 Code, sec. 12-21)
Sec. 5.02.003 Gathering evidence; prosecuting arsonists, etc.
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take, or cause to be taken, the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of
the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to
commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall
cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to
the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all the information
obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1978 Code, sec. 12-
22)
Sec. 5.02.004 Summoning witnesses, etc.
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation and may require the production of any
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1978 Code, sec. 12-23)
Sec. 5.02.005 Offenses by witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall be
fined in a sum not exceeding the amount in section 1.01.009; provided, however, any person so convicted shall
have the right of appeal. (1978 Code, sec. 12-24)
Sec. 5.02.006 Privacy of investigations; separating witnesses
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the room or place where such
investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to
communicate with each other until they have been examined. (1978 Code, sec. 12-25)
Sec. 5.02.007 Entry where fire has occurred
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1978 Code, sec. 12-26)
Sec. 5.02.008 Periodic investigations; remedying dangerous conditions
(a) The fire marshal or fire chief, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property
adjacent, and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to
enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, quarterly or more often, to
enter upon and make, or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile,
manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. (1978 Code, sec. 12-27)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/248
(b) Whenever the fire chief or fire marshal, after inspection of any building or structure or premises in the city,
finds, because of deterioration, age, lack of repairs or having therein or thereon electrical wires or equipment
improperly installed, electric wiring or equipment out of repair, defective chimneys, defective gas connections or
appliances, defective heating apparatus, inadequate means of egress or dangerous accumulations or hazardous
conditions present a fire hazard or render said buildings, structures or premises liable to fire, or which buildings
or structures or premises are so situated or occupied, or in such condition of disorder or disrepair, either from the
exterior or interior, as to endanger said buildings, structures or premises or buildings, structures or premises or
property located elsewhere, or human life, from a fire in or on such building, structure or premises, the chief of
the department or fire marshal shall cause to be served written notice and order on the owner or occupant or
person responsible therefor, to remove such fire hazard by rearranging, repairing or demolishing the condemned
buildings or structures, or by repairing the equipment therein or by changing the occupancy therein or by
clearing the premises of dangerous accumulations or hazardous conditions in such a way as to remove such fire
hazard. (Ordinance 660, sec. 12, adopted 10/12/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or premises;
provided, however, if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5)
days, appeal to the city commission, which shall investigate the cause of the complaint, unless by its authority
the order is revoked, and if sustained such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said
owner or occupant. (1978 Code, sec. 12-27; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.02.009 Maintaining improper appliances, etc., dangerous substances
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or
health, or safety of person or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system or with a storage of explosives,
petroleum, gasoline, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse or with
any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others; or which
shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions
dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the maintainer thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009. (1978 Code, sec. 12-29)
Sec. 5.02.010 Notice prerequisite to prosecution
No prosecution shall be brought under section 5.02.009 until the order provided for in section 5.02.008 is given,
and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (1978 Code, sec. 12-30; Ordinance adopting
Code)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 5.03.001 Adopted
That certain documents, three (2) [sic] copies of which are on file in the office of the building inspector, and the
city, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city, for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises in the city and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2012
edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the building inspector, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
Sec. 5.03.002 Amendments
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/248
That the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Slaton, Texas.
Section 109.4 Insert: Misdemeanor offense, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Section 111.4 Insert: Fine of not less than two hundred dollars $200.00 or more than two thousand
dollars $2,000.00.
Sec. 5.03.003 Geographic limits
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2012 International Fire Code are hereby established
as follows:
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 and Section 5706.2.4.4 Insert: Geographic limits in which the storage of class I
and class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of building is prohibited outside the City of Slaton,
Texas zoning area of industrial I or greater areas, and shall be prohibited in all other zoning areas.
Section 6104.2 Insert: Geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted
for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas and placed within the City of Slaton, Texas
zoning area of industrial I or greater areas.
(Ordinance 743 adopted 6/11/12)
Sec. 5.03.004 Penalties
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith,
or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the city commission or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed, shall
severally for each such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine as provided in section 1.01.009. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(1978 Code, sec. 12-46; Ordinance 500, sec. 1, adopted 2/9/88)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE LIMITS*
Sec. 5.04.001 Designated
The following described territory within the city is designated as the fire limits of the city:
(1) Description initially. Beginning at the northeast corner of block 39, Original Town; thence west
to the northwest corner of said block 39; thence south along 6th Street to the northeast corner of
block 48; thence west to the northwest corner of block 48; thence south along 7th Street to its
intersection with the alley in block 49, or the southeast corner of lot 9, block 49; thence west along
alleys in blocks 49 and 50 to its intersection with 9th Street; thence south along 9th Street to its
intersection with Lynn Street; thence west to the northwest corner of block 62; thence south along
10th Street, crossing Panhandle, Garza and Lubbock Streets, to the northwest corner of block 90,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/248
West Park Addition; thence east along Lubbock Street to the northeast corner of lot 4, block 90;
thence south to the northeast corner of lot 22, block 90; thence east along the line of lots 13 and 14,
block 90, crossing 9th Street to the alley in block 91 (running east and west); thence along said alley
to the southeast corner of lot 12, block 91; thence angling southeast across 8th Street to the southwest
corner of block 92; thence northeastward with the line of lots 4 and 5, block 92, and on, crossing
Panhandle Avenue, continuing the line along line between lots 4 and 5, block 93, to the northeast
corner of said block 93; thence north along 8th Street crossing Lubbock, Garza and Lynn streets, to
the southwest corner of block 47; thence east to the southeast corner of block 47; thence north to the
northeast corner of block 47; thence east on Crosby Street to the southeast corner of block 40; thence
north to the northeast corner of said block; thence crossing Texas Avenue to the place of beginning.
(2) Added territory. Add the following described territory to the fire limits: Beginning at the
northwest corner of block 48 of the Original Town, a point in the present fire limits; thence in a
westerly direction along the north property line of block 49 to the northwest corner of said block;
thence south to the alley in said block 49 connecting with a point in the present fire limits, same
being the north half of block 49, connecting with the present fire limits at the west end of alley in
block 91 of the West Park Addition; thence south to the southwest corner of block 91; thence east
along the south property line of said block to the southeast corner; thence north to a point in the
present fire limits at the east end of alley in block 91, same being the south half of block 91.
(3) Excluded territory. Except and exclude from the fire limits the following described territory:
Commencing at the northeast corner of block 39, Original Town; thence west along Dickens Street to
the northwest corner of block 39, Original Town; thence south along 6th Street to the southwest
corner of said block, crossing Texas Avenue, to the southwest corner of block 40, Original Town;
thence east along Crosby Street to the southeast corner of block 40, Original Town; thence north to
the northeast corner of said block, crossing Texas Avenue, to the place of beginning, same being all
of blocks 39 and 40, Original Town.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-4)
Block 48 of the Original Town (description). (Ordinance 623, sec. 1, adopted 10/8/02)
Sec. 5.04.002 Incombustible construction–Required within fire limit
(a) Every building hereafter erected, altered or enlarged within the fire limits shall be enclosed on all sides
inclusive of walls, windows, and roof, including cornices and sides of air shafts, constructed wholly of
incombustible materials which are required by the International Building Code, and International Fire Code. All
building shall comply with the required fire rating, along with setback standards, as required by their occupancy
type and zoning designation.
(b) Any new building or exterior modification proposed within the fire limits shall require compliance with
the Historical District Designation Ordinance, (in its pending form or as eventually passed), including
application to the city by form compliant with that ordinance and approval by the city.
(Ordinance 717 adopted 12/9/08)
Sec. 5.04.003 Same–Building or moving frame buildings into city; removal of damaged buildings
(a) No structure, the walls of which are wholly, or in part, constructed of wood, shall hereafter be built or
moved into the fire limits, except temporary one-story frame buildings for the use of builders.
(b) Any existing frame, ironclad, or stucco building within the fire limits which may hereafter be damaged by
fire, decay or otherwise to an amount greater than half its present value, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be
repaired or rebuilt, but shall be removed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/248
(c) No addition shall be made to such buildings unless they shall meet the requirements of section 5.04.002.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-24)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIRE LANES, FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADWAYS, FIRE SAFETY SURVEYS
Sec. 5.05.001 Definitions
Access roadways for the fire apparatus. Fire lane, public street or highway.
Fire lane. A means of access designated for fire department use during emergencies to allow unobstructed
access to a building or operation.
(Ordinance 660, sec. 2, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.002 Enforcement
The fire chief, fire marshal or police chief is hereby authorized to monitor fire lanes to detect obstructions and
may issue citations, remove and impound any vehicle obstructing said fire lane, or both. (Ordinance 660, sec. 10,
adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.003 Penalties
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article, including the 2000 edition of the International
Fire Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
5.03.003. (Ordinance 660, sec. 13, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.004 Fire lanes required
Fire lanes shall be designated, designed, and maintained as specified by the 2000 edition of the International Fire
Code. (Ordinance 660, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.005 Maintenance of fire lanes
The owner or person in control of any building for which fire lanes have been designated shall mark and
maintain said fire lanes by painting stripes on the surface of said roadways to designate the fire lane for fire
apparatus in such a manner so as to be visible to a reasonably observant person. (Ordinance 660, sec. 3, adopted
10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.006 Specifications for marking fire lanes
All required fire lanes shall be provided and maintained with fire lane striping which consists of a six-inch-wide
red background stripe with four-inch-high white letters stating “fire lane no parking” or “no parking fire lane” to
be painted upon the red stripe every twenty-five (25) feet along the entire length of the fire lane, showing the
exact boundary of the fire lane; fire lane markings shall be upon the vertical surface of the curb unless otherwise
approved by the fire chief. (Ordinance 660, sec. 4, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.007 Fire apparatus access roads
If the fire chief, fire marshal or authorized representative determines that other means of notice are ineffective to
designate a fire lane, signs may be required by written notice to the property owner. When required, these signs
shall be erected and maintained bearing a red legend stating “no parking fire lane” with letters of at least twelve
(12) inches in height on a white reflectorized background at least twelve (12) inches wide by eighteen (18)
inches tall. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post, and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet,
six inches (6' 6") above the finished grade. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls as approved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/248
by the fire chief, fire marshal or authorized representative. Additional signs may also be required by written
notice from the fire chief or fire marshal. (Ordinance 660, sec. 5, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.008 Required access
Fire apparatus access roads shall be approved by the fire department, and site plans shall be submitted to the fire
marshal for approval prior to starting construction of the adjacent building. Structural aspects of fire lanes shall
meet all other applicable standards under the code of the city. No person shall mark, post, or otherwise identify a
no-fire-lane street, whether public or private, as a fire lane. (Ordinance 660, sec. 6, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.009 Construction of buildings, facilities or structures to provide access
All buildings, facilities or structures shall be constructed in such a way that every part of the first story is within
one hundred fifty feet (150') of a dedicated street or fire lane as measured by the route necessary to extend
firefighting hose lines around the building. The 150 feet shall be measured along a ten-foot-wide unobstructed
pathway, around the external walls of the structure. A continuous row of parking between the fire lane and the
structure shall be considered a barrier. A structure may be erected at a greater distance from a fire lane or
dedicated public street if the complete automatic fire sprinkler system is provided to protect all portions of the
building. (Ordinance 660, sec. 7, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.010 Dimensions of fire lanes
All fire lanes shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet. The minimum
unobstructed width of a fire lane shall be not less than twenty (20) feet unless otherwise approved by the fire
department. (Ordinance 660, sec. 8, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.011 Surface of fire lanes
Fire lanes shall be provided with a concrete or asphalt surface to provide all-weather driving capabilities and
shall be constructed to support the imposed weight of a fifty-thousand-pound (50,000 lb.) fire apparatus.
(Ordinance 660, sec. 9, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.05.012 Fire safety surveys
It shall be the duty of the fire chief or fire marshal to perform a fire safety survey of all commercial premises
within his jurisdiction at least once a year. Such surveys shall be made by carefully viewing all premises both
from the abutting street and abutting alley. The chief of the fire department shall require such written reports to
disclose dangerous accumulations or hazardous conditions. (Ordinance 660, sec. 11, adopted 10/12/04)
ARTICLE 5.06 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.06.001 Definition
Fireworks. Combustible or explosive compositions, or combustible or explosive devices, designed to produce
visible or audible effects for amusement purposes. (Ordinance 661, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.06.002 Possession, sale, manufacture, etc.
No person may manufacture, sell or give away fireworks, or store, transport, possess or use fireworks within the
city limits. (Ordinance 661, sec. 2, adopted 10/12/04)
Sec. 5.06.003 Penalties
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 5.03.003 of this chapter. (Ordinance 661, sec. 3, adopted
10/12/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/248
Sec. 5.06.004 Exemptions for display permit
Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad track torpedoes, or other
signaling devices used by railroads, or to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or
dealers in photographic supplies, or to prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any
kind if conducted under proper police supervision after application has been made and permit issued by the chief
of the fire department for such demonstration. Said permit shall not be granted unless such demonstration or
display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the chief of the fire
department, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. (1978 Code, sec.
12-5)
ARTICLE 5.07 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.07.001 Contribution for service
The individual members of the volunteer fire department shall receive a contribution for service at the rate of
$50.00 per month, effective as of December 1, 2008. (Ordinance 716 adopted 11/11/08)
Secs. 5.07.002–5.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Costs for Emergency and Rescue Services
Sec. 5.07.031 Billing
The city recognizes and supports the right of the Slaton Volunteer Fire Department to bill persons and entities,
including insurance companies providing coverage to said persons and entities for the reasonable costs that are
related to the loss, damage, and wear to apparatus, tools, equipment, and materials necessary to provide the
emergency property protection services rendered to said persons and entities. (Ordinance 681, sec. 1, adopted
10/10/06)
Sec. 5.07.032 Collection of fees
(a) Fees shall be collected for services provided inside the city limits as well as those provided outside the city
limits. Fire administration shall utilize applicable incident report information that will be forwarded to the Slaton
Volunteer Fire Department's authorized agent for this collection of fees.
(b) The Slaton Volunteer Fire Department, or their authorized agent, shall submit an invoice to the relevant
insurance company or government program covering the particular loss that is related to the emergency services
rendered. If it can be reliably determined that there is no insurance coverage or benefit for a particular loss
which causes the fire department to incur loss, damage, and wear and tear to apparatus, tools equipment, and
materials, then the Slaton Volunteer Fire Department may hold responsible the person or entity that received said
emergency property protection services.
(Ordinance 681, secs. 2, 3, adopted 10/10/06)
Sec. 5.07.033 Exemptions
(a) Residents of the city receiving emergency services rendered by the Slaton Volunteer Fire Department are
hereby exempted from the fire department service charges contained herein, unless it is determined that the
emergency services rendered were connected to negligent and/or malicious act(s) on the part of said persons.
(b) Calls for service at residential structure “single-family residence” fires within the city limits shall not be
subject to any of the fire department service charges contained herein, unless it is determined that the emergency
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/248
services rendered were connected to negligent and/or malicious act(s) on the part of the property owners. First
responder/medical assist calls to a residence, i.e., not involving a motor vehicle, within the city limits are hereby
exempted from the fire department service charges contained herein unless it is determined that the emergency
services rendered were connected to negligent and/or malicious act(s) on the part of persons receiving the
treatment.
(Ordinance 681, secs. 4, 5, adopted 10/10/06)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.02.001 Sweeping of trash from business houses
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or employed by, any business house to allow wastepaper or trash
to be placed or swept upon any sidewalk, street or alley. (1978 Code, sec. 13-28)
State law reference–Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 365.
Secs. 6.02.002–6.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Nuisances**
Sec. 6.02.031 General definition
(a) Whatever is dangerous to human life or health, whatever renders the ground, the water, the air, the food, a
hazard or injury to human life or health or that is offensive to the senses or that is or tends to become detrimental
to the public health is hereby declared to be a nuisance; and the specific acts, conditions and deeds, as are set
forth in this article, are, among others, each declared to be a nuisance and prohibited. (1978 Code, sec. 13-20)
(b) The violation of this section is hereby declared a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more
than the amount set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 501, sec. 1, adopted 2/9/88)
Sec. 6.02.032 Specific enumeration
The following acts, commissions, omissions, conditions, and deeds by any person shall be and are hereby
declared to be nuisances:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/248
(1) The act of allowing to exist any full or overflowing privy, vault, cesspool, or other receptacle
for filth or human excrement, upon any premises owned or controlled by any person;
(2) The act of allowing to be pumped, or the contents of cesspools to flow, over any premises for
fertilizing or other purposes;
(3) Any imperfect or faulty trap, or any trap in disrepair, any sink or water closet, or any other
drainage appliance or fixture within any house or building from which there shall arise any foul or
offensive gas or odors;
(4) The casting, draining, throwing or causing to be cast, drained, thrown or distributed into any
public street or highway, gutter, alley or other public grounds any kitchen water, water from exhaust
pipes, laundry water, water from service stations and garages, air conditioners or other wastewater,
slops, swill or liquid filth;
(5) Whenever any stable, stall, shed or enclosure, yard or appurtenance thereto, in which any horse,
cattle, cow or other animal is kept, or any place in which manure or liquid discharge of such animals
shall collect and accumulate and which stable, stall, shed, enclosure, yard or appurtenance thereto is
not kept in a clean and sanitary condition or permitted to remain in a condition which would
constitute a breeding place for flies, or is not kept in a clean and sanitary condition so that offensive
smells, odors or fumes cannot escape therefrom, it shall be deemed a nuisance, provided, that nothing
in this subsection shall be so construed as to include manure deposits upon private property,
otherwise lawful, for the purpose of cultivation or to be used as fertilizer;
(6) The suffering or permitting by any person, whether owner or agent of any premises, occupied
or unoccupied, of weeds, grass, or plants that are not cultivated, to grow upon any premises to be a
height of more than twelve (12) inches on an average and to grow in rank profusion thereon, and any
such premises upon which any weeds, grass or plants are permitted to grow above the height of
twelve (12) inches or in rank profusion shall be deemed a nuisance, dangerous to public health and
calculated to increase the fire hazard in the city;
(7) The failure on the part of the owner, operator, agent or driver of any truck, trailer or other
vehicle that has been used for the hauling of any livestock, animals or fowl, and when same has been
parked in or on any highway, street, alley, vacant lot, or tract of land, either public or private, or in
any service station or garage, to move such truck, trailer or other vehicle, containing manure or
excreta or liquid discharge of such livestock, animals or fowl when notified by the city health officer
or the city administrator to move such truck, trailer or other vehicle to such location as will not
disturb the inhabitants of the city by reason of the odor, gases or fumes caused by the contents of said
truck, trailer or other vehicle;
(8) The allowing of paper, lumber, rocks and/or other trash or debris to accumulate or remain on
any piece of property in such a manner as to create a harborage, or breeding place for rats;
(9) The keeping or maintaining of a public restroom in an unsanitary condition;
(1978 Code, sec. 13-21)
(10) The allowing of animal feces to accumulate or animal urine residue to accumulate on or
within any residential or commercial building to the extent that the immediately adjacent property is
exposed to its odor;
(11) The allowing of a building, either residential or commercial, to be infested with rats, mice or
cockroaches or to remain in such a condition that it constitutes a breeding place for rats, mice or
cockroaches.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/248
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.02.033 Abatement
(a) Whenever any nuisance, either general in nature or specifically defined in this chapter, shall exist within
the city, the appropriate code enforcement personnel or department shall notify the owner or occupant of the
premises where such nuisance exists and direct the removal or abatement of the nuisance specific and shall
describe a time frame within which such removal or abatement shall be completed. The notice must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained:
(A) By publication at least once;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates.
(b) If the municipality mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a), and the United
States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and
the notice is considered as delivered.
(Ordinance 667, sec. 13-22, adopted 6/14/05; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Should the owner or occupant fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the action directed by the notice
within the specified time frame, or in the event the owner or occupant cannot be located, the city shall cause
such nuisance to be abated or removed and a lien shall be filed of public record upon the property for the
expense incurred.
(d) In instances where properties are subject to being classified as “habitually unhealthy premises” as herein
defined, the city shall be required to give no more than one notice annually by certified mail and may, thereafter,
during that calendar year, notify the owner or occupant by regular mail of impending action by the city.
“Habitually unhealthy premises” are those whereon the city has documented a history of 4 occurrences of
violations of this article within the preceding 24-month period.
(Ordinance 667, sec. 13-22, adopted 6/14/05)
Sec. 6.02.034 Creation constitutes misdemeanor
Every nuisance herein defined, whether generally or specifically, is prohibited and forbidden within the city, and
any person making, causing, permitting or maintaining any of said nuisances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009, and in the case of a continuing
offense, each day same is continued shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code, sec. 13-23)
Secs. 6.02.035–6.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Cutting and Removing Vegetation*
Sec. 6.02.061 On private premises
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/248
It shall be the duty of any owner, agent or occupant of any premises to remove or cause to be cut all such weeds,
grass or plants that are not cultivated as often as may be necessary to comply with subsection (6) of section
6.02.032; provided, the removing and cutting of weeds, grass and plants which are not cultivated, at least once in
three (3) weeks during the period stated in subsection (6) of said section 6.02.032, shall be deemed to be in
compliance; and it shall be the duty of any owner, agent or occupant of any premises to use every precaution to
prevent such weeds, grass or plants growing on such premises so as to become a nuisance as defined in said
subsection (6). (1978 Code, sec. 13-24)
Sec. 6.02.062 On adjacent public ways
It shall be unlawful to allow to grow or remain on any street, alley or other public way abutting premises owned
or occupied by him any weeds, grass or plants prohibited by section 6.02.032(6). (1978 Code, sec. 13-25)
Sec. 6.02.063 Abatement of dangerous weeds
The city may abate, without notice, the nuisance of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which
are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
342.008.
Secs. 6.02.064–6.02.090 Reserved
Division 4. Illegal Deposits on Private or Public Premises
Sec. 6.02.091 Generally
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any slops, garbage, sewage, refuse, rubbish or other waste matter
either on his own premises, or premises occupied by him as tenant or otherwise, or on the premises of any other
person, or in or on any public street, alley or other public way, where same shall be exposed to the open air or
accessible to flies. All such accumulations of garbage and other dry refuse, until removed as provided by
ordinance, shall be kept in closed containers to prevent access thereto by flies. (1978 Code, sec. 13-26)
Sec. 6.02.092 Obstructing drainage
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any trash, refuse or any material of any kind and character into any
drainage ditch or gutter in such a way as to obstruct or impede the natural drainage of water in such ditch or
gutter. (1978 Code, sec. 13-27)
Secs. 6.02.093–6.02.120 Reserved
Division 5. Old Machinery, Appliances and Junk
Sec. 6.02.121 On private premises
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow old and discarded machinery, appliances, junk or parts thereof to be
or remain in or upon any lot owned or occupied by him. (1978 Code, sec. 13-29)
Sec. 6.02.122 On adjacent public way
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any old or discarded machinery, appliances, junk or parts thereof to
be placed or allow the same to remain in the street, alley or other public way abutting the premises owned or
occupied by him. (1978 Code, sec. 13-30)
ARTICLE 6.03 RESERVED*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/248
ARTICLE 6.04 AMBULANCE SERVICE*
Sec. 6.04.001 Available; supervision of equipment and service
The ambulance service equipment held by the city shall be utilized as an ambulance service for persons
requesting or utilizing such service, which shall be subject to the further provisions of this article, and such
ambulance service shall be under the immediate supervision of the chief of police or such other person or office
as the city commission may designate, and such equipment shall be maintained at locations under the direction
of such chief of police, subject to the approval of the city commission. (1978 Code, sec. 22-1)
Sec. 6.04.002 Charge schedule
Any person who utilizes the ambulance service of the city, whether such person requested the same or not by
reason of emergencies then existing, shall pay for said service. All rates, fees and charges shall be determined
and prescribed in amount from time to time by resolution of the city commission, and the city secretary
maintains a schedule of all such charges. (1978 Code, sec. 22-2; Ordinance 512, sec. 1, adopted 9/12/89)
Sec. 6.04.003 Failure to pay
(a) When any person utilizes or receives the ambulance service of the city and fails to pay for such service
within sixty (60) days after a statement for costs for such service has been mailed to him, either to his known
address or the address left with the hospital, such failure to pay shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this code.
(b) Failure to pay by the person utilizing or receiving ambulance service after receiving notice as herein
provided shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud on the part of such person. Such person shall be
notified that he is in violation of this code by certified or registered mail or by personal service by an officer of
the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-3)
ARTICLE 6.05 REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS†
Sec. 6.05.001 Office of registrar created; appointment; deputy
The office of registrar of births and deaths is hereby created, and the registrar of births and deaths shall be the
city secretary. A deputy registrar shall be appointed by the registrar. (1978 Code, sec. 13-1; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 6.05.002 Compliance with statute; reporting sale of coffins and births and deaths
(a) Every birth and every death occurring within the city shall be registered and the necessary permits issued
as required by the state vital statistics law, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, title 3, chapter 191 et seq., relating
to deaths and births, and as such rules may apply to the city.
(b) Any person who furnishes a coffin in which to bury a dead body shall report to the registrar of births and
deaths, at the time of the sale and before the delivery of the coffin to the purchaser, the fact of such sale and such
other information as may be required by the registrar of births and deaths.
(c) It shall be the duty of the superintendent or any person in charge of any hospital or other institution
wherein the sick are taken for detention or care, or any person in attendance as a physician or otherwise, to
report to the registrar of deaths and births, by telephone or otherwise, every birth and every death, within twelve
(12) hours, and in each event, prior to the removal of the mother of the child or of the deceased from the hospital
or institution, or other place where same occurs, and such report shall include such other information as may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/248
demanded by the registrar of births and deaths, which shall not be accepted as the birth or death certificate
required in subsection (a).
(1978 Code, sec. 13-2)
Sec. 6.05.003 Records
(a) The registrar of births and deaths shall complete, correct, arrange in chronological order and index the
birth and death records of the city, and shall forward prior to the tenth of the following month to the office of
state registrar of vital statistics all original certificates of births and deaths filed during the previous month.
(b) The registrar shall keep the records in a fireproof vault in the municipal building.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-3)
Sec. 6.05.004 Fees
(a) The registrar shall be paid, for the account of the city, a fee for each birth and each death certificate
certified to the city by the state registrar of vital statistics.
(b) The registrar, upon the payment of a fee, shall issue a certified copy of any record within his keeping,
except such as are forbidden by the state statutes. All fees collected for the issuance of such copies shall be paid
on the first day of each month, into the city treasury, with such statement as may be required by the city, and
shall credit such fees to such fund as required by the city commission.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-4)
(c) The fees charged by the registrar shall be the same fees as charged by the state bureau of vital statistics as
provided in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 191.0045. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.05.005 Violation
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any person required by such provisions to perform any
act who fails or refuses to do so shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction fined as provided
in section 1.01.009 of this code. The registrar of births and deaths shall immediately report to the mayor any
apparent violation of such provisions which comes to his attention, and the city shall immediately follow up
such cases with necessary court procedure, to the end that every birth and death shall be registered in the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-5)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Appointment of acting judge
In the absence of the judge of the municipal court from his office or in the event that in the opinion of the mayor
the judge of the municipal court is unable to fulfill the duties of his office because of incapacity or in the event
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/248
of a vacancy in the office, the city commission shall appoint an acting judge of the municipal court. (1978 Code,
sec. 8-2)
State law reference–Municipal court judges generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004.
ARTICLE 7.02 CHILD SAFETY FUND†
Sec. 7.02.001 Created
There is hereby created a child safety fund into which there shall be deposited all court costs assessed by reason
of the 1991 amendment to article 6701d-26. (Ordinance 525, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/91)
Sec. 7.02.002 Recommendations for expenditures
A committee composed of the mayor, the chief of police and the superintendent of schools shall make
recommendations to the city commission for all expenditures from such fund, and none are to be made except
upon approval of the city commission. (Ordinance 525, sec. 2, adopted 11/12/91)
Sec. 7.02.003 Limitations on expenditures
No expenditure shall be made except for the purpose of enhancing child safety, health, nutrition, child abuse
prevention and intervention, and drug and alcohol abuse prevention. (Ordinance 525, sec. 3, adopted 11/12/91)
ARTICLE 7.03 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND**
Sec. 7.03.001 Established
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, known as the fund, pursuant to
article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue
account.
(Ordinance 629, sec. 1, adopted 5/8/03)
Sec. 7.03.002 Establishment of amount of fee and assessment and collection
(a) The fee shall be in the amount as set forth in section A7.03.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this
code.
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in
the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after May 1, 2003.
(d) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city secretary who shall deposit the fee
into the municipal court technology fund.
(Ordinance 629, sec. 2, adopted 5/8/03)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/248
Sec. 7.03.003 Designated use of fund and administration
(a) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of technology enhancements for the
municipal court of the city. “Technology enhancements” shall include any and all items described in article
102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city commission.
(Ordinance 629, sec. 3, adopted 5/8/03)
ARTICLE 7.04 MUNCIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND
Sec. 7.04.001 Establishment of amount of fee and assessment and collection
(a) Each assessed fee, provided for in section A7.04.001(a) in appendix A to this code, shall be deposited into
the municipal court building security fund which is created hereby pursuant to article 102.017 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, V.A.C.S.
(b) The fee provided for in subsection (a) above, shall be collected on all convictions occurring after the
effective date hereof for offenses occurring on or after March 15, 2006.
(Ordinance 672 adopted 3/14/06)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
ARTICLE 8.02 NOISE†
Sec. 8.02.001 Nuisances
(a) Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury
to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration as to substantially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
(1978 Code, secs. 16-9, 16-10)
Sec. 8.02.002 Enumeration
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article, but such enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in
such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/248
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, rest, sleep or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in
any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence.
(2) Stationary loudspeakers or amplifiers. The use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier of
such intensity that it annoys and disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity
thereof or the use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier operated on any weekday between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time on Sunday.
(3) Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or longcontinued
noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the
immediate vicinity.
(4) Horns and signal devices on automobiles, etc. The continued or frequent sounding of any horn
or signal device of any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger or warning
signal, or the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh noise for
any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in
the immediate vicinity.
(5) Steam whistles on stationary boilers. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of danger, so
as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(6) Discharge of exhaust from engines. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler
or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, so as to disturb
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(7) Noise near school, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school
or institution of learning while the same is in session or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such
manner indicating that the same is a school or hospital street, so as to disturb persons of ordinary
sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(8) Loading and unloading operations; opening, etc., of bales, etc. The creation of any loud and
excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers, so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in
the immediate vicinity.
(9) Shouting and crying of peddlers, etc. The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors, which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
(10) Drums, etc., calling attention to performance, show or sale. The use of any drum, loudspeaker
or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale of merchandise, so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the
immediate vicinity.
(1978 Code, sec. 16-11)
Sec. 8.02.003 Amplifiers on vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive and operate or park upon any street or alley in the city a vehicle of
any kind equipped with a loudspeaker, amplifier or any other kind of sound equipment, and use such vehicle,
amplifier or sound equipment for advertising purposes of any kind; however, nothing herein shall be construed
as prohibiting the city from issuing a permit to use such vehicles equipped with loudspeakers or amplifiers at
public and/or political assemblies. (1978 Code, sec. 16-12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/248
Sec. 8.02.004 Amplifiers on public or private property
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect a loudspeaker or amplifier of any kind to a radio, television or
record-playing machine or to any kind of machine which produces or reproduces sound of any kind and, when
so connected, place said loudspeaker or amplifier on any building or vacant lot in the city, or place the same
inside of any such building near an entrance or window or any opening in said building, or place such
loudspeaker or amplifier on the sidewalk or in the street in front of any building or alongside of any building or
vacant lot, and use or permit such loudspeaker or amplifier to be used to produce or reproduce sounds of any
kind for the purpose of advertising, entertaining or for any other purpose. Nothing herein shall be construed as
prohibiting the playing of a radio, television or record-playing machine when not connected with a loudspeaker
or amplifier in any building or on any vacant lot in the city. (1978 Code, sec. 16-13)
Sec. 8.02.005 Permit for playing musical instrument on street or sidewalk
It shall be unlawful for any person to play upon any kind of musical instrument upon any of the streets or
sidewalks or the public square, of the city, unless a parade or assembly permit has been obtained as required in
this code. (1978 Code, sec. 16-14)
Sec. 8.02.006 Vehicle loads
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive along or upon any public street or alley in the city any vehicle, which
is loaded with iron or other material likely to produce a great or annoying sound, without using proper deadening
substances to prevent noises annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities within one hundred fifty (150) feet of
such vehicle. (1978 Code, sec. 16-15)
ARTICLE 8.03 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.03.001 Air guns and spring guns
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any air or spring gun or air or spring rifle of any
description in, on, across or near to any building, park, street or alley within the city. (1978 Code, sec. 16-8)
Sec. 8.03.002 Throwing missiles
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw rocks, stones, balls, clods of earth, or any other missile in such
manner as may do injury to any person or property. (1978 Code, sec. 16-18)
Sec. 8.03.003 Concealed handguns on city property
(a) The city administrator or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable
provisions of this section including posting of premises and notification in the official newspaper. (Ordinance
546, secs. 1, 2, adopted 3/12/96)
(b) It shall be an offence for any person, except a certified fulltime, paid, peace officer or other persons
authorized by the chief of police, to enter or attempt to enter upon any city-owned or city-leased property while
in the possession of a concealed handgun. (Ordinance 708 adopted 4/8/08)
ARTICLE 8.04 ADVERTISING
Sec. 8.04.001 Putting up placards, etc., in public places
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, tack, nail, tie, glue, paste or maintain any placard, poster,
banner or any other material anywhere on the streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, signal light posts or bases,
streetlight posts or bases, telephone posts or electric posts in the city or to cause the same to be done.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/248
(b) This section shall not apply to any officer of the city, the state, or the United States who may place upon
such objects, by tying with strings or ties, any posters or placards in the interest of public health and safety.
(1978 Code, sec. 3-1)
Sec. 8.04.002 Painting on or defacing city property
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or write pictures, characters, signs or advertisements or use any other
paint or material of any kind upon any of the sidewalks, streets, curbs or pavements of the city or upon any
ornamental balustrade, fountain, stairway or other improvements belonging to the city; and it shall also be
unlawful to paint or to write in any manner thereon, or to carve thereon, or in any way to mutilate, deface or
destroy the same. (1978 Code, sec. 3-2)
Sec. 8.04.003 Banners, etc., over public streets
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, fasten, tie or maintain any banners, streamers or other
similar materials anywhere in the city in such a manner that the same shall be above, over and across any public
street within the city; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to charitable organizations or any
person engaged in promoting a nonprofit civic enterprise who has secured approval from the city and has
furnished a bond indemnifying the city for any personal injury or property damage which might result from the
building, constructing, fastening, tying, disconnecting or maintaining any such banners, streamers or other
similar material above, over or across any public street within the city. Upon presenting to the chief of police
evidence of approval by the city and evidence of securing the bond as required above, the chief of police shall
issue a permit to such charitable organization or any person engaged in promoting a nonprofit civic enterprise to
engage in the activities otherwise herein prohibited. (1978 Code, sec. 3-3)
Sec. 8.04.004 Signs upon or over sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect or permit to remain any standing sign, bulletin board or
advertisement of any kind upon any of the sidewalks of the city, or to place, erect or permit to remain any
swinging sign or sign attached to any building, which sign is less than nine (9) feet above the sidewalk. (1978
Code, sec. 3-4)
Sec. 8.04.005 Distributing, etc., handbills, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to circulate or distribute upon any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds of the city, or to scatter about, or to place in or upon any vehicle standing upon any public street,
alley, sidewalk or public grounds of the city, any dodgers, handbills or circulars. (1978 Code, sec. 3-5)
Sec. 8.04.006 Obscene, etc., advertising and displays
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or have posted or painted or to display or distribute any bill,
sign, bulletin, card or banner, containing pictures or illustrations or any other matter of an obscene character, as
defined by state law, at any point in the city where the same may be seen by persons traversing any alley, street
or public place. (1978 Code, sec. 3-6)
ARTICLE 8.05 ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.05.001 Definition of abandoned motor vehicle
For the purposes of this article, a motor vehicle is abandoned if the motor vehicle:
(1) Is inoperable, is more than five years old, and has been left unattended on public property for
more than 48 hours;
(2) Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/248
(3) Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the
property for more than 48 hours;
(4) Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway
for more than 48 hours.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-1), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.002 Authority to take abandoned motor vehicle into custody
(a) The police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor
found on public or private property.
(b) The police department may use agency personnel, equipment, and facilities or contract for other personnel,
equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, and store an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard
motor taken into custody by the agency under this article.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-2), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.003 Taking abandoned motor vehicle into custody; notice
(a) The police department shall send notice of abandonment to:
(1) The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken
into custody by the department; and
(2) Each lienholder recorded under chapter 501 [of the Transportation Code] for the motor vehicle
or under chapter 31, Parks and Wildlife Code, for the watercraft or outboard motor.
(b) The notice under subsection (a) must:
(1) Be sent by certified mail not later than the 10th day after the date the agency:
(A) Takes the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor into custody; or
(B) Receives the report under section 683.031 of the Texas Transportation Code;
(2) Specify the year, make, model, and identification number of the item;
(3) Give the location of the facility where the item is being held;
(4) Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the item not later than the 20th day after
the date of the notice on payment of:
(A) Towing, preservation, and storage charges; or
(B) Garagekeeper's charges and fees under section 683.032; and
(5) State that failure of the owner or lienholder to claim the item during the period specified by
subsection (4) is:
(A) A waiver by that person of all right, title, and interest in the item; and
(B) Consent to the sale of the item at a public auction.
(c) Notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle,
watercraft, or outboard motor was abandoned is sufficient notice under this section if:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/248
(1) The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined;
(2) The registration has no address for the owner; or
(3) The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is
impossible.
(d) Notice by publication:
(1) Must be published in the same period that is required by subsection (b) for notice by certified
mail and contain all of the information required by that subsection; and
(2) May contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-3), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.004 Storage fees
The city shall collect reasonable storage fees:
(1) For not more than 10 days, beginning on the day the item is taken into custody and ending on
the day the required notice is mailed; and
(2) Beginning on the day after the day the agency mails notice and ending on the day accrued
charges are paid and the vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is removed.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-4), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.005 Auction or use of abandoned items; waiver of rights
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is not claimed under section 683.012 of the
Texas Transportation Code:
(1) The owner or lienholder:
(A) Waives all rights and interests in the item; and
(B) Consents to the sale of the item by public auction; and
(2) The police department may sell the item at a public auction or use the item as provided by
section 683.016 of the Texas Transportation Code.
(b) Proper notice of the auction shall be given. A garagekeeper who has a garagekeeper's lien shall be notified
of the time and place of the auction.
(c) The purchaser of a motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor:
(1) Takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership;
(2) Shall receive a sales receipt from the law enforcement agency; and
(3) Is entitled to register the motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor and receive a certificate
of title.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-5), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.006 Auction proceeds
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/248
(a) The police department shall collect reimbursement from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor
vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor for:
(1) The cost of the auction;
(2) Towing, preservation, and storage fees resulting from the taking into custody; and
(3) The cost of notice or publication.
(b) After deducting the reimbursement allowed under subsection (a), the proceeds of the sale shall be held for
90 days for the owner or lienholder of the vehicle.
(c) After the period provided by subsection (b), proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lienholder shall be
deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of auction, towing, preservation, storage, and notice
and publication fees resulting from taking other vehicles, watercraft, or outboard motors into custody if the
proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to meet those fees.
(d) The police department shall transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account to the municipality's
general revenue account to be used by the law enforcement agency.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-6), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.007 Junked vehicle defined
A junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; or
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate.
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(3) Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(B) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-7), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.008 Declaration of public nuisance
Consistent with the state Transportation Code, a junked vehicle or a part thereof that is visible from a public
place or public right-of-way:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of the private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates a fire hazard;
(5) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/248
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of
municipalities; and
(7) Is a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-8), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.009 Offense
Maintaining a public nuisance as defined by this article is a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not to
exceed $200.00. (Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-9), adopted 11/14/00; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.05.010 Abatement of nuisance
(a) Motor vehicles, or a part thereof, constituting a public nuisance are subject to abatement pursuant to the
following provisions:
(1) No junked vehicle, or a part thereof, removed from public or private property may be
reconstructed or made operable after such removal.
(2) The provisions of this section shall be administered by the city administrator or his designee,
except that any person may perform the actual removal of the vehicle.
(3) Any vehicle, or a part thereof, considered to be junked shall be tagged by affixing to its
windshield or back glass a notice that such is considered to constitute a nuisance and that a public
hearing for the purpose of securing an order to remove the vehicle will be held at a date and time
certain in the municipal court and advising that any owner may appear to provide testimony. The city
administrator or his designee shall attempt to determine the name and address of any owner or
lienholder and shall, by United States mail, post a similar notice to those entities.
(b) The affixed notice and the posted notice shall be given 10 days in advance of the hearing, and by certified
mail with a five-day return to:
(1) The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
(2) Each lienholder of record of the nuisance;
(3) The owner or occupant of:
(A) The property on which the nuisance is located; or
(B) If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-ofway.
(c) The notice must state that:
(1) The nuisance must be abated and removed no later than the 10th day after the date on which the
notice was mailed; and
(2) Any request for a hearing must be made before that 10-day period expires.
(d) If the notice is returned undelivered or if the address is unknown, action to abate the nuisance shall be
continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the return of the notice, on which date the hearing shall be
held. If the address is unknown, the notice shall be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand
delivered.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/248
(e) Within five days of the entry of an order for removal, the city administrator or his designee shall give to
the state department of transportation notice identifying the vehicle or part thereof.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-10), adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.011 Removal
A junked vehicle, or a part thereof, determined to be so after opportunity for a hearing may be removed to a
scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a site designated by the city. (Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-11), adopted
11/14/00)
Sec. 8.05.012 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to a vehicle or portion thereof that is:
(1) Lawfully situated within a building;
(2) Situated on private property as inventory of a vehicle dealer on an approved surface that is free
of vegetation or in an automobile wrecking yard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle
stored by a collector on the collector's property, and stored on private property and without an
accumulation of trash in, around, or underneath, or in proximity to the motor vehicle if the weeds and
vegetation are trimmed to a height not exceeding eight (8) inches underneath the vehicle and within
ten (10) feet of the vehicle and screened from ordinary public view.
(Ordinance 587, sec. 2 (14-12), adopted 11/14/00)
ARTICLE 8.06 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.06.001–8.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 8.06.031 Definition
Public place. Any public road, street, sidewalk, parkway, alley, store building, workshop, restaurant, cafe, public
theater, picture show (movie theater), public lobby of a hotel, motel or roominghouse, or any place at which
people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for the purposes of business, amusement or other
lawful purposes, including but not restricted to any room in a private residence where the public generally is
invited for purposes of business or amusement.
Sec. 8.06.032 Hours established
(a) No subminor shall remain in or upon any public place or any establishment between the following hours:
(1) 8:00 a.m. and 4:02 p.m., when the public school system is in session, except that students
classified by their school as either juniors or seniors shall be authorized to be absent from the school
campus during the period of time from 12:42 o'clock p.m. to 1:15 o'clock p.m.
(2) Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official city time, except
that on Friday and Saturday nights, the hours shall be from 12:00 p.m. midnight to 6:00 a.m.
throughout the year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/248
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any subminor accompanied by a parent, guardian, or legal
adult custodian, or to a subminor upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by subminor's parents,
guardian, or legal adult custodian, or to any subminor who is engaged in gainful lawful employment during the
curfew hours, in religious activities, or observing rights guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution.
Sec. 8.06.033 Unlawful conduct of parents
(a) No parent, guardian, or legal custodian shall knowingly permit any subminor to remain in or upon any
public place or any establishment between the following hours:
(1) 8:00 a.m. and 4:05 p.m., when the public school system is in session;
(2) Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official city time, except
that on Friday and Saturday nights, the hours shall be from 12:00 p.m. midnight to 6:00 a.m.
throughout the year.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parent, guardian, or legal custodian, who accompanies
a subminor, or to a parent, guardian, or legal custodian who directs a subminor upon an errand or other
legitimate business or to any parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a subminor engaged in gainful lawful
employment during the curfew hours, participating in religious activities or observing rights guaranteed by the
First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Sec. 8.06.034 Unlawful conduct of owners or operators of establishments or public places
No owner or operator of an establishment or public place or their agents or employees shall knowingly permit
any subminor to remain upon the premises of said establishment or public place between the following hours:
(1) 8:30 am. and 3:30 p.m., when the public school system is in session;
(2) Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such subminor shall be accompanied by
a parent, guardian, or legal custodian, or to a subminor upon an errand or other legitimate business
directed by such subminor's parent, guardian, or legal custodian, or to a subminor who is engaged in
gainful lawful employment during the curfew hours, participating in religious activities or observing
rights by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Sec. 8.06.035 Penalties
(a) Any parent, guardian, or legal custodian who shall violate any provision of section 8.06.033 of this article
after having received notice of a prior violation shall be fined not exceeding $200.00.
(b) Any owner or operator of an establishment or public place and any agent or employees or any operator
who shall violate the provisions of section 8.06.034 of this article shall be fined upon conviction not exceeding
$200.00.
(c) Any subminor who shall violate any provisions of section 8.06.032 of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined in a sum not exceeding $200.00.
(d) Each violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 780 adopted 2/8/16)
ARTICLE 8.07 SEX OFFENDERS' RESIDENCY*
Sec. 8.07.001 Findings and intent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/248
(a) Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders that use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on
children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely
likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses and most sexual offenders commit many offences,
have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This
makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
(b) It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from
establishing temporary or permanent residences.
(Ordinance 677, sec. 1, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 8.07.002 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Permanent residence. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Temporary residence. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person
routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of 4 or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month
and which is not the person's permanent residence.
(Ordinance 677, sec. 2, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 8.07.003 Prohibition; penalties; exceptions
(a) It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of article 43.25 Penal Code, article
43.26 Penal Code, article 21.08 Penal Code, article 21.11 Penal Code, article 22.011 Penal Codes, article 22.021
Penal Code and article 25.02 Penal Code, regardless of whether the adjudication was deferred, in which the
victim of the offence was less than sixteen (16) years of age, to establish a permanent residence or temporary
residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including but not limited to, a
school, day-care facility, playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade
facility, as those terms are defined in article 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the state.
(b) For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the distance shall be measured by
following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein.
(c) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred and no/100's dollars ($500.00).
(d) Exceptions. A person residing within 1,000 feet of those places where children commonly gather, as
specified herein, does not commit a violation of this article if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex
offender registration laws of the state, prior to the date of the adoption of this article.
(2) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person is a minor.
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the
person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/248
temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state.
(Ordinance 677, sec. 3, adopted 6/13/06)
Sec. 8.07.004 Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sexual offenders; penalties
(a) It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other
conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any
person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of
this article, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, is located
within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including but not limited to, a school, daycare
facility, playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those
terms are defined in article 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the state.
(b) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred and no/100's dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 677, sec. 4, adopted 6/13/06)
ARTICLE 8.08 SALE OR POSSESSION OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS AND BATH SALTS
Sec. 8.08.001 Definitions
(a) For the purposes of the article; certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense
include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; reference to the male
gender includes the female, and references to any person or animal without specifying gender include both male
and female; the word “shall” is mandatory and directory wherever it is used in the article.
(b) The following terms and words are defined:
Restricted smoking material. Any substance, however marketed which can reasonably be converted for smoking
purposes whether it is presented as incense tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the
following chemical or comparable chemical:
(1) Any aromatic plant material in granular, loose leaf or powder form, or in liquid form or as a
food additive, and any herbal incense type stimulant commonly characterized or represented to be
legal spice/synthetic cannabinoids/synthetic “legal” marijuana, sold under numerous brand names
such as “K-2,” “spice,” etc.;
(2) Any crystalline or powder product in crystalline, loose-powder, block tablet, or capsule form,
or any stimulant-type product commonly characterized or represented to be bath salts/synthetic
cathinones/synthetic stimulants, sold under numerous brand names such as “Bliss,” “Euphoria,”
“Super Coke,” etc.;
(3) Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as
salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(4) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497)
and homologues;
(5) (6As, 1-As)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6-6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a
tetrahydrobenzo [c] chromen-1-o1) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(6) 1-pentyl-3 (1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/248
(7) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073);
(8) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081); or
(9) Products containing some of the above substances which are currently being marketed under
the following commercial names:
“K-2,” “K-2 SUMMIT,” “K-2 SEX,” “GENIE,” “DASCENTS,” “ZOHAI,” “SAGE,” “SPICE,”
“KO KNOCK-OUT 2,” “SPICE GOLD,” “SPICE DIAMOND,” “YUCATAN FIRE,” “SOLAR
FLARE,” “PEP SPICE,” “FIRE N' ICE,” AND “SALVIA DIVINORUM.”
(10) It shall be unlawful to market, display for sale, or package for sale any substance listed or
described in such a manner, under the totality of the circumstances, as to imply, or create the
impression, that the ingestion or use of the substances will result in any form of euphoria, or will
mimic the effect on the human body typically associated with naturally occurring cannabinoids or
any other substances listed or described in any penalty group contained in the Texas Controlled
Substances Act as it now exists or may be amended.
(11) Exceptions:
(A) The prohibitions set forth in subsection (10) above shall not apply to any person or
facility regulated under the Texas Pharmacy Act.
(B) The prohibitions set forth shall not apply to any substance if the substance's packaging
includes:
(i) The name and physical address of the manufacturer of the product and each
ingredient or component thereof;
(ii) The name and physical address of each distributor; and
(iii) A complete list of all ingredients and components of the product, including their
chemical composition, sufficient to provide full disclosure.
The fact that the product's labeling does not include the foregoing may be considered as
an element of the “totality of the circumstances” referred to above.
(C) The prohibitions set forth in (10) above shall not apply to any substance labeled in
accordance with the regulations of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or other federal or
state law.
Restricted smoking material paraphernalia. Any paraphernalia, equipment, or utensil that is used or intended to
be used in ingesting or inhaling and illegal smoking materials and may include:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glad [glass], stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bow.
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion make;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/248
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Sec. 8.08.002 Restricted smoking material: purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the sale or delivery of restricted smoking materials as defined herein to
any individual within the city limits and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials by any
individual within the city limits. Any form or delivery, to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this
article.
Sec. 8.08.003 Sale, delivery, offer, or gift
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to, or to give any restricted smoking material to
any person.
Sec. 8.08.004 Use or possession of restricted smoking material
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the
corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 8.08.005 Use or possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any restricted smoking paraphernalia with the
intent to use it to ingest, inhale, or otherwise consume restricted smoking material. If appropriate forensic testing
is done on the paraphernalia and traces of restricted smoking material are present on or in the device, such shall
constitute a violation of this article.
Sec. 8.08.006 Defenses to prosecution
(a) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the use of the restricted smoking
material is in the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to
prescribe controlled substances within the state.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this section if an individual charged with a violation
can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious
undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have membership of not less than five (5)
years supported by documentation from clergy or a spiritual leader recognized by the state.
Sec. 8.08.007 Penalty
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day of such violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ordinance 759 adopted 6/10/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/248
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Drug and alcohol policy for certain employees
For all employees holding a state commercial driver's license, the city adopts an anti drug and alcohol program
which complies with the state department of transportation guidelines as now existing and as may hereafter be
amended including but not limited to:
(1) Random selection screening.
(2) Education.
(Ordinance 547 adopted 4/9/96)
ARTICLE 9.02 POLICE DEPARTMENT; LAW ENFORCEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.02.001 Arrest on city property outside of city
(a) The term “officer,” as used in this section, includes the chief of police and any police or peace officer who
may be employed by the city.
(b) All officers of the city shall have authority to arrest any person on any property owned and used by the city
outside of the city, for the violation of any ordinance of the city or any law of the United States or the state.
(1978 Code, secs. 8-1, 8-3)
Secs. 9.02.002–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Mutual Law Enforcement Assistance†
Sec. 9.02.031 Assignment of city police authorized
Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 362, the city administrator and/or chief
of police are authorized to assign the regularly employed law enforcement personnel of the department to assist
any other county or municipality in this state, when a state of civil emergency in such county or municipality has
been declared by proper authority, upon request by such proper authority, and when, in the opinion of such
proper authority, a need exists in such other county or municipality for the services of additional law
enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants,
and the visitors thereto, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or
threat thereof by three (3) or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural
disaster or manmade calamity. (1978 Code, sec. 2-3; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.02.032 Other peace officers as city police when assigned
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/248
Whenever any law enforcement officer of any other county or municipality is assigned to this city, under
authority of an order adopted by the governing body of such other county or municipality, to assist under
circumstances as described above which may exist in this city, such officer shall be a peace officer of this city
and shall be under the command of the chief of police of this city while so assigned, and he shall have all the
powers of a regular law enforcement officer of this city as fully as though he were within the county or
municipality where regularly employed, and his qualifications, respectively, for office where regularly employed
shall constitute his qualification for office in this city, and no other oath, bond, or compensation shall be made.
(1978 Code, sec. 2-4)
Sec. 9.02.033 Prerequisites of office continue for city police when assigned
When any law enforcement officer of this city is ordered by proper authority to perform peace officer duties
outside the territorial limits of this city, he shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension, and all other
compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death benefits, the same as though the
service had been rendered within the limits of this city; and he shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of
travel, food or lodging, as well as for damage to equipment and clothing and medical expenses, which he may
incur while on duty outside such limits, or while traveling to or from such assignment. (1978 Code, sec. 2-5)
Sec. 9.02.034 Reimbursement to other governmental body
When any law enforcement officer is assigned to this city from another county or city under the circumstances
described above, and upon request of the proper authority of this city, this city will, upon proper request,
reimburse the county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement officer for his actual expenses of
travel, food, lodging, and for such cost or damage to equipment and clothing resulting from the services of such
law enforcement officer in this city and for which the county or city where he is regularly employed has paid.
(1978 Code, sec. 2-6)
Secs. 9.02.035–9.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Police Reserve*
Sec. 9.02.071 Established; composition; control and supervision
An auxiliary police force to be known as police reserve, city police department, is hereby established. It shall be
composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and whose application for membership
has been accepted and who have complied with the rules, regulations and orders provided for the conduct and
control of the members thereof. It shall be composed of a number to be established from time to time by
resolution of the city commission. The police reserve shall be separate and distinct from the regular force of the
police department, but shall be under the direct control and supervision of the chief of police. (1978 Code, sec.
18-50)
Sec. 9.02.072 Commanding officer
The members of the police reserve shall be under the authority, control and command of the chief of police,
subject to all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and of this division. Members shall be appointed
from a list of eligibles compiled as hereinafter provided. (1978 Code, sec. 18-51)
Sec. 9.02.073 Application and eligibility for membership
A list of eligibles shall be established, in compliance with rules and regulations set forth, as follows:
(1) All applicants for positions with the police reserve must apply in writing on the form prescribed
by the chief of police.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/248
(2) All applicants for positions with the police reserve must meet the following basic
qualifications:
(A) At least nineteen (19) years of age;
(B) A United States citizen and an actual resident of the city;
(C) A graduate of a standard high school;
(D) Free of all physical defects, physically strong and well proportioned;
(E) Of good moral character; and
(F) Never have been convicted of a felony.
(3) Selections will be made through examinations, and appointments will be made by the chief of
police with the consent and approval of the city commission. All examinations shall be impartial,
practical in their character, and shall relate to those matters which fairly test the relative capacity of
the persons examined to discharge the duties of the position to which they expect to be appointed.
(4) All applicants successfully completing the examination shall, before appointment, be subjected
to:
(A) Rigid background investigation;
(B) Fingerprint check for criminal record;
(C) A driver's license record check;
(D) Credit rating check; and
(E) Rigid physical examination.
Upon failure to receive a favorable report on any of the five (5) above-mentioned
investigations, the applicant shall be rejected.
(5) All applicants, before appointment to the police reserve, shall subscribe to an oath that they will
obey and observe the Constitution of the United States, the constitution of the state and the laws of
this nation, this state, and this city and that they will carry out the duties of a member of the police
reserve to the best of their ability.
(1978 Code, sec. 18-52)
Sec. 9.02.074 Duties
(a) The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the
chief of police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of the law, and
in the maintenance of peace and order during periods of emergency designated by the chief of police.
(b) The chief may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix the
specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders
from time to time, and he may command members of the police reserve force to obey the instructions of regular
police officers in carrying out their duties.
(c) The chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the police reserve
force, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/248
(1978 Code, sec. 18-53)
Sec. 9.02.075 Identification card and insignia
An identification card and other insignia or evidence of identity as the chief may prescribe shall be issued to
each member, who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and he must surrender
them upon the termination of his membership. (1978 Code, sec. 18-54)
Sec. 9.02.076 Uniforms and badges
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police reserve force and
direct the manner in which the same shall be worn. (1978 Code, sec. 18-55)
Sec. 9.02.077 False personation
It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by the fine as provided in section 1.01.009 for any person not a member in
good standing of the police reserve force to wear a police reserve force uniform, carry or display a police reserve
force identification card or badge, or to otherwise deceitfully represent himself to be connected with the police
reserve force. (1978 Code, sec. 18-56)
Sec. 9.02.078 Remuneration for services
Members of the police reserve force shall receive regular patrol officers' pay when ordered to active duty by the
chief of police, or during periods of emergency. There will be no remuneration for their tour of training, nor for
service voluntarily performed except as authorized by the chief of police. (1978 Code, sec. 18-57)
Sec. 9.02.079 Power and authority
(a) Carrying firearm. No member of the police reserve force shall bear any firearm except while on duty or by
express order of the chief of police.
(b) Breaking and entering. No member of the police reserve force shall break into or otherwise forcefully
enter upon any private property or enter the dwelling or habitation of another person without the consent of the
owner or occupant except when immediately accompanied by a regular member of the police department who
then and there requests his aid in the enforcement of the law.
(c) Power of arrest. A member of the police reserve force shall have the following powers of arrest and none
others:
(1) When the offense is committed in his presence or within his view, if the offense is one classed
as a felony, or as an offense against the public peace.
(2) Upon the presentation of a credible person that a felony has been committed and the offender is
about to escape, and there is not sufficient time to procure a warrant for the arrest of said offender.
(3) When authorized by a warrant of arrest, and said warrant is in the actual possession of the
officer making the arrest.
(4) To lend physical aid to any regular member of the police department in making any lawful
arrest, when authorized by the chief of police, or requested by any regular member of the police
department.
(1978 Code, sec. 18-58)
Sec. 9.02.080 Diminishing or expanding force
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/248
The chief of police may, by order, diminish or expand the membership of the police reserve force as exigency
may require, within the limit hereinbefore established. (1978 Code, sec. 18-59)
Sec. 9.02.081 Removal from membership by chief; resignation
(a) Membership of any person may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for any cause deemed
sufficient by the chief of police, without right of appeal.
(b) Any member may resign from the police reserve force at any time, but it shall be the duty of said member
to notify the chief of his resignation.
(1978 Code, sec. 18-60)
Sec. 9.02.082 Summary dismissal; publication
In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his duties as
a member of the police reserve force and any breach of the rules and regulations established by the chief of
police shall subject any member to summary expulsion and the fact thereof may be published at the order of the
chief. (1978 Code, sec. 18-61)
ARTICLE 9.03 INTERGOVERNMENTAL EMPLOYEE BENEFITS POOL
Sec. 9.03.001 Execution of interlocal agreement; adoption of plan
(a) The city hereby elects to join the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool by executing the pool's
interlocal agreement.
(b) The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its officers and employees through the
TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool: P85-30-10-C10/25. The benefit plan herein adopted is
attached to Ordinance 589 as exhibit A and incorporated herein for all purposes.
(c) The city administrator is hereby authorized to execute the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits
Pool Interlocal Agreement on behalf of the city.
(Ordinance 589, secs. 2–4, adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 9.03.002 Execution of continuation of coverage agreement; administration
(a) The city hereby elects to have the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool administer the city's
continuation of coverage.
(b) The city hereby adopts the continuation of coverage agreement provided by the TML Intergovernmental
Employee Benefits Pool.
(c) The city administrator is hereby authorized to execute the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits
Pool continuation of coverage agreement on behalf of the city.
(Ordinance 588, secs. 2–4, adopted 11/14/00)
Sec. 9.03.003 Health benefits coverage for retirees
(a) The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through TML Intergovernmental
Employee Benefits Pool under the pool's interlocal agreement.
(b) The city hereby adopts the following definition of “retiree” for purposes of this section: The employee
must be vested in the retirement plan, and must either have lived past the 60th anniversary of his date of birth or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/248
have completed 25 full years of service.
(c) The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the TML
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool:
(1) The same medical plan(s) offered to active employees;
(2) The retiree continuum of care medical plan adopted for retirees and their dependents;
(3) Dental plan II;
(4) Vision plan B;
(5) Retiree life;
(6) Retiree optional life;
(7) Retiree continuum of care plan for early retirees, >65 retirees not entitled to Medicare and
Medicare supplement program for >65 retirees;
(8) Retiree dependent life.
(d) The interlocal agreement in effect between the city and the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits
Pool provides that the board of trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The rules and regulations of the TML
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool allow the participating member entity to provide retiree medical
coverage at the same contribution as charged to active employees, to select a contribution level which is 100%
or 185% of the active employee contribution or to offer over age 65 retirees a Medicare supplement. The city
elects to have the retiree medical contribution for under age 65 retirees be the same as the active employee rate,
for the benefit pool offers this year. Coverage's and contributions will be as established annually by the TML
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool board of trustees. The city will review this contribution rate
annually.
(e) This section will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date and to employees, who retired
under a previous ordinance. For individuals retiring after the effective date of this section to qualify, they must
enroll for this coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement.
(Ordinance 694 adopted 9/11/07)
ARTICLE 9.04 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.04.001 Initial participation–Acceptance of system
On behalf of the city, the city commission hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the
employees of all departments, except the fire department, participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System
as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code, title 8, subtitle G, chapter 851 et seq., and all of the benefits and
obligations of such system are hereby accepted. (1978 Code, sec. 18-20; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.04.002 Same–Notice of participating departments
The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the
city has elected to participate and have the employees of the following departments participate in such system:
water department, police department, street and sanitation department and accounting department. (1978 Code,
sec. 18-21)
Sec. 9.04.003 Same–Including new employees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/248
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of
participation of such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System beginning upon the date such person becomes an “employee” as defined in V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, section 851.0001, of such system. (1978 Code, sec. 18-22)
Sec. 9.04.004 Same–Refusal to add employees or departments
The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system but shall never
discontinue as to any participants. (1978 Code, sec. 18-23)
Sec. 9.04.005 Same–Remittances and reports
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System,
at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's proper contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be
deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of
V.T.C.A., Government Code, title 8, subtitle G, chapter 851 et seq., as amended, and the city secretary is hereby
authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the
municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service
compensation received by each, and to make and execute all other reports and certificates, which may be
required of the city under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code, chapter 855, or the rules and
regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. (1978 Code, sec. 18-24)
Sec. 9.04.006 Current service maximum earnings
The total annual earnings which may be paid by the city to any of its employees who are members of the Texas
Municipal Retirement System shall be considered in calculating the amount to be withheld and the deposits and
contributions to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by reason of current service rendered by
such employee to this city; and the maximum amount which shall be deducted each month for current service
deposits to said system (where such compensation is paid on a monthly basis) shall include payments of onetwelfth
(1/12) of the aforesaid sum which is prescribed above as the maximum annual earnings to be taken into
account in calculating deposits and contributions on account of current service. (1978 Code, sec. 18-25)
Sec. 9.04.007 Provisions saved from repeal
The specific provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted and participated in by the city
and its employees, are hereby saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 10.01.001 Replats
(a) Any person who wishes to revise a subdivision plat which has been previously filed for record must make
an application of the proposed revised plat to the city commission. The replat of the subdivision shall meet all
the requirements for a subdivision that may be pertinent. However, if the subdivision as replatted does not
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/248
require any appreciable alteration or improvement of utility installations, streets, alleys, building setback lines,
etc., no engineering plans or preliminary plat will be required
(b) In the event the proposed replat involves property which has been previously developed or zoned as
single-family or duplex-residential use, special requirements are triggered as follows:
(1) After an application is filed for a replat affecting single-family and duplex property, the city
administrator shall give notice of the application to be published in the official newspaper of the city
at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the city commission meeting at which it is to be
considered. Such notice must include a statement of the time and place at which the city commission
will meet to consider the replat and to hear protests to the revision at a public hearing. Additionally,
written notice must be sent to all owners of property located within two hundred (200) feet of the
property upon which the replat is requested. Such notice may be served by depositing the notice,
properly addressed and postage paid, at the local post office.
(2) If twenty (20) percent or more of the property owners to whom notice has been required to be
given file a written protest of the replatting before or at the public hearing, the affirmative vote of at
least three-fourths (3/4) of the city commission members is required to approve the replat.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Replatting without vacating preceding plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.014;
additional requirements for certain replats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.015.
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
The city's subdivision ordinance, Ordinance 232 adopted February 10, 1964, is included at the end of this
chapter as exhibit A. Except for nonsubstantive stylistic modifications, the ordinance is printed as it appeared in
appendix B of the 1978 Code of Ordinances. Section numbers and subsection designations, capitalization,
punctuation, and grammar have been retained as enacted. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected
without notation. Material enclosed in brackets has been editorially supplied for clarification. The history note
appearing at the end of each section denotes the source of the section. Subsequent amendments have been
incorporated with the source of the amendment appearing at the end of the amended provisions.
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISIONS
Sec. 1. Policy, purpose, scope.
(a) The City of Slaton, Texas, hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city improvements
in whatsoever nature including the maintenance of streets, furnishing of sewerage facilities and water service
from all additions, hereafter established, the platting of which has not been approved by the city commission as
provided herein. These regulations are adopted by the city commission of the City of Slaton, Texas, as a proper
way for persons or corporations so intending, to subdivide land within the city limits or within five (5) miles
thereof; and all property not subdivided in lots, blocks or streets within the city shall hereafter be laid out under
the directions of the city commission of the City of Slaton, Texas, herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any
owner or agent of any owner to lay out, subdivide or plat any land into lots, blocks, and/or streets within the city,
or to sell property therein and thereby, which has not been laid off, subdivided and platted according to these
rules. No officer or employee of the city shall do, or cause to be done any work upon any street or in any
addition or subdivision of the city, unless all requirements of this ordinance have been complied with by the
owner of said addition or subdivision.
(b) The procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions of real estate within
the corporate limits of the City of Slaton, Texas, and for a distance of five (5) miles surrounding such corporate
limits, as prescribed in this ordinance, are intended to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/248
(1) Guide and assist and expedite the developers in correct procedures to be followed and to
inform them of the general standards which shall be required. Protect the public interests by
controlling the location, design, class and type of streets, utilities and essential services required.
(2) Provide for the public welfare, the essential areas required for educational, recreational,
industrial and commercial purposes.
(c) The city commission shall before approving any plats submitted to it, refer such plats to the city water
superintendent, the city street superintendent, the city attorney and the city engineer for their suggestions and
comment by written report.
(d) The city planning commission before approving any plats submitted to it shall refer such plats to the
departments named above for their suggestions and comment by written report.
(e) Plans and specifications for the above improvements shall meet the approval of the city engineer. If it is
determined that additional drainage facilities in the form of storm sewers within the subdivision are necessary,
the developer shall prepare, with the approval of the city engineer, plans and specifications to be used by him in
correcting the drainage. All such work necessary to be done under such plans and specifications shall be done at
the sole expense of the developer. Storm sewers required to provide drainage from the point where storm water
emanates from the subdivision to an adequate drainage point along existing streets, may, at its discretion, be
provided by the City of Slaton. In the event that the storm drain construction is so great as to be prohibitive for
either the subdivider or the city, all areas affected by such drainage shall be omitted from the development; or,
the developer may, if the city commission so agrees, provide same upon a basis of refund over a period of time
agreeable to the city commission. The details of such refund plan to be worked out by the subdivider and the city
engineer and submitted to the city commission for approval or rejection.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 1, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 2. Adoption of regulations; short title; definitions.
The following regulations be and the same are hereby adopted and approved and, for the purpose of these
regulations, which shall be known as and may be cited as “City of Slaton Subdivision Regulations”:
Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land under one ownership having access to a street, either occupied or
to be occupied by a building or building group together with accessory buildings, which parcel of land is
designated as a separate and distinct tract and is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved
subdivision plat filed of record.
Resubdivision means the division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size therein, or with
the relocation of any street lines.
Street; alleys: The term “street” means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, thoroughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place or however otherwise designated.
Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
Subdivision: The term “subdivision” means the division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or transfer of ownership or building development, provided
that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five (5) acres or more and not involving a
new street or alley shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to
the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 2, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 3. Preliminary plats and field notes–Filing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/248
(a) Six (6) copies of the preliminary plat and field notes shall be submitted to the city secretary of the City of
Slaton, Texas, for presentation to the city planning commission ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which
approval is asked. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch or larger and shall
show the following:
(1) Name of subdivision.
(2) Names of the owner and engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and designs.
(3) Boundary lines, existing boundary lines, and width and location of platted streets and alleys
within and adjacent to the property.
(4) Width and depth of proposed lots.
(5) Contours sufficient to accurately show the topography. Contours and all grades in the addition
must refer to the City of Slaton datum. (Contours at one (1) foot intervals preferred)
(6) Physical features of the property, including locations of watercourses, culverts, bridges,
railroads and present structures.
(7) A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision.
(8) Adequate off-street parking must be provided for lots set aside or planned for business use and
shall comply with any zoning ordinances then in effect in the City of Slaton.
(9) If a preliminary plat does not itself show it, then a map on a smaller scale must be presented to
show the nearest subdivision, how streets and alleys or highways in the subdivision submitted may
connect with those in the nearest subdivision.
(b) The six (6) copies of the preliminary plat shall be distributed by the city secretary, one to the mayor, one to
the city planning commission, one to the city attorney, one to the city engineer, one to the water superintendent,
and one to the street superintendent. Each preliminary plat shall be accompanied by certificates of the city water
department, the Southwestern Public Service Company and the Pioneer Natural Gas Company and/or their
successors and assigns regarding the availability of their respective utility to the subdivision; and further as to
the layout of their respective utility system which concerns such subdivision, in short, whether or not they can
give the resident of such subdivision a complete utility service; and whether their respective utility system layout
is congenial to such proposed subdivision layout. The preliminary plat should be marked: “Preliminary plat for
inspection purposes only and in no way official or approved for record purposes.” The preliminary plat should
be accompanied by a certificate by a licensed public surveyor or a registered public surveyor or a registered
professional engineer that said subdivision is not subject to flood conditions or that such portion that is subject to
flood conditions has been provided with sufficient drainage.
(c) Before the filing of the preliminary plat payment of the fee as herein and hereafter set forth by the
subdivider, shall be made to the city secretary, and the subdivider shall certify to the city secretary that he has
received a copy of this ordinance and that he will comply with same.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 3, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 4. Same–Contents.
The preliminary plat shall include the following items:
(1) Boundary, street, alley and building lines.
(2) Width and names of streets and locations with reference to all streets adjacent to and leading to
the subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/248
(3) Width and depth of all lots.
(4) Watercourses and drainageways.
(5) Contour lines on not more than one (1) foot intervals with elevations based on City of Slaton
datum.
(6) Layout, in dotted lines, of all lots adjacent to the subdivision showing lot size, lot and block
numbers, and the name of the existing subdivision or the name of the property owner if undeveloped
land, all shown in dotted lines and figures.
(7) Scale and north point.
(8) Name and address of subdivider.
(9) Name and address of engineer and surveyor.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 4, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 5. General requirements
(a) Streets:
(1) No street dedication shall be less than sixty (60) feet wide.
(2) All new streets shall be continuations of existing streets, at the same or greater width and
having the same names (if possible), and street jogs with center offsets of less than one hundred (100)
feet shall be prohibited.
(3) Dead-end streets may be platted where the land adjoining property is not subdivided, in which
case the streets shall be carried to the boundaries thereof. (In the few instances where dead-end
streets are otherwise necessary, a cul-de-sac with a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet shall be
provided.)
(4) No intersecting street shall be platted with the angle included between adjoining street lines
less than thirty (30) degrees nor more than one hundred fifty (150) degrees.
(5) Streets shall be platted to allow two (2) tiers of lots with an alley between. Intersecting cross
streets may not be more than seven hundred (700) feet apart.
(6) Streets shall be platted with appropriate regard to topographical features lending themselves to
attractive treatment.
(7) Where plats are presented for approval which adjoin unplatted property, the owner of the
proposed subdivision shall provide his pro rata part of boundary streets.
(b) Alleys, reserve strips: Alleys shall be laid in the rear of lots fronting on adjoining streets. The minimum
width of an alley shall not be less than twenty (20) feet and shall be graded and leveled.
(c) Lots and blocks:
(1) In general, lots shall conform in width, depth and area to the pattern already established in the
adjacent areas, having due regard to the character of the neighborhood, its particular suitability for
development for residential purposes and also taking into consideration the natural topography of the
ground, drainage, sanitary sewage facilities and the proposed layout of the streets.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/248
(2) In locations where sanitary sewers are not already available, and where there is no immediate
prospect for installation of sanitary sewers, septic tanks of approved type may be installed in
conformity with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the City of Slaton pertaining to public
health; provided, however, that in no case shall septic tanks be installed on lots having a frontage of
less than sixty (60) feet, and a depth of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. In this connection, if
the soil texture in the area is such as will not lend itself to the utilization of a septic tank, then the
proposed size of the lots must be increased to provide for a safe absorption of the effluent, as
determined by the health department of the City of Slaton.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 5, adopted 2/10/64)
(3) Lots should have a minimum of fifty (50) foot width and one hundred (100) foot depth and, in
no case, shall the lot contain less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, and then only when
approved by the City Commission. (Ordinance 593, sec. 2, adopted 6/12/01)
(4) The area of the lot shall be computed by taking the average width of the lot times the average
depth of the lot measured from the street line to the rear lot line.
(5) All sidelines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines,
unless a variation from this rule, would, in the opinion of the city planning commission give a better
lot plan.
(6) For private housing projects and shopping villages, it will not be necessary to subdivide tracts
of land. Site plans, however, must be filed showing the arrangement of the project in detail, together
with essential requirements such as parking facilities, locations of buildings and the other uses to be
permitted, and shall be subject to approval as herein set forth for plats.
(7) The city planning commission shall without delay approve or disapprove or approve
conditionally the preliminary plat and send it to the city commission for final action; in as much, as
the preliminary plat must be approved or disapproved within sixty (60) days of its being filed, by the
city commission.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 5, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 6. Final plat.
(a) General. Original and six (6) copies of the final plat or record plat with reproducible sepia shall be
submitted to the city secretary after the preliminary plat has been approved and all changes and all alterations
made. No final plat will be considered unless preliminary plat has first been submitted. Such plat shall be filed in
the office of the city secretary at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting in which approval is requested. Final
plat should be accompanied by the following data:
(1) Plats shall be drawn upon sheets 8-1/2" x 11" (or 11" x 17"; 17" x 22" and 22" x 36") inches
and to the scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger.
(2) A title including name of subdivision owner or owners, and licensed land surveyor or registered
civil engineer responsible for the plat, and the scale and location of the subdivision with reference to
original land grants or surveys, the data and north point.
(3) The certificate of the registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor who surveyed, mapped
and monumented the land should be placed on the face of the map, showing that he has done so as
required by this ordinance.
(4) A deed of dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and playgrounds to public use forever, signed
and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner of such land. The wife of all married men
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/248
executing such dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall join with her husband therein unless
satisfactory proof be provided showing that the property to be subdivided does not constitute any
portion of anybody's homestead, in which case the instrument of dedication shall state the fact that
the property subdivided and platted does not constitute a part of such parties' homestead and
positively designates and identifies such parties' homestead. In the case there are any lienholders,
they shall execute a subordination agreement subordinating their liens to all public streets, alleys,
parks, school sites and any other public areas shown on the plat of such subdivision as being set aside
for public uses and purposes; or they may join in such dedication deed or certificate of dedication. It
shall in addition to the above requirements, contain the following:
(i) An accurate description of the tract of land subdivided.
(ii) A statement and express warranty that the parties joining in such dedication deed or
certificate of dedication are the sole owners of such tract of land.
(iii) An express dedication to the public for public use forever the streets, alleys, rights-ofway,
parks, school sites and other public places shown on the attached plat.
(iv) The dedication deed that the subdivider makes shall include a provision that conveys to
the City of Slaton, Texas, a municipal corporation, fee simple title to park areas, alleys and
streets which are dedicated to the public use.
(5) A positive reference and identification of the plat of such subdivision by the name of such
subdivision, date of plat and signature of engineer.
(6) Certificate of improvement: The subdivider's Texas licensed professional engineer shall furnish
the planning commission with a written certification stating that all improvements required by this
ordinance which have been completed prior to final approval have been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with plans and specifications for such improvements approved by the city engineer and/or
shall further certify that sufficient cash has been deposited or a surety bond furnished with the city to
secure the completion of all those improvements so required which are incomplete. When a surety
bond has been furnished the city in lieu of any or all of the required improvements, it shall be
delivered to the city attorney for approval. The surety bond shall have attached thereto a copy of the
contract for such improvements and such other information and data necessary to determine the
validity and enforceability of such bond. When the bond has been examined and approved, the city
attorney shall furnish the planning commission with a written certification that the surety bond is in
his opinion as valid and enforceable as regards all improvements required by this chapter [ordinance]
still incomplete and for which cash deposit has not been made.
(7) Protective covenants, if any, in form for recording.
(8) Certificates showing that all taxes have been paid on the tract to be subdivided, and that no
delinquent taxes exist against the property.
(9) All final plats must be approved by the city commission. The city commission will not consider
a plat for file or approval until considered by the city engineer, city planning commission, city
attorney, city water superintendent and the city street superintendent and the city attorney has
furnished such commission with an opinion that this ordinance has been complied with by the
subdivider. The subdivider must provide in addition to the other requirements of this ordinance an
opinion of an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Texas addressed to the city, and
furnished at the expense of the subdivider, that the title of the subdivider (owner or owners)
petitioning for plat approval to be the fee simple owner of such property or if anyone else has any
interest therein or lien thereon that he has subrogated such interest or lien to the dedication
instruments hereinabove mentioned.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/248
(b) Improvements required prior to acceptance of the final plat.
(1) Monuments:
(i) Monuments consisting of one (1) inch iron pipe, twenty-six (26) inches in length, shall be
placed at all corners of the block lines, the point of intersection of the alleys and block lines,
and at the point of intersection of curves and tangents of the subdivision. This twenty-six (26)
inch pipe shall be in two (2) lengths, one eighteen (18) inches in length, with an eight (8) inch
length of pipe above, which shorter length shall be placed flush with the average ground
elevation. When extremely loose soil conditions are encountered, upon authorization of the city
engineer, an eight (8) inch wooden two (2) inch by two (2) inch stake as a substitute shall be
driven in the top of the eighteen (18) inch length on one (1) inch pipe in lieu of the eight (8)
inch length of one (1) inch pipe. All markers shall be indicated on the final plat.
(ii) Lot markers shall be two (2) inch by two (2) inch wooden stakes placed at each corner of
all lots flush with the average ground elevation or they may be countersunk, if necessary, in
order to avoid being disturbed.
(iii) Two (2) of the monuments provided in (i) above for block corner or intersection corners
shall be permanent survey reference points. These points shall be marked with monuments, the
top of which shall be twelve (12) inches below the existing ground and shall be made of two (2)
inch diameter iron pipe eighteen (18) inches in length, the top twelve (12) inches of which shall
be set in concrete. Inside of the two (2) inch pipe and extending to the surface of the ground a
one (1) inch pipe shall be installed. These reference points should be located so as to establish
one side of the subdivision.
(2) Streets:
(i) Grading, drainage and structures necessary to the proper use and draining of streets,
highways and ways, and to the public safety, all in accordance with plans and specifications of
the city.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 6, adopted 2/10/64)
(ii) All streets within or abutting to the proposed subdivision shall be paved and curbs and
gutters installed, according to specifications approved by the director of public works prior to
such paving. All paving shall be at least thirty-six (36) feet wide; however, the city commission
may require wider paving or may permit narrower paving where it is deemed appropriate. All
paving shall be constructed under the supervision of the director of public works, who shall
require compliance with all specifications. In the case of streets along the boundary of a
proposed subdivision, the developer shall deposit one-half the estimated cost of paving such
streets with the city secretary. All paving cost shall be borne by the subdivider except that the
city may participate in such cost pursuant to existing paving policies. (Ordinance 400, sec. 1,
adopted 4/28/78)
(iii) Underground utility lines required in the subdivision shall be placed under or across all
streets prior to paving.
(3) Water and sewer:
(i) Water and sewer lines shall be installed to serve all lots within the proposed subdivision.
(ii) Provided, however, the requirements of paragraph (i) of this subsection shall not be
required when the planning commission finds one of the following situations to exist: Where
water or sewer is not available and cannot be made available in the immediate future.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/248
(4) Street lighting: The minimum requirement for street lighting facilities shall be one (1)
candlepower light, or equal, at street intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Light standards
shall be approved by the city electrical inspector.
(5) Street name signs: Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections within or abutting
the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a type approved by the city engineer and shall be placed in
accordance with standards of erection of said director.
(6) Bond in lieu: In lieu of the completion or installation of any or all of the above improvements,
and before the final plat is approved and recorded the city may accept a cash deposit or surety bond
executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, to secure to the city the actual
cost of such improvements as estimated by a professional engineer who is licensed to practice in
Texas, which estimate shall also be approved by the city engineer.
(c) Withholding improvements until approved. The city shall withhold all city improvements of whatsoever
nature including the furnishing of sewerage facilities and water service from all additions, which have not been
approved as provided by this ordinance and further, no building permits shall be issued by the city for
improvements on any piece of property in any subdivision until such city approval has been secured.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 6, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 7. Improvements.
The subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve all streets in the subdivision. Improvements shall be installed
to a permanent line and road and to the satisfaction of the city engineer in accordance with standard
specifications of the City of Slaton or good engineering practice if specifications are not available. The
minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of
the final plat by the city commission shall be:
(1) Grading, integral curb and gutter, six (6) inch curb and eighteen (18) inch gutter of twenty-five
hundred (2,500) p.s.i. concrete, drainage, and drainage structures necessary to properly drain the area.
(2) Pavement of a width suitable for the traffic on the street minimum acceptable pavements: A
triple asphalt surface treatment of one and one-half (1-1/2) inch hot mix, six (6) inch gravel or caliche
base, the base and material should have a plastic index of twenty (20) or less, or six (6) inch
reinforced concrete (2,500) p.s.i. asphaltic concrete on a properly prepared subgrade, properly
compacted base with a minimum compressive strength of two thousand five hundred (2,500) p.s.i. at
twenty-eight (28) days and have a minimum of five (5) sacks of cement per cubic yard and a
maximum of seven and five-tenths (7.5) gallons of water per cubic yard.
(3) Sidewalks; four (4) foot wide, four (4) inches thick, two thousand five hundred (2,500) p.s.i.
concrete.
(4) All concrete in pavements under (1), (2) and (3) shall have a minimum compressive strength of
two thousand five hundred (2,500) p.s.i. at twenty-eight (28) days and have a minimum of five (5)
sacks of cement per cubic yard and a maximum of seven and five-tenths (7.5) gallons of water per
cubic yard.
(5) Water systems with mains of sufficient size and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish
adequate domestic water supply, furnish fire protection to all lots and to meet the requirements of the
City of Slaton water and sewer department as set forth by the city engineer.
(6) Sanitary sewer facilities to service the subdivision and to meet the requirements of the City of
Slaton water and sewer department.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/248
(7) All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner as will obviate
the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutter, curb and drainage structures when
connections are made.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 7, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 8. Payment.
The subdivider may award the contract and make payments directly to the contractor, after the plans and
specifications have been approved by the city engineer for all grading, paving, drainage, structures and
sidewalks in the addition. The engineer who shall be a professional engineer licensed to practice in Texas
representing the subdivider shall prepare the plans and specifications for the water and sewer lines and present
them to the city engineer for approval after which the city may advertise for bids and award the contract if the
cost for said contract has been paid to the city by the subdivider. When completed and before final approval of
the plat for filing the aforesaid licensed professional engineer shall furnish his signed certificate to the city
secretary with a copy also to the city engineer and the city attorney that the improvements meet the requirements
of this ordinance in all respects.
Subdivider shall also upon completion furnish to the city attorney for approval a surety bond in the principal
sum of twenty-five (25) percent of the original cost of such improvements, of a corporation with a permit to do
business in Texas to the effect that such subdivider shall pay for any and all repairs needed to such
improvements within two (2) years of their completion date as set forth above. The city may make the repairs
itself or have them done and charge the subdivider the reasonable cost thereof including the cost of the city's
labor expense in doing so as computed by the city, which shall after such approval be filed with the city
secretary.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 8, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 9. As-built plans.
The engineer representing the subdivider must present to the City of Slaton reproducible complete as-built plans
for all paving, drainage structures, waterline and sewer lines within thirty (30) days after completion of each
contract. (Ordinance 232, sec. 9, adopted 2/10/64)
Sec. 10. Fees and charges.
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be paid into the general fund of the City of Slaton when any
preliminary map or plat is tendered to the city planning commission or any other board or agency, and each of
the fees and charges provided herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the city planning commission or
any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid to the officer designated herein. The
city secretary, his deputies or assistants shall calculate the fees and charges in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1) Preliminary plats. $10.00 per plat, plus $1.00 per lot.
(2) Final plats. $20.00 per plat, plus $2.00 per lot.
(3) For approval of multiple dwelling areas, business or industrial areas not subdivided into lots,
both the preliminary and final plats shall carry a fee of $5.00 per acre.
These fees shall be charged on all plats, regardless of the action taken by the city planning commission whether
the plat is approved or denied.
Advice and cooperation in the preparation of plats will be freely given by the city engineer.
(Ordinance 232, sec. 10, adopted 2/10/64)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/248
Sec. 11. Cumulative effect.
The terms and provisions of this ordinance shall be cumulative of all other ordinances of the City of Slaton
regulating subdivisions, and such other ordinances are not repealed by this ordinance except in those instances
where the provisions of said other ordinances conflict with the terms of this ordinance, in which event the terms
of this ordinance shall prevail. (Ordinance 232, sec. 11, adopted 2/10/64)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 11.01.001 Continuation of tax upon sale of gas and electricity used for residential uses
(a) The tax upon the sale of gas and electricity when used for residential use is hereby continued, the city
commission electing not to repeal such tax as is permitted under the terms of V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section
321.105.
(b) The term “residential use” shall mean as defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 151.317(c).
(1978 Code, sec. 11-14; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAXES*
Sec. 11.02.001 Freeport goods
The city elects to tax that tangible personal property described in article VIII, section 1-j, subsection (a), Texas
Constitution, and section 11.251, Texas Property Tax Code, which would otherwise be exempt. (Ordinance 514
adopted 12/12/89)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
Sec. 11.02.002 Goods in transit
The goods in transit, as defined in Tex. Tax Code 11.253(a)(2), as amended by House Bill 621, enacted by the
80th Texas Legislature in regular session, shall remain subject to taxation by the city. (Ordinance 691 adopted
9/11/07)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES†
Sec. 11.03.001 Levied
The city commission hereby officially and affirmatively declares that a one-percent local sales and use tax
within the city has been properly and lawfully adopted in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Tax Code,
section 321.101. (1978 Code, sec. 11-13; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/248
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX**
Sec. 11.04.001 Levied
Pursuant to chapter 351 of the Tax Code of the state, there is hereby levied a tax of seven percent (7%) of the
price paid for a room in a hotel. The tax shall apply to every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right
of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession
of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room
in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the
hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession.
(Ordinance 631, sec. 15-93, 7/8/03)
Sec. 11.04.002 Collection; exemptions
(a) The owner of each hotel or motel shall collect the tax from the occupant and shall file, on forms to be
provided by the city, on or before the tenth day of each following month a report with the city tax collector
showing the consideration paid during the preceding month and the tax collected, which tax shall be remitted in
full by the owner to the city tax collector. (1978 Code, sec. 15-94)
(b) The persons and entities described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 351.006, are exempt from payment of
the hotel occupancy tax levied in this article. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.04.003 Noncompliance
Any owner failing to collect the tax hereby imposed, or failing to report as herein required, or failing to remit the
tax collected, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be penalized by a fine as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each violation shall be considered a separate offense. (1978 Code,
sec. 15-95)
ARTICLE 11.05 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES*
Sec. 11.05.001 Tax authorized
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this
section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other
telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot
be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A, Tax Code, section 321.210, is hereby repealed
by the city, as authorized by Tax Code, section 321.210(b).
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local
sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.
(Ordinance 491, sec. 1, adopted 6/32/87; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.05.002 Cumulative provisions
This article shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this article
shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve
as an offset to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city pursuant to any franchise, street
use ordinance, charter provision, statute or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable
by any provider of telecommunications service; it being the express intent hereof that all such obligations,
impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or
limitation hereby. (Ordinance 491, sec. 2, adopted 6/32/87)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/248
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Short title; adoption of state law
(a) This chapter may be known and cited as the traffic code. (1978 Code, sec. 21-1)
(b) All provisions of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, as now in effect in the state and
generally referred to as V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, title 7, subtitle C, chapter 541 et seq., including all
amendments to such statute as of this date, is hereby adopted and is supplemented by the regulations set forth in
this chapter. (1978 Code, sec. 21-1; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.01.002 Enforcing officers–Designated; authority
It shall be the duty of the police department of this city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Officers of the
police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible
signs in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, in event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic, as conditions may require, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or the
fire department may direct traffic, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. (1978 Code, sec. 21-2)
Sec. 12.01.003 Same–Making and enforcing regulations
The police department and police officers are hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to
make effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. (1978 Code, sec. 21-3)
Sec. 12.01.004 Bicycles, pushcarts, etc., on sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or run any bicycle, tricycle, or like vehicle, except wheelchairs, on any
sidewalk within the city, or to use said sidewalks on which to push or to pull any handcarts or pushcarts or other
like vehicle. (1978 Code, sec. 21-8)
Sec. 12.01.005 Skateboards or similar devices in commercial zone
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon a skateboard, or similar device designed for coasting, on any
street or sidewalk in any commercial zone in the city between the hours of 10:00 o'clock a.m. and 7:00 o'clock
p.m. (Ordinance 650, sec. 1, adopted 7/13/04)
Sec. 12.01.006 Unlawful acceleration of vehicle
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to accelerate such vehicle on a public roadway, or on a
parking lot open to the public without a fee, in such a manner as to:
(1) Cause dust, gravel or debris to be thrown in a discernable extent by the force of the tires;
(2) Cause the rear tires to smoke or leave black marks on the roadway surface; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/248
(3) Cause the motor vehicle to swerve from the rear producing a movement known popularly as
fishtailing.
(Ordinance 649, sec. 1, adopted 5/11/04)
State law reference–Reckless driving, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.401.
Sec. 12.01.007 Sleeping or reclining upon public property
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep or to recline upon the public right-of-way of any street,
highway, alley or upon the sidewalk of a commercially zoned district at any time.
(b) The violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $200.00.
(Ordinance 675 adopted 3/14/06)
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 12.02.001 Conformance to manual and specifications
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications
adopted by the state transportation commission as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001.
All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city must conform to the manual and specifications
adopted under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All existing traffic-control devices and those
erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section
shall be official traffic-control devices. (1978 Code, sec. 21-4; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.02.002 Installation; record
(a) The city commission shall by ordinance direct that the chief of police shall have the duty of erecting or
installing upon, over, along or beside any highway, street or alley signs, signals and markings or cause the same
to be erected, installed or placed in accordance with the ordinance and consistent with the manual. Said trafficcontrol
devices shall be installed immediately, or as soon as such specific device, sign or signal can be procured.
(b) Whenever the chief of police has erected and installed any official traffic-control device, signal or sign at
any location in the city, or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to an ordinance and
the manual, he shall thereafter file a report with the city secretary in writing and signed officially by the chief of
police, stating the type of traffic-control device, sign or signal, and when and where the same was erected and
installed. The city secretary shall file and maintain such report of the chief of police among the official papers of
the office of the city secretary.
(1978 Code, sec. 21-5)
Sec. 12.02.003 Traffic register
(a) A traffic register shall be continuously maintained by the city secretary as a public record and shall contain
a record of every specific location in the city where any traffic-control device, sign, signal, marking, right-ofway
or special regulation is made applicable. The city commission has heretofore found that the conditions
prerequisite to the establishment of all special traffic regulations herein prescribed and the installation of all
traffic-control devices, signs, signals and markings evidenced by the record thereof in the traffic register existed
and such findings are hereby confirmed and such regulations shall continue in operation until modified.
(b) Whenever any special regulation of traffic becomes expressly not applicable to a specific location in the
city, the record of such location shall remain in the traffic register, but shall be prominently marked “deleted” by
the city secretary who shall also note the date of such deletion and the authority therefor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/248
(1978 Code, sec. 21-6)
(c) Ordinances prescribing regulations for the installation of traffic-control signs, signals or devices on
specific streets or portions of streets and at intersections have not been included in this code, but are specifically
saved from repeal. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.02.004 Presumptive evidence
It being unlawful for any person other than the chief of police, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to
install or cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities
on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
any traffic ordinance of the city, that any traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on
any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the chief of police pursuant to the
authority of an ordinance directing the installation of such device, signal or marking. (1978 Code, sec. 21-7)
ARTICLE 12.03 PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
Ordinances establishing areas of specific streets, portions of streets, lots or zones where parking of vehicles is
prohibited or limited have not been included in this code, but are specifically saved from repeal. Such ordinances
are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.03.002 Prohibited parking for purpose of sale of vehicle
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or allow to stand upon the streets and portions of streets of the
city any vehicle bearing thereon any sign, placard or words advertising same for sale or for the purpose of sale
whether so marked with any such sign, placard or words or not. (1978 Code, sec. 21-11)
Sec. 12.03.003 Parking oversized vehicles in residential areas
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any truck, bus or trailer having a capacity in
excess of one (1) ton or which is more than eighteen (18) feet in length, seven (7) feet in width or seven (7) feet
in height to park the same upon any street in the residential area of the city; provided, however, the provisions of
this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the parking of any such truck, bus or trailer on any residential street
for the purpose of the actual loading and unloading of goods, wares and merchandise when such vehicle is
accompanied by a driver; and provided, further, “loading” and “unloading” as used in this section shall be
limited to the actual time necessarily consumed in such operation. (1978 Code, sec. 21-15; Ordinance 618, sec.
1, adopted 10/8/02)
Secs. 12.03.004–12.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Angle Parking
Sec. 12.03.031 Compliance
Upon the streets or parts of streets of the city, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at angle to the
curb when signs or markings are placed there by the city, and in place indicating that angle parking is required.
(1978 Code, sec. 21-12)
Sec. 12.03.032 Existing recessed spaces
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/248
In locations where the normal curb has been recessed to provide space for angle parking, such parking will be
permitted to be continued notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter if the following conditions exist:
(1) The distance between the location of the normal curbline and the recessed portion of the curb
(or the edge of the sidewalk) shall be not less than twelve (12) feet;
(2) The sidewalk, or area reserved for pedestrian use, shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide and
shall be separated from the parking area by a curb or tire stop not less than four (4) inches and not
more than eight (8) inches in height. The sidewalk shall be at least eight (8) feet wide if both edges of
the sidewalk are used for tire stops for parked vehicles.
(3) The recessed curb area shall have been constructed prior to the date of the passage of this
chapter (April 13, 1964).
(1978 Code, sec. 21-13)
Sec. 12.03.033 Future recessed spaces
The locations where the normal curbline is recessed for the purpose of providing space for angle parking at
sometime after the date of passage of this chapter (April 13, 1964), such parking will be permitted only if the
following conditions exist:
(1) The distance between the location of the normal curbline and the recessed portion of the curb
(or the edge of the sidewalk) shall not be less than sixteen (16) feet;
(2) The sidewalk, or area reserved for pedestrian use, shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide and
shall be separated from the parking area by a curb or tire stop of not less than four (4) inches and not
more than eight (8) inches in height. The sidewalk shall be at least eight (8) feet wide if both edges of
the sidewalk are used as tire stops for parked vehicles.
(3) At least six (6) feet of the sidewalk, or area reserved for pedestrian use, shall be located within
the street right-of-way.
(1978 Code, sec. 21-14)
ARTICLE 12.04 HAZARDOUS VEHICLES
Sec. 12.04.001 Operation
(a) Except as otherwise provided hereinafter, no person may drive, operate or move, nor may the owner
permit to be driven, operated or moved, any vehicle having a load capacity in excess of one ton, or which is
more than twenty (20) feet in length or seven (7) feet in height or width, upon any street, alleyway or public
thoroughfare in the city.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this provision, no person may drive, operate or move, nor may the owner
permit to be driven, operated or moved, any vehicle transporting explosives or toxic gases upon any street,
alleyway or public thoroughfare in the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 21-22)
Sec. 12.04.002 Parking
(a) Except as otherwise provided hereinafter, no person may park, nor may the owner permit to be parked, any
vehicle having a load capacity in excess of one ton, or which is more than twenty (20) feet in length or seven (7)
feet in height or width, upon any street, alleyway, or public thoroughfare in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/248
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this provision, no person may park nor may the owner permit to be parked
any vehicle transporting explosives or toxic gases upon any street, alleyway or public thoroughfare in the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 21-23)
Sec. 12.04.003 Exceptions
It is provided, however, that sections 12.04.001 and 12.04.002 shall not apply to the following exceptions, each
of which is excepted from the prohibitions of such sections:
(1) School buses;
(2) Any bus, truck or trailer utilized for the purpose of actual loading or unloading goods, wares or
merchandise when such vehicle is accompanied by its driver; provided further that loading or
unloading shall be limited to a reasonable time to complete such operation;
(3) State highways and farm to market roads are hereby designated as truck routes and shall be
excepted from the above prohibition.
(1978 Code, sec. 21-24)
Sec. 12.04.004 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of sections 12.04.001 and 12.04.002 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1978 Code, sec.
21-25)
ARTICLE 12.05 SPECIAL SCHEDULES FOR SPECIFIC STREETS
Sec. 12.05.001 Speed limits; school zones
Ordinances establishing speed limits on specific streets or portions of streets and ordinances establishing school
zones where the speed of vehicles is reduced have not been included in this code, but are specifically saved from
repeal. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.05.002 One-way streets
Ordinances establishing one-way streets or portions of streets have not been included in this code, but are
specifically saved from repeal. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 12.05.003 Stop intersections
Ordinances designating intersections where traffic is controlled by stop signs have not been included in this
code, but are specifically saved from repeal. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 12.05.004 Yield intersections
Ordinances designating intersections where traffic is controlled by stop signs have not been included in this
code, but are specifically saved from repeal. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.06 TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 12.06.001 Definition
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/248
Truck. A commercial motor vehicle with a loaded weight exceeding forty thousand (40,000) pounds.
Sec. 12.06.002 No truck routes
It shall hereafter be unlawful for a truck to be operated on Second Street at any point north of the north line of
East Murray Street and south of the south line of Scott Street.
Sec. 12.06.003 Posting of signs
Traffic-control signs shall be erected for Second Street at its intersection with the north line of East Murray
Street, and facing northbound vehicular traffic, which signage shall display the legend “NO TRUCKS.”
(Ordinance 796 adopted 4/9/18)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Meter tampering
(a) (1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation or any agency,
servant or employee thereof to secure or attempt to secure utility service whether electric, gas or
water, by physically or electronically tampering or damaging the metering, meter seals or locks
and/or connecting paralleling or bypassing load usage on the line or company side of metered or
unmetered utility services by any means or devices in order to avoid paying for usage of the utility
services or knowingly using services that have been obtained by these means. (1978 Code, sec. 16-
19)
(2) It shall be unlawful for any residence, business or combination thereof to share a water meter
with another such residence, business, or combination thereof, whether by the utilization of utility
lines extended between them, or otherwise. (Ordinance 718, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/09)
(b) It shall be unlawful for any employee of a utility company within the city to perform the above-stated
unlawful acts that result in the avoidance or improper metering of the utility service such employee is charged
with servicing.
(c) The above unlawful acts shall not apply to licensed electricians or plumbers during the performance of
maintenance or emergency repairs or to such persons acting on the request from the fire or police officials in
emergency situations; provided, however, any act shall be reported to the affected utility within seventy-two (72)
hours of such act or if not reported such person performing the act shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(d) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. This penalty shall be in addition to any penalty assessed
for the theft of such service as provided in section 31.04 of the Texas Penal Code.
(1978 Code, sec. 16-19)
Sec. 13.01.002 Monthly charge for water and sewer service outside city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/248
(a) Water or sewer service shall not be extended outside the corporate limits of the city without the recipient
customer executing a written contract at a negotiated monthly charge of not less than 150% of the charge to
residences or businesses, as applicable, within the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any recipient of water through the service of the city to resell such water for any
purpose, other than restaurants in the service of meals to patrons.
(Ordinance 718, sec. 2, adopted 3/10/09)
ARTICLE 13.02 WATER*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Maintenance of system
The superintendent of the water department shall constantly inspect all parts of said water system and maintain
them in good condition. He shall keep in good repair at all times for constant service all pumps, machinery,
hydrants and all other waterworks fixtures and properties. He shall at all times keep a sufficient supply of water
in the tanks to give adequate fire protection and pressure, and to make taps and connections to mains and all
repairs, etc., to keep said water system in good condition. (1978 Code, sec. 22-31)
Sec. 13.02.002 Application for service; meter deposit
Before water shall be supplied to any person or premises by the city water department, the owner or occupant of
the property shall make application and deposit the amount set forth in section A13.02.002 of the fee schedule in
appendix A to this code for one three-fourths-inch by five-eighths-inch water meter, of a kind to be supplied by
the city water department; provided, if the establishment to be served is a cafe, service station or laundry, the
deposit shall be as set forth in section A13.02.002 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code. (1978 Code,
sec. 22-20)
Sec. 13.02.003 Furnishing meters
The superintendent of the water department shall determine the size and type of meter installed or used on any
water service. The city will only buy or install regular three-fourths-inch by five-eighths-inch water meters;
where larger meters are needed the owner shall buy said meter, with the approval of the city water
superintendent as to kind, type and size. (1978 Code, sec. 22-21)
Sec. 13.02.004 Installation and payment of costs for connections
The city water department shall install and maintain all service connections from water mains through
customers' meters within the corporate limits. A charge for all materials used in the installation of each
connection shall be made against each party desiring connection with such mains, and such amounts shall be
collected by the superintendent of the water department. (1978 Code, sec. 22-22)
Sec. 13.02.005 Control of appurtenances; tampering with meters, etc.; turning water on or off
All meters, curb cocks, goosenecks, valves and meter boxes connected with the city water mains and service
pipes, including those furnished at the expense of the consumer or property owner, shall remain under the direct
control of the superintendent, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than those authorized by the
superintendent of the water department to connect, disconnect, move or tamper with any such meter, or to turn
on or off the water at the curb cock, valve or meter, or to open or tamper with any meter box. (1978 Code, sec.
22-23)
Sec. 13.02.006 Wasting water; emergency shutoffs; use of hot water heaters and boilers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/248
For the convenience of consumers of water and as a measure of conservation and safety to the service, the
following regulations are enacted:
(1) Wasting water. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully or negligently waste
water in any manner whatsoever, and any person having knowledge of any condition whereby water
is being wasted shall immediately notify the superintendent of the water department.
(2) Emergency shutoffs. Consumers shall install an approved “stop and waste” inside of the
property line at a location accessible in case of emergency and shall not use the curb cock at the
meter in lieu thereof.
(3) Hot water heaters. Consumers shall install on all storage hot water heaters that are directly
connected to the water lines a check valve to be approved by the superintendent.
(4) Boiler connections. It shall be unlawful for any person to draw from any city pipes directly into
any stationary boiler within the corporate limits of the city. All persons having boilers supplied with
water are cautioned against the danger of explosion or collapse. The city will not be liable for any
damage that may occur on account of the water being shut off for any purpose or on account of the
breaking of any pipe or fixture by pressure of the water from the city water mains.
(5) Supply tanks for steam engine boilers. Where city water is used to supply a steam engine
boiler, its owner must provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply of at least six (6) hours
into which the service pipe will be discharged.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-27)
Sec. 13.02.007 Fire hydrant use; obstruction of access
(a) Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of use to extinguish fires and to be used and opened only
by the water and fire departments or such persons as may be given authority by the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry away water from fire hydrants without written permission from
the water superintendent, or to place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate valve, curb cock, meter or meter box
any object, material, debris or structure of any kind so as to prevent immediate access to same.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-28)
Sec. 13.02.008 Cutting off water for repairs, etc.
The water superintendent may at any time order the water cut off from any premises connected for repairs,
extensions or other purposes. (1978 Code, sec. 22-29)
Secs. 13.02.009–13.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Billing, Rates and Charges*
Sec. 13.02.041 Schedule of monthly service rates
(a) The monthly water rates are on file in the city secretary's office.
(b) The city shall levy and collect from each residential single-family dwelling unit using the sanitary sewer
system a monthly service charge and an additional monthly volume charge per 1,000 gallons of water consumed.
There shall be a minimum charge and a maximum charge.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/248
(c) A customer may make a written demand that the meter reading for which he has been billed be reread.
Should the rereading indicate the billing reflected an overcharge, the bill should be adjusted to reflect the true
reading. Should the rereading indicate that the billing was not in error (or was too low), an additional charge
shall be added to the billing.
(d) All rates, fees and charges shall be determined and prescribed in an amount from time to time by
resolution of the city commission, and the city secretary maintains a schedule of all such charges.
(Ordinance 495, sec. 22-24, adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance 512, sec. 1, adopted 9/12/89)
Sec. 13.02.042 Billing; reconnection charge after delinquency
It shall be the duty of the city water superintendent to have all water meters read on schedules established by the
city administrator. Billings to customers shall be mailed within six (6) calendar days with payment due on the
following month on dates established by the city administrator. If a bill is not paid within five (5) days of the due
date, service will be disconnected without notice and a fee as set forth in section A13.02.042 of the fee schedule
in appendix A to this code will be charged for reconnection payable prior to reconnection. (Ordinance 495, sec.
22-25, adopted 9/8/87)
Sec. 13.02.043 Testing meter
Any consumer shall have the right to demand that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined
and tested by the superintendent for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is or is not registering correctly. (1978
Code, sec. 22-26)
Secs. 13.02.044–13.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Backflow Prevention*
Sec. 13.02.071 Definitions
Administrative authority. The city administrator or his designee, which may be the building inspector.
Approved air gap. A physical separation between a water inlet and its usage that has been approved by the
administrative authority.
Backflow prevention device. A device to prevent the backflow into potable water system.
Customer service inspector. Licensed plumbing inspectors, water supply protection specialists licensed by the
state board of plumbing examiners or certified waterworks operators with customer service endorsement.
Licensed plumbers, at the discretion of the city, may perform inspections on single-family residential services.
All customer service inspectors must be approved by the administrative authority.
TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or the successor thereof.
(Ordinance 561, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/98; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.02.072 Authorization
The city administrator is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this division in order
to protect the health and welfare of the public and to develop and maintain policies and procedures in order to
meet the intent and spirit of this division. (Ordinance 561, sec. 2, adopted 4/14/98)
Sec. 13.02.073 Application
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/248
This division applies to all services connected to the city's public water supply. (Ordinance 561, sec. 3, adopted
4/14/98)
Sec. 13.02.074 Backflow prevention
(a) It is unlawful for any property owner, occupant or operator of any premises where a connection exists to
the public water supply and where there exists an actual or potential source of contamination, as determined by
the city, to remain in connection with the public water supply without an approved backflow prevention plan or
an approved air gap. Where an approved air gap exists, a one-time screening report shall be all that is required
by this section. A copy of said screening report shall be kept on file with the administrative authority. Backflow
prevention devices shall be installed according to local codes where actual or potential contamination or system
hazard exists and an air gap is impractical. The administrative authority may require an approved backflow
prevention device to be installed at the meter. If backflow prevention is required at the meter it shall be at the
owner's, occupant's or operator's expense. A backflow prevention device installed at the meter shall be in
addition to and shall not relieve same from compliance with all rules contained herein and local plumbing codes
that affect internal and external hazards.
(b) An approved backflow prevention plan will include:
(1) Where approved air gaps are impractical, an annual inspection and approved testing of all
backflow prevention devices according to manufacturer's recommendations is required. Devices must
also be tested upon installation and more frequently than annually if the manufacturer's
recommendations so state.
(2) An approved backflow preventer test report submitted to the administrative authority by
January 31st each year, showing test results from a “general tester.” The administrative authority may
allow the test to be done by an approved “fireline tester” if firelines only are tested. Failure to submit
an annual report shall constitute a violation of this division.
(3) Copies of manufacturers' maintenance manuals on all devices must be on file with the person
responsible for the premises and available for inspection upon request by the administrative authority.
(4) Any additional requirements deemed necessary to protect the public water supply by the
administrative authority.
(c) A current list of local recognized testers shall be on file in the office of the administrative authority.
(d) All device testing must be in accordance with the University of Southern California's Foundation of Cross
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research and/or the American Water Works Association Manual of Cross
Connection Control.
(e) Test equipment shall be certified for accuracy annually and shall carry test gauge serial numbers.
Documentation showing the most recent certification shall be accessible to the administrative authority and must
be kept for a period of not less than three years. Test gauge serial numbers shall be included on “test and
maintenance” report forms. Gauge testers must sign and date reports.
(f) Overhead bulk, condensing, cooling or industrial processes shall be separated from the potable water
supply by an approved air gap between the outlet hose and the overflow rim of the receiving tank.
(Ordinance 561, sec. 4, adopted 4/14/98)
Sec. 13.02.075 Customer service inspections
(a) Prior to providing continuous water service to any new construction or existing service that has been
discontinued for any reason, an inspection shall be made by the designated customer service inspector. If no
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/248
unacceptable plumbing practices are found an approved “customer service inspection certification” shall be
completed.
(b) When the designated customer service inspector has reason to believe that a cross connection or other
unacceptable plumbing practice exists on any existing premises or after any material improvement, correction,
or addition to private plumbing facilities have been made, without the approval of the administrative authority,
the water supply shall be terminated immediately. Reconnection shall be made only after repairs are made to the
satisfaction of the administrative authority.
(c) Copies of properly completed inspection certificates shall be kept on file with the city. Certification shall
be kept on file for a period of at least ten years. Inspection certificates must be approved by the administrative
authority and contain all information suggested in 30 TAC, chapter 290, appendix D.
(d) An inspection fee as set forth in section A13.02.075 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this code shall be
collected from the customer for each customer service inspection.
(Ordinance 561, sec. 5, adopted 4/14/98)
ARTICLE 13.03 SEWER*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Apartment house. A collection of dwellings for housing a number of people grouped in four (4) or more
families, assigned to different sections in the same structure.
Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Sanitary sewage. The waste from water closets, automotive wash racks, urinals, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs,
showers, household laundries, cellar floor drains, garage floor drains, storerooms, soda fountains, cuspidors,
refrigerator drips, drinking fountains, stable floor drains, or waste from any other drain emptying into the
sanitary sewer system of the city.
Single-family residence. A building used exclusively as living quarters for a family and occupied by only one
family.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-40)
Sec. 13.03.002 Septic tanks where sewerage not available
Every owner of every building within the city intended for human occupancy and located on any lot, the
property lines of which are all in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any city sanitary sewer line, shall
be equipped with sanitary flush water closets, connected to an approved septic tank; and every person in charge
of such building, whether owner or agent, shall be responsible for compliance. Pit privies are prohibited. (1978
Code, sec. 13-73)
Secs. 13.03.003–13.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Connection to Sanitary Sewer Line
Sec. 13.03.031 Required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/248
Every owner of every building intended for human occupancy, and located on any lot within the city, the
property line of which extends within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any sanitary sewer line, and every person
in any way responsible for such building, whether agent or occupant, is hereby required to equip such building
with sanitary water flush closets and connect same with the city sewer, under the supervision of the city water
department. (1978 Code, sec. 13-70)
Sec. 13.03.032 New lines
Should any additional sewer line be built or extended, the owners, agents and occupants of any such buildings
on any lots, the property line of which is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such new or extended sewer line,
shall, within sixty (60) days from the date of completion of such sewer, construct or cause to be constructed
water closets on said property and connect same with said sewer. (1978 Code, sec. 13-71)
Sec. 13.03.033 Maintenance
It shall be the duty of all such property owners, agents and occupants of such buildings to maintain said water
closets and the connection thereof with the sewer in good working condition, free from all defects and
obstructions. (1978 Code, sec. 13-72)
Secs. 13.03.034–13.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Billing, Rates and Charges*
Sec. 13.03.061 Charge for residential, single-family dwelling in city
The city shall levy and collect from each residential, single-family dwelling within the city using the sanitary
sewer system a monthly sewer charge which shall be determined and prescribed in an amount from time to time
by resolution of the city commission, and the city secretary maintains a schedule of all such charges. (1978
Code, sec. 22-41; Ordinance 512, sec. 1, adopted 9/12/89)
Sec. 13.03.062 Commercial rates
The commercial rates for sanitary sewer services shall be determined and prescribed in an amount from time to
time by resolution of the city commission and shall be collected by the city secretary. The city secretary
maintains a schedule of all such charges. (1978 Code, sec. 22-42; Ordinance 512, sec. 1, adopted 9/12/89)
Sec. 13.03.063 Special cases
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, should it be determined by the city commission that any
persons connected to and using the sanitary sewer system of the city should not be listed in the above schedule
of rates, then the city commission shall designate the rate said customers shall pay and the schedule under which
said customers shall be listed, and such determination by the city commission shall be final. (1978 Code, sec.
22-43)
Sec. 13.03.064 Service outside city
No prevision of this article shall be construed as giving any person located, living or residing outside the
corporate limits of the city the right to tie on or to enjoy the sanitary sewer services of the city or the
appurtenances thereto, but the governing body may contract with any person for sewer service under such terms
and conditions as may appear to such governing body to be for the best interest of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 22-
44)
Sec. 13.03.065 Billing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/248
(a) The charges herein assessed shall be assessed against the person in whose name the water meter is
assessed. In any event any person who is connected to or is using the sanitary sewer system of the city and is not
connected to the water lines of the city shall be assessed in the name of the person connected to and using the
city sewer system.
(b) The above charges shall be due and payable monthly as water bills are paid to the city, and said charges
shall be paid to the city at the water department.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-45)
Sec. 13.03.066 Delinquency
Any person who shall fail to pay the sewer charge as herein levied and assessed within twenty (20) days from
the time same becomes due and payable shall be subject to have their sewer and water service disconnected from
the city's sewer and water system and lines, and thereafter no sewer or water connection which has been
disconnected for the nonpayment of said charges shall be reconnected for the same user until all costs incurred in
the actual physical disconnection and reconnection have been paid and all delinquent sewer and water service
charges have been paid to the city. (1978 Code, sec. 22-46)
Secs. 13.03.067–13.03.100 Reserved
Division 4. Automotive Wash Racks
Sec. 13.03.101 Traps required
Each automotive wash rack hereafter constructed in the city shall have a sand and grease trap conforming to the
blueprints and specifications of the plumbing inspector of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 13-74)
Sec. 13.03.102 Disconnection when detrimental
The water superintendent shall have the authority to inspect all automotive wash racks in the city, and any time
that he deems the operation of one of them to be an unreasonable burden on the sanitary sewer system of the
city, he shall disconnect the wash rack from the city sanitary sewer system; this power shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any penal provision of any other ordinance of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 13-75)
ARTICLE 13.04 INDUSTRIAL WASTES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.04.001 Definitions
For the purpose of interpreting this article, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
Approving authority. Those departments, divisions or personnel of the city whose duties include applying and
enforcing this article.
City. The city, together with all its governing and operating bodies.
Commercial wastes. Waterborne wastes discharged from commercial enterprises solely as a result of activities
which can be considered normal domestic activities even though they occur at the commercial enterprise.
Domestic wastes. Waterborne wastes discharged from households as a result of normal domestic activities and
discharged through normal domestic plumbing systems.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/248
Industrial waste discharge application or application. The form contained herein whose completion and
approval by the approving authority is required before industrial wastes can be discharged into the sewer system.
Industrial waste discharge permit or permit. The industrial waste discharge application, when properly filled out
and signed by the approving authority, represents the industrial waste discharge permit for the industry so
applying.
Industrial waste surcharge. An additional charge applied to industrial wastes which have a BOD (five-day,
twenty-degree centigrade biochemical oxygen demand, Standard Methods) greater than three hundred (300)
milligrams per liter and/or a suspended solids concentration (Standard Methods) greater than three hundred
(300) milligrams per liter.
Industrial wastes. Any wastes other than domestic or commercial wastes.
Permit amendment application. The same form as used for the original application can be used to apply for
approval of changes in the original permit conditions.
Permittee. That person applying for an industrial waste discharge permit to discharge industrial waste into the
city's sewer system under the regulations of this article.
Pretreatment. Any treatment processes, operations and facilities which are applied to a waste before it is
discharged into a public sanitary sewer for the purpose of improving the quality of the waste.
Properly shredded garbage. Garbage refers to solid waste from domestic, industrial or commercial preparation,
cooking or dispensing of food or from the handling, storage and sale of produce. Properly shredded garbage
refers to garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sanitary sewage, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
Public sanitary sewer. A publicly owned pipe or conduit designed to collect domestic waste, domestic type
commercial waste, and industrial waste and transport these wastes to the city's sewage treatment plant(s).
Required structures. Control manholes and flow measurement devices which may be required for wastes
discharging into public sanitary sewers.
Sewer service charge. A base charge applied to all wastes discharging into public sanitary sewers calculated on
the volume of waste flow during the billing period.
Sewerage or sewer system. All public sanitary sewers, along with their appurtenances, and all elements of the
city's sewage treatment plant(s).
Standard Methods. The book “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” American
Public Health Association, American Waterworks Association, and the Water Environment Federation, latest
edition available.
Waste. Any material that has been used by and discharged from an industry, commercial enterprise, household,
or any other establishment, whether this material is carried by water or not.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-80)
Sec. 13.04.002 Penalty for violation
The violation of this article is hereby declared a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine as provided in section
1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 502, sec. 1, adopted 2/9/88)
Sec. 13.04.003 Powers of approving authority
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/248
(a) The approving authority, and other duly authorized employees of the city acting as its duly authorized
agent and bearing credentials and identification, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be
necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with
provisions of this article. The approving authority or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into
any process beyond that point having direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewer.
(b) While performing the necessary work on private properties under subsection (a) above, the approving
authority or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the proprietor and the proprietor shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees
and the city shall indemnify the proprietor against loss or damage to its property, to city employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the proprietor and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
proprietor to maintain safe conditions.
(c) Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof.
Any person who shall continue any violation of this article shall be disconnected from the public sanitary sewer
and/or water service. Such disconnection and reconnection shall be at the total expense of the sewer and/or water
user.
(d) Where wastes, acids, chemicals, or other deleterious substances are discharged to the sewer system
causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with the proper operation or performance of the
sewer system, the approving authority is authorized to immediately terminate services by such measures as are
necessary to protect the facilities.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-81)
Sec. 13.04.004 Compliance with building and plumbing codes
Domestic wastes and commercial wastes can be discharged into any public sanitary sewer agreeable to the
approving authority as long as building and plumbing codes are complied with and the wastes do not violate any
conditions set forth in division 2 of this article. (1978 Code, sec. 13-87)
Sec. 13.04.005 Conditions for discharge into public sanitary sewer
Industrial wastes cannot be discharged into any public sanitary sewer until all of the following requirements
have been satisfied:
(1) Review of the problem with the approving authority;
(2) Completion of industrial waste discharge application and approval thereof by the approving
authority;
(3) Establishment of pretreatment necessary for the waste to comply with the conditions set forth
in division 2 of this article;
(4) Establishment of structures required.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-88)
Sec. 13.04.006 Pretreatment facilities
(a) Persons generating wastes prohibited from discharge into public sanitary sewers by the conditions set forth
in division 2 of this article shall pretreat or otherwise dispose of such prohibited wastes so that any wastes
discharged into a public sanitary sewer comply with the conditions set forth in said division.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/248
(b) Special attention will be given to grease, oil and sand interceptors. These shall be provided for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, and other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwellings. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for easy cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be
substantially constructed, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
(c) All pretreatment or disposal processes shall be maintained by the person generating or discharging the
wastes at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-89)
Sec. 13.04.007 Required structures and devices
(a) Control manhole. Any person discharging industrial waste into a public sanitary sewer of the city shall
construct a suitable control manhole, downstream from any treatment or storage tanks or other approved works
utilized by such person for pretreatment, such control manhole to be for the purpose of facilitating observations,
measurements and sampling of all waste created and discharged by such person. The control manhole shall be
constructed at a location and in a manner approved by the approving authority. The control manhole shall be
constructed and installed at the expense of the person discharging the waste, and it shall be maintained at the
expense of such person at all times in a safe, acceptable and proper operating condition.
(b) Flow measurement. The volume of flow used in computing sewer service charges and industrial waste
surcharges shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the city. In the event that a person discharging waste into the city's sewer system produces
evidence to the approving authority demonstrating that a substantial portion of the total amount of water used for
all purposes does not reach the sewer system, an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in
computing charges may be established by the approving authority.
(c) Meters. Any person discharging industrial waste into a public sanitary sewer who procures any part or all
of his water supply from sources other than the city water department, all or part of which is discharged into a
public sanitary sewer, shall install and maintain at his expense water meters of the type approved by the
approving authority for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer
service charges and industrial waste surcharges. Such meters shall be read monthly and tested for accuracy when
deemed necessary by the approving authority. Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the approving
authority that a substantial portion of the water as measured by the aforesaid meter, or meters, does not enter the
sewer system of the city, then the approving authority may require or permit the installation of additional meters
at the owner's expense in such manner as to measure the quantity of water actually entering the said sewer
system from the lot, parcel of land, building or premises of such owner or occupant, and the quantity of water
used to determine the sewer service charge and industrial waste surcharge may be the quantity of water actually
entering the sewer system as so determined, if the approving authority so elects.
(d) Other methods of measuring quantity and quality. If the approving authority finds that it is not practicable
to measure the quantity or quality of waste by the aforesaid meters or monitoring devices, he shall determine the
quantity or quality of the waste in any manner or method he may find practicable in order to arrive at the flow
rate of waste entering the sewer system of the city and/or the quality of the waste to be used to determine the
industrial waste surcharge.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-90)
Sec. 13.04.008 Determining character and concentration of wastes
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/248
Any waste discharged or deposited into a public sanitary sewer shall be subject to periodic inspection and
sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority. Samples shall be collected in such
manner as to be representative of the character and concentration of the waste under operational conditions. The
laboratory methods used in the examination of said wastes shall be those set forth in Standard Methods, or by
other widely accepted methods agreeable to the approving authority. The determination of the character and
concentration of industrial waste shall be made by the approving authority. Should an owner or occupant
discharging industrial waste to public sanitary sewers desire a determination of the quality of such industrial
waste be made by the approving authority, special determination may be made by the approving authority at the
expense of the owner or occupant discharging the waste. (1978 Code, sec. 13-91)
Secs. 13.04.009–13.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Prohibited Discharges
Sec. 13.04.041 Certain wastes without approval
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, or drainage from downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds, lawn sprays, swimming pools, or
any other surface or subsurface drainage into any public sanitary sewer, except as provided for by the approving
authority. (1978 Code, sec. 13-82)
Sec. 13.04.042 Injurious wastes generally
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a public sanitary sewer any waste which, in the opinion
of the approving authority, will damage the sewer system or will adversely affect the operation or performance
of the sewer system. (1978 Code, sec. 13-83)
Sec. 13.04.043 Injurious wastes specifically
Specifically, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sanitary sewer any of the
following described wastes:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred forty (140) degrees
Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees centigrade), and/or waste which causes the temperature of the total
treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour or a
combined total increase to a plant influent temperature of one hundred five (105) degrees Fahrenheit;
(2) Any waters or wastes which contain wax, grease or oil, plastic, or other substances that will
solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one
hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit;
(3) Any wastes which by themselves or by interaction with other substances may cause fire or
explosion hazards, or in any other way be injurious to persons who will have access to the sewer
system;
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers,
or other interference with the proper operation of the sewer system, such as ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, or bulk
solids;
(5) Any garbage not within the definition of “properly shredded garbage” as defined herein;
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substance which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
is capable of causing objectionable odors; or hazard to life; or forms solids in concentration
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/248
exceeding limits established in section 13.04.044; or creates any other condition deleterious to
structures or operation of the sewer system; or requires unusual provisions, attention, or expense to
handle such materials.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-84)
Sec. 13.04.044 Excess quantities of certain substances
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sanitary sewer any waste containing the
following substances, except within the quantities, concentrations, or limits stipulated below:
(1) Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis one hundred (100) milligrams per liter
(eight hundred thirty-three (833) pounds per million gallons) of either or both or combination of free
or emulsified oil and grease;
(2) Acids or bases which have a corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to
structures, operation, performance or personnel of the sewer system, or which have a pH lower than
five and five-tenths (5.5) or higher than nine and five-tenths (9.5);
(3) Heavy metals in solution or suspension in concentrations exceeding the following:
(A) Chromium as Cr, 5.0 milligrams per liter (mg/l);
(B) Arsenic as As, 0.05 mg/l;
(C) Barium as Ba, 5.0 mg/l;
(D) Boron as B, 1.0 mg/l;
(E) Cadmium as Cd, 0.02 mg/l;
(F) Copper as Cu, 1.0 mg/l;
(G) Lead as Pb, 0.1 mg/l;
(H) Manganese as Mn, 1.0 mg/l;
(I) Mercury as Hg, 0.005 mg/l;
(J) Nickel as Ni, 1.0 mg/l;
(K) Selenium as Se, 0.02 mg/l;
(L) Silver as Ag, 0.1 mg/l;
(M) Zinc as Zn, 5.0 mg/l;
(4) Cyanide or cyanogen compounds in excess of one (1.0) milligram per liter as CN;
(5) Any water or waste that contains more than ten (10) milligrams per liter of the following gases:
hydrogen sulfide, sulphur dioxide or nitrous oxide;
(6) Phenols or phenolic compounds in excess of five thousandths (0.005) milligram per liter as
phenol;
(7) Any radioactivity as radium 226 and strontium 90 greater than three (3) uuc per liter and ten
(10) uuc per liter, respectively. In the known absence of strontium 90 and alpha emitters, the known
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/248
concentration shall not be greater than one thousand (1,000) uuc per liter;
(8) Materials which exert or cause:
(A) Unusual concentrations or compositions of solids;
(B) Excessive discoloration or odor;
(C) Unusual flow and concentration;
shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the city water and sewer system if such
wastes can cause damage to collection facilities, impair the processes, incur excessive treatment
cost or render the water unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-85)
Sec. 13.04.045 Determination of values
The quantities, concentrations and ranges in sections 13.04.041 through 13.04.044 shall refer to maximum
values observed or to values of samples composited over a length of time determined by the approving authority,
but not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. (1978 Code, sec. 13-86)
Secs. 13.04.046–13.04.080 Reserved
Division 3. Discharge Permit
Sec. 13.04.081 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged industrial waste into any public
sanitary sewer of the city without having first obtained an industrial waste discharge permit from the city. (1978
Code, sec. 13-92)
Sec. 13.04.082 Application
(a) Any person desiring to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into any public sanitary sewer
facilities of the city shall make application to the approving authority for a permit. Application forms will be
furnished by the approving authority on request. The approving authority shall approve such applications and
grant an industrial waste permit only when the evidence submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the waste
or wastewater to be discharged will comply with all of the regulations of this article.
(b) No discharge will be allowed for any industrial waste or wastewater until the required pretreatment
facilities for such waste or wastewater are completed and operating. Within sixty (60) days after initiation of
discharge of the waste, these pretreatment facilities must be operating in such a manner that the industrial waste
being discharged through them complies with the conditions set forth in division 2 of this article and in a manner
that flow measurement can be made as described in sections 13.04.004 through 13.04.008 and 13.04.081.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-93)
Sec. 13.04.083 Application form
(a) The following form represents the application required by section 13.04.082, and this form, when properly
filled out and when signed by the approving authority, represents an industrial waste discharge permit.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to file a permit amendment application with the approving
authority thirty (30) days prior to the change of any item of information on the permit. This amendment
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/248
application will be on the same form as the original application and must be signed by the approving authority
before the change will be allowed. This will represent an amended permit.
“INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE APPLICATION
To the City of Slaton, Texas
The undersigned being the (Permittee) of the property located at does hereby request a permit
to (Install, Use) an industrial waste discharge connection serving the (Name of Proprietor or
Company) which firm is engaged in at said location.
1. A plat of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains (Exhibit A).
2. A complete schedule of all process waters and raw industrial waste produced or expected to be
produced before pretreatment (if any) at said property, including a description of the character of each
waste, the daily volume and maximum rate of discharge and representative analysis of the raw waste
(Exhibit B).
3. Plans and specifications covering all pretreatment facilities for waste treatment proposed to be
performed on the waste under this permit with a full description (laboratory analysis) of the character
of the waste to be discharged to the public sewer, daily volume and maximum rate of discharge to the
public sanitary sewer (Exhibit C).
4. Plans and specifications of the grease, oil and sand interceptors, control manhole, and flow
measurement structure (Exhibit D).
5. To operate and maintain any waste pretreatment facilities which may be required as a condition
of the acceptance into the public sanitary sewer of the industrial wastes involved, in an efficient
manner at all times, and at no expense to the city.
6. To cooperate with the Approving Authority and his representatives in their inspecting, sampling,
and study of the industrial wastes and any facilities providing pretreatment.
7. To notify the Approving Authority immediately in the event of any accident, negligence or other
occurrence that occasions discharge to the sewer system any wastes or process waters not covered by
this permit.
8. To accept and abide by all provisions of this article, and of all pertinent ordinances or
regulations that may be adopted in the future.
9. To accept and pay when billed the sewer service charge and industrial wastes surcharge which is
over and above the published water and sewer rates as set forth in the Industrial Waste Ordinance
(Article 13.04 of Chapter 13, Code of Ordinances).
“Date
Signed
(Permittee)
(Address)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/248
$
Attested:
Connection Fee Paid
Date
“Application Approved and Permit Granted:
Date
Signed
(Approving Authority)”
(1978 Code, sec. 13-94)
Secs. 13.04.084–13.04.110 Reserved
Division 4. Industrial Waste Surcharge
Sec. 13.04.111 Formula
(a) Persons discharging industrial waste under the conditions of an industrial waste discharge permit will be
subject to an industrial waste surcharge over and above the regular sewer service charge. The basis for this
surcharge is a capital and operating cost to the city in excess of the cost for treating domestic waste or domestic
type commercial waste of the same volume. Computations of such surcharge shall be based on the following
formula:
S = V x 8.34 x [0.011 (BOD - 300) + 0.007 (SS - 300) ]
106
106
S = Surcharge in dollars
V = Waste flow in gallons during the billing period, as determined in
section 13.04.007
8.34 = Pounds per gallon of waste
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/248
0.011 = Unit charge per pound of BOD in dollars
BOD = 5-day, 20° C biochemical oxygen demand concentration of waste in
milligrams per liter
300 = Normal BOD concentration in milligrams per liter
0.007 = Unit charge per pound of suspended solids in dollars
SS = Suspended solids concentration of the waste in milligrams per liter
300 = Normal suspended solids concentration in milligrams per liter
(b) Industrial waste surcharges payable under this section shall be as follows:
Commencing *, 15 percent of charges computed by formula.
Commencing **, 35 percent of charges computed by formula.
Commencing ***, 100 percent of charges computed by formula.
* 60 days from date of the initial monthly service charge billing per (a) above.
** 90 days from date of the initial monthly service charge billing per (a) above.
*** 120 days from date of the initial monthly service charge billing per (a) above.
If the waste concentration of BOD or SS is less than the normal concentration for that category, then there shall
be no surcharge for that category, nor shall there be credit given to the total surcharge.
(c) Determination of BOD and SS for an industrial waste shall be as described in section 13.04.008. The
above surcharge shall include the cost of sampling and analysis activities, scheduled by the approving authority,
and no additional charges shall be made to persons discharging industrial wastes for sampling and analysis
activities, unless the activities are requested by such persons and the activities are not scheduled by the
approving authority. Flow-weighted averages of BOD and SS as derived from sampling results shall be used in
the surcharge formula.
(d) Industrial waste surcharge provided for in this section shall be included as a separate item on the regular
bill for water and sewer charges and shall be paid monthly in accordance with the existing practices. Surcharges
shall be paid at the same time that the water, sewer and sanitation charges of the person become due and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/248
payment for water and sanitation services shall not be accepted without payment also of the industrial waste
surcharge.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-95)
Sec. 13.04.112 Review of rates
The governing body shall at annual intervals, or whenever necessary, review the surcharge rates provided herein.
(1978 Code, sec. 13-96)
ARTICLE 13.05 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.05.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Dry kitchen refuse. All solids remaining after liquids and slop have been drained off of kitchen garbage.
Kitchen garbage. All dry refuse, meat, vegetable and fruit refuse, small dead animals and dead fowl.
Premises. Any business house, business establishment, grocery store, dry goods store, mercantile store,
department store, boardinghouse, hotel, tourist camp, apartment house, hospital, roominghouse, school, theater,
barbershop, beauty shop, filling station, garage, cafe, restaurant, lumberyard, electric shop, plumbing shop, tailor
shop, private residence, vacant lot, and all other places of business or places in said city where garbage, trash or
rubbish accumulates.
Rubbish. All tin cans, bottles, glass, scraps of iron, tin, wire or other metals, and any other articles to which the
term “rubbish” is usually applied.
Trash. Paper of all kinds, rags, old clothing, paper containers, pieces of wood, boxes, barrels, crates, feathers,
and any other article to which the term “trash” is usually applied.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-50)
Sec. 13.05.002 Penalty
Any person failing or refusing to comply with the terms of this article shall be deemed to be in violation of
same, and any person violating this article or any part thereof shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, on conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day of such violation
shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code, sec. 22-68; Ordinance 503, sec. 1, adopted 2/9/88)
Sec. 13.05.003 Article provisions deemed cumulative
This article shall be cumulative of all other sanitary ordinances and regulations of the city, except when in
conflict with the terms of such ordinances and regulations, in which case the terms of this article shall prevail.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-69)
Sec. 13.05.004 Accumulation, collection generally
The emptying or disposing of any garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish, or the accumulation of such matters, in any
place within the city except in accordance with the provisions of this article is hereby prohibited, and no one
except the duly authorized agents and employees of the city shall collect garbage and refuse or empty containers
containing garbage or refuse substances or convey or transport garbage or refuse substances over the streets,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/248
alleys and public thoroughfares of said city, except as otherwise expressly provided in this article. (1978 Code,
sec. 22-51)
Sec. 13.05.005 Duty of owners, occupants of real property
Every person owning, leasing, managing, operating, using or occupying any building, apartment, house,
structure, grounds or premises within the city shall keep such building, apartment, house, structure, grounds, or
premises clean, free and clear of all garbage, kitchen garbage, dry kitchen refuse, trash, rubbish; manure from
lots, stables and poultry yards; all wastes, oils and greases of garages and filling stations; and all other articles
and accumulations that may cause such premises to become unsanitary or unsightly. (1978 Code, sec. 22-52)
Sec. 13.05.006 Containers required; use of side-loading containers
(a) The city shall provide metal containers of sufficient size and number in the residential and commercial
districts for the deposit of garbage, refuse, rubbish or trash. These containers shall be fitted with a tight-fitting lid
or cover, which cover shall remain closed on the container at all times, except when garbage, refuse, rubbish or
trash is being deposited or collected.
(b) All garbage, refuse, rubbish or trash, including cardboard boxes, shall be deposited in the containers by the
person having control or custody of such. A sufficient number of containers will be supplied at those businesses
where a large number of cardboard boxes are disposed of. All cardboard boxes shall be “broken” down or
flattened out before being deposited in a container.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place into containers any roofing or building materials,
dirt, rocks or heavy items, heavy metals, engine blocks or other auto parts, dead animals, burning or smoldering
materials, tree limbs or tree trunks.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or object whatsoever in a manner such that it
interferes with the movement of the garbage truck or emptying of a detachable container. Upon notification, the
police department shall remove or cause to be removed such vehicle or object at the owner's expense. Proof of
ownership shall be prima facie evidence that such owner parked such vehicle so as to violate this section.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-53)
Sec. 13.05.007 Collection by city
The city will make or cause to be made regular collections from the containers for the removal of trash and
rubbish from all premises in the business district of the city, each day except Saturday, Sunday and holidays, as
is necessary to maintain sanitary conditions. In residential districts, garbage containers shall be emptied by the
city each week as is necessary to maintain sanitary conditions. The times of such collection shall be announced
by the proper officials of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 22-54)
Sec. 13.05.008 Materials placed in street or alley
It is unlawful to place any waste material including but not limited to brush, tree trimmings, grass clippings,
rubbish, garbage, refuse, trash, construction material or any household or industrial waste in the alley or street
unless is properly placed in a garbage container approved by the city that is designed for that purpose.
Residential containers shall be used only for disposal of residential waste. (Ordinance 609, sec. 1 (22-55),
adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 13.05.009 Special services for disposal of trees, automobiles, tires, industrial waste, etc.
Every owner, operator or occupant of any premises, store, factory or business shall dispose of all trees, over four
(4) feet in length, tree trunks, automobile bodies, abandoned automobiles, tires, industrial waste, etc.
Arrangements of this special service may be made with the city garbage department if personnel and equipment
are available for such service. Charges for such special service shall be on a cost basis. (1978 Code, sec. 22-56)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/248
Sec. 13.05.010 Recycling and reuse
The city may provide recycling facilities at designated areas for materials that can be recycled or reused. The
city administrator may set guidelines and policies to facilitate orderly recycling. In the event the city or its agent
are unable to provide recycling facilities, materials not allowed in garbage containers may be disposed of only at
a sanitary landfill location by the citizen disposing of such materials. It shall be a violation of this section to
disobey recycling directives as posted at said facilities. (Ordinance 609, sec. 2 (22-57), adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 13.05.011 Removal of scrap lumber, trash, and vegetation; construction and demolition projects
(a) The general contractor on each construction or demolition project shall remove all trash, scrap lumber,
scrap masonry and concrete and other items of refuse from the construction site. All material shall be promptly
transported to and disposed of at a sanitary landfill. If there is no general contractor, the owner of the premises
shall fulfill the duty.
(b) Any person contracting to trim or remove shrubs, bushes, trees or other vegetation, whether for a bid price
or hourly wage, shall remove such vegetation from the premises and transport such to a sanitary landfill, or an
alternate disposal site provided by the city, for disposal. Roofing materials shall be disposed of at a sanitary
landfill and shall not be placed in containers supplied by the city or placed in any area within the city limits.
(Ordinance 609, sec. 3 (22-58), adopted 6/11/02)
Sec. 13.05.012 Burning
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to burn or permit the burning of kitchen garbage, dry kitchen
refuse, trash and rubbish on any premises in any manner whatsoever. (1978 Code, sec. 22-61)
Sec. 13.05.013 Disposal in streets, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or dispose of any kitchen garbage, dry kitchen refuse, trash or
rubbish in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk within the city. Every owner or operator of any premises shall
keep the alleys, streets and sidewalks abutting on such premises free and clear of all such garbage, trash and
rubbish. (1978 Code, sec. 22-62)
Sec. 13.05.014 Meddling, tampering with garbage or containers
It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle or tamper with any garbage container or receptacle, or any trash or
rubbish receptacle, or with any garbage, trash or rubbish, or to in any manner pilfer such receptacles or such
garbage, trash or rubbish, or to scatter the contents thereof in any street, alley, sidewalk or premises in the city.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-63)
Sec. 13.05.015 Littering
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or
premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles or any
other form of litter or waste matter. (1978 Code, sec. 22-64)
Sec. 13.05.016 Duty of business owners, occupants
(a) Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall
exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper
napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials thrown or left on said premises by his
customers and to take reasonable measures to prevent same from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises.
(b) Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises by the owner or
operator of such business, accessible to the customers of such business where the above-referred to articles of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/248
waste may be disposed of readily. Such receptacles shall be emptied regularly by the owner or occupant of such
store or other business into the container provided by the city for that purpose.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-65)
Sec. 13.05.017 Duty of customer
It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of
wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials except
in receptacles provided for such purposes. (1978 Code, sec. 22-66)
Secs. 13.05.018–13.05.050 Reserved
Division 2. Billing, Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.05.051 Charges established
In order to defray the cost and expense of collecting garbage, trash and rubbish in the city, there is hereby levied
and assessed and there shall be charged and collected from each and every person owning, leasing, managing,
occupying or operating any premises within the business and residential districts, for furnishing such services
and for making such collections and removals of garbage, trash and rubbish, such monthly service charges as
may be prescribed by resolution by the city commission from time to time. The monthly service charge shall be
equal to, or exceed, the cost of furnishing such services, including the repayment of bonds, loans, charges; to
provide for interest and sinking funds; to provide for the purchase of equipment and other required expenditures
for the operation of the collection and disposal equipment of the city. (1978 Code, sec. 22-58)
Sec. 13.05.052 Payment of charges
The payment of all charges assessed for the collection of garbage, rubbish and refuse shall be paid at the same
time as the payment of any and all other utility charges owed to the city by the consumer. Failure to pay such
charges shall authorize the city to discontinue the service of such utility services. (1978 Code, sec. 22-60)
Sec. 13.05.053 Avoiding payment; accounts conform to water accounts
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee, using or occupying a building, house or structure
as a separate unit, to utilize the garbage containers or receptacles of another owner, occupant, tenant or lessee for
the disposal of his own refuse, garbage, trash, rubbish or tree limbs, and in this manner try to avoid payment of
the fees levied by this article. Where an apartment house or other building is served water through one meter, the
person in whose name the water meter stands, or in any case of several users being served water through one
meter, the person in whose name the water account stands, shall be responsible for the payment of the garbage
removal fee; and regardless of any other provision herein, there shall be no more than one garbage collection
charge per water meter collected each month. (1978 Code, sec. 22-67)
ARTICLE 13.06 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND WATER CONSERVATION PLANS
Sec. 13.06.001 Drought contingency plan
The city drought contingency plan attached to Ordinance 748 as exhibit A and made part hereof for all purposes
is, and the same is hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city. (Ordinance 748 adopted 7/9/12)
Sec. 13.06.002 Water conservation plan
The water conservation plan attached to Ordinance 641 as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference is
hereby adopted as the water conservation plan of the city. (Ordinance 641, sec. 1, adopted 12/9/03)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/248
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE
The city's zoning ordinance, Ordinance 173, adopted March 1, 1977, is included at the end of this chapter as
exhibit A. Except for nonsubstantive stylistic modifications, the ordinance is printed as it appeared in appendix
A of the 1978 Code of Ordinances. Section numbers and subsection designations, capitalization, punctuation,
and grammar have been retained as enacted. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation.
Material enclosed in brackets has been editorially supplied for clarification. The history note appearing at the
end of a section denotes the source of the amendment to the original ordinance, as amended through Ordinance
362. Subsequent amendments have been incorporated into the ordinance with the source of the amendment
appearing at the end of the amended provisions. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 14.03 HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT
The historic preservation district zoning ordinance, Ordinance 699, adopted by the city on July 15, 2008, is
included at the end of this chapter as exhibit B. Due to the nature of this ordinance and the technicalities
involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only nonsubstantive
formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and subsections
have been retained as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a
history note following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material is unchanged
from the original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other material added
for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets.
EXHIBIT A
ZONING
Sec. 1. Definitions
The following shall apply in the interpretations and enforcement of this ordinance, to-wit:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the
plural number, the words in the plural number include the singular number, the word “building”
includes the word “structure,” the word “lot” includes the word “plot,” the word “shall” is mandatory
and not discretionary.
(2) Accessory building: A subordinate use or building customarily incident to and located on the
lot occupied by the main use or building.
(3) Alley: A way which extends only secondary means of access to abutting property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/248
(4) Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling arranged, designed or occupied as
the residence of a single family, individual or group of individuals.
(5) Apartment house: A building or portion thereof arranged, designed or occupied by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other.
(6) Beer parlor: A place where beer and light wines or either of them are sold for consumption on
the premises, and the majority of the gross business done is from the sale of beer and light wines or
either of them.
(7) Boardinghouse: A building other than a hotel where lodging and meals for five (5) or more
persons are served for compensation.
(8) Courts, tourist: A building or group of buildings designed, arranged or used for temporary
occupancy, having accommodations for housing or parking automobiles in close proximity to the
quarters occupied by the owners of such automobiles and providing for three (3) or more such
quarters.
(9) Courts, trailer: An area designed and used for the temporary occupancy by automobile trailer
or tent quarters and providing for one (1) space per travel unit.
(10) Customary home occupations: Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupants of a
dwelling not involving the conduct of a retail business and not including any occupation conducted in
any building on the premises excepting the building which is used by the occupant as his or her
private dwelling. Home occupation shall include, in general, personal services such as furnished by
an architect, lawyer, physician, dentist, musician, artist, and seamstress, when performed by the
person occupying the building as his or her private dwelling and not including a partnership or the
employment of more than one such assistant in the performance of such services.
(11) Depth of rear yard: The main horizontal distance between the rear line of a building other than
an accessory building and the centerline of the alley where an alley exists, otherwise the rear lot line.
(12) Depth of lot: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
(13) District: A section of the city of which the regulations governing the area, height and use of
buildings are uniform.
(14) Dwelling, multiple: A building used or designed as a residence for three (3) or more families
or households living independently of each other and excluding mobile homes, automobile trailer
homes, vacation travel trailers or other portable or movable structure built on a chassis and without a
permanent foundation.
(15) Dwelling, group houses: Detached or semidetached dwellings built on one lot, usually in
opposite rows separated by a walkway or court and excluding mobile homes, automobile trailer
homes, vacation travel trailers or other portable or movable structure built on a chassis and without a
permanent foundation.
(16) Dwelling, one-family: A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by only
one family. No mobile home, automobile trailer home, vacation travel trailer, camping trailer or other
movable or portable structure built on a chassis without a permanent foundation shall be considered a
one-family dwelling for the purpose of construing this ordinance.
(17) Dwelling, two-family: A detached building for separate accommodations for and occupied as,
or to be occupied as, a dwelling for only two (2) families.
(18) Family: One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/248
(19) Front yard: An open unoccupied space extending across the front of a lot between the
building and the fronting street.
(20) Gross floor area: The gross floor area of an apartment house shall be measured by taking
outside dimensions of the apartment building at each floor excluding however, the floor area of
basements or attics when not occupied as living quarters.
(21) Garage apartment: An apartment built on the rear or side of a lot, similar to servants' quarters,
or secondary to the principal dwelling.
(22) Garage, private: An enclosure designed for the housing of motor vehicles with capacity for
not more than five (5) motor driven vehicles for private use of the occupants of the lot.
[(22a)] Garage, public: An enclosure designed or used for equipping, repairing, hiring, servicing,
selling or storing of motor driven vehicles.
(23) Garage, storage: Any premises, except those defined as a private garage, used exclusively for
the storage of automobiles.
(24) Height: The height of a building or portion of a building shall be measured from the average
established grade at the street lot line or from the average natural ground level, if higher, to the
highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for hip or gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the
following structures shall be excluded: Chimneys, cooling towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas,
domes, or spires, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, and parapet walls not
exceeding four (4) feet in height.
(25) Hotel: A building or group of buildings occupied as a place for individuals who are lodged
with or without meals, in which as a rule the rooms are occupied for hire, in which provisions are not
made for cooking in an individual apartment, and open to the public by means of a central lobby.
(26) Institution: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for
public use.
(27) Lodging house: A building other than a hotel where lodging for five (5) or more persons is
provided for compensation over definite periods of time.
(28) Lot: Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, and including
such open spaces as are required under this ordinance, having its principal frontage upon a public
street or officially approved place.
(a) Interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
(b) Through: A lot having a frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
(c) Fractional: A portion of a lot that has been cut off of a corner lot, having the sideline of
the remainder of the corner lot as a sideline.
(d) Front line: The line of an interior lot which is adjacent to the street. On corner lots it is
the prolongation of the front line of adjacent interior lots as originally platted.
(29) Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
(30) Lot, corner: A lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets and having a width not
greater than one hundred (100) feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/248
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
(30-A) Manufactured home: A manufactured home is a structure as defined by Texas Revised Civil
Statutes Article 5221f Section (9), as a HUD-Code Manufactured Home, as presently defined or as
may hereafter be amended. (Ordinance 625, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/02)
(31) Nonconforming uses: A building or premises lawfully occupied by a use that does not
conform to the regulations at the time of the passage of this ordinance of the use in the district in
which it is situated.
(32) Open space: Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on a lot
that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or
porches.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
[(32a)] Parking space. An approved all weather surface, of concrete, asphalt, brick, rock, or
similar compacted material that is maintained free of vegetation, loose soil, mud, or standing water,
which is located on private property for the purpose of storing motor vehicles. (Ordinance 577, sec.
1, adopted 11/9/99)
(33) Persons: The word “person” when used in this ordinance shall, for the purpose of this
ordinance, mean every person, firm, copartnership, association, partnership, corporation or society;
and the term “person” shall include both singular and plural, and the masculine shall embrace the
female gender.
(34) Place: An open, unoccupied space reserved as the principal means of access to abutting
property.
(35) Rear yard: A space unoccupied except by buildings of accessory use as herein permitted
extending for the full width and measured as to depth between the rear of the main building and the
rear lot line.
(36) Side yard: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building situated between the
building and the sideline of a lot, and extending through from the street or from the front yard or to
the rear line of the lot. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a sideline.
(37) Stables, private: An enclosure with a capacity for not more than four (4) horses, mules, or
other domestic animals.
(38) Stables, public: An enclosure with a capacity for more than four (4) horses, mules or other
domestic animals.
(39) Street: Any public throughfare dedicated to the public and not designated as an alley and
providing the principal means of access to abutting property.
(40) Story: That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next
above.
(41) Story, half: A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two
(2) exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such story. Any such space used
for residential purposes shall be deemed to be a full story.
(42) Structural alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, or girders.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/248
(43) Width of side yard: The mean horizontal distance between a sidewall of a building and the
sideline of the lot.
(44) Reversed frontage: A portion of a corner lot fronting the street which was originally platted as
a side street.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
Sec. 2. Zoning district map
The city is hereby divided into nine classes of use districts, termed respectively as follows: “R-1” Dwelling, “R-
2” Dwelling, “R-3” Dwelling, “R-MH” Dwelling, “B-1” Local Retail, “B-2” Local Business, B-2-MH, “I-1”
Industrial, “I-2” First Manufacturing, “I-3” Second Manufacturing; with the zoning regulations for each district
as herein set forth, approved and established. The zoning map is hereby declared to be adopted and is considered
a part of this ordinance, and shall be considered as much a part of same as if the matters of information set forth
thereby were fully contained and described herein. Such map shall on its face be identified and verified in the
manner as follows: It shall bear the title of “Zoning Map of the City of Slaton, Texas.” It shall be dated July 13,
1964; it shall bear the name of the city commissioners, the city planning and zoning commission and it shall be
attested by the signature of the mayor and city secretary. The original of this map shall be kept in the office of
the city secretary in the city hall and replicas thereof may be reproduced on paper on such reduced scale as
deemed by the city secretary to be reasonable and proper for general information purposes. (Ordinance 173A;
Ordinance 625, sec. 2, adopted 11/12/02)
Sec. 3. Use districts
In said districts, as heretofore enumerated and as hereinafter set apart, segregated and identified, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged or designed to
be used for other than one or more of the uses assigned and allocated to same respectively as follows:
“R-1” Dwelling District:
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
(1) One-family Dwelling, save and except for manufactured homes. (Ordinance 625, sec. 3,
adopted 11/12/02)
(2) Churches, public or private school, park or playgrounds, and all municipal recreational
facilities (not commercial).
(3) Farm, truck garden, orchard, greenhouse or nursery; for the growing of plants, shrubs or trees,
provided no retail or wholesale business sales office, packing or storage sheds or buildings are
maintained on the premises.
(4) Golf course; but not including miniature driving range or any other form of commercial
amusements.
(5) Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when situated in the same dwelling and not
involving the conduct of a business, including customary home occupation engaged in by the
occupants of the dwelling and including also the office of a physician, surgeon, dentist, musician or
artist, when situated in the dwelling used by such physician, surgeon, dentist, musician or artist, as
his or her private dwelling, but said incidental use shall be permitted only as a secondary use.
(6) Signs:
(a) One unlighted sign not exceeding one square foot in area and attached flat to the outside
wall of any building;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/248
(b) One sign not exceeding eighteen (18) square feet for a church or school.
(7) Accessory buildings, including one private garage or servants' quarters when located not less
than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line nor less than five (5) feet from any other street line,
provided however, that servants' quarters may be erected above private garages and that said servants'
quarters shall not be leased or rented to anyone other than the family of a bona fide servant giving
more than fifty (50) percent of his or her time to the family occupying the premises to which the
servants' quarters is an accessory building, or private garage may be constructed as a part of the main
building or attached to it by covered passage, paved patio or masonry walls. Said accessory building
shall not be used for “commercial purposes” (the term “commercial purposes” shall include part-time
business).
(8) Temporary buildings: When they are to be used only for construction purposes or field offices
for the sale of the real estate in the immediate addition. Such temporary construction buildings must
be removed immediately upon completion or abandonment of construction and the field office must
be removed immediately upon request of the building inspector.
(9) Garage sales: The sale of items normally accumulated by a household may be sold from
residential premises upon compliance with the following conditions:
(a) Any person or persons intending to hold a garage sale shall make application for permit
with the city secretary's office of the City of Slaton not less than five (5) days prior to such sale
and shall disclose the name of all persons participating as sellers in such garage sale, the
address of all such persons and the time and date of such sale. Prior to the issuance of such a
permit the city secretary shall collect from such applicant the sum of three dollars ($3.00) as a
permit fee. Such permit shall be displayed openly during all hours of such garage sale at the
location in plain view, and the failure to display such a permit shall constitute a misdemeanor
offense. Organizations exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or as
amended, shall be exempt from payment of the permit fee but shall be subject to the remaining
portions of this ordinance.
(b) Garage sales shall be permitted provided such sales shall not continue for more than
forty-eight (48) consecutive hours and no more than two (2) such sales shall be conducted at the
same address in any twelve (12) month period.
(c) All items offered for sale shall have been originally purchased by the person offering such
for sale for their own original household use and no item offered for sale at such garage sale
shall have been purchased by the seller for the purpose of offering such for resale.
(d) No item for sale shall be displayed outside of the residence, garage or carport unless such
is displayed in the back yard of such residence and not visible from a public street.
(e) Only one unlighted sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area shall be permitted
for each such sale. Said sign shall pertain to the garage sale only and shall be located on the
property where the sale is conducted and shall not be placed upon any public property or
utilities. Such sign shall be permitted for the duration of the sale only.
(f) Violations of these conditions shall be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars
($200.00). (As amended by Ordinance No. 362.)
“R-2” Dwelling District:
(1) Any use permitted in an “R-1” District.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/248
(2) Two (2) family dwellings, save and except for manufactured homes. (Ordinance 625, sec. 3,
adopted 11/12/02)
(3) Churches.
(4) Kindergartens, play schools or day nurseries; when not more than ten (10) pupils.
(5) Parking automobile area as accessory use only.
(6) Telephone exchange (no business office).
(7) Fire station.
(8) Water supply reservoirs, towers and artesian wells, gas and electric public utility regulator
stations, but the size, height, and location of said stations to be fixed by the city commission.
(9) Accessory building: Said accessory building shall not be used for “commercial purposes” (the
term “commercial purposes” shall include part-time business).
(10) A one family garage apartment will be permitted provided, however, that same shall conform
to the spacing requirements applicable to accessory buildings. A one family garage apartment shall
not be permitted in conjunction with another dwelling on the same lot for more than one family.
“R-3” Dwelling Districts:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing districts.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
(2) Multiple dwellings, apartments, houses and group houses, save and except for manufactured
homes. (Ordinance 625, sec. 3, adopted 11/12/02)
(3) Hospitals and clinics, excepting tubercular and veterinary hospitals and clinics, and those for
alcoholic, narcotic and insane and feebleminded patients.
(4) Hotels in which business may be conducted for the sole convenience of the occupants of the
building; provided, however, there shall be no entrance to such place of business except from the
inside of the buildings.
(5) Institutions of a philanthropic nature other than penal or correctional institutions.
(6) Libraries and museums.
(7) Boarding and lodging houses.
(8) Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, lodges, excepting those whose chief activities are services
customarily carried on as a business.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
“R-MH” Dwelling District
Manufactured homes are to be permitted only in a district designated on the Zoning Map as “R-MH”
or in an “I” Industrial District. Such districts may be further categorized, designated and restricted as
“R-1-MH” for single families, “R-2-MH” for two family units, “R-3-MH” for multifamily units.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/248
Such homes shall comply with height regulations, yard requirements, lot area requirements, and
vehicle parking space requirements for “R-1”, “R-2” and “R-3” Dwellings.
“B-1” Local Retail District:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing dwelling, districts, except for Manufactured Homes
as a dwelling.
(Ordinance 625, sec. 3, adopted 11/12/02)
(2) Banks, office, studio.
(3) Restaurant or cafe.
(4) Retail pressing, dyeing and cleaning shops.
(5) Retail store, barbershop, beauty parlor, and other shops for custom work or the making of
articles to be sold at retail on the premises; provided that no “secondhand goods” store or yard will be
permitted in the “B-1” District.
(6) Automobile parking lots.
(7) Professional. offices for architect, engineer, attorney and real estate.
“B-2” Local Business District:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing districts.
(2) Auto sales (where the major business is the display and sales of new automobiles by an
authorized dealer and repair work and storage facilities shall be purely incidental, provided further
that the area allowed for the repairs and storage of cars shall not be nearer than twenty (20) feet from
the front line of the building).
(3) Bakery, laundry, cigar manufacturing, candy manufacturing (when employing less than six (6)
persons on the premises).
(4) Hotels, mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks as defined by applicable
ordinances. (Ordinance 348)
(5) Mortuary, greenhouse, or nursery office.
(6) Public storage garage (only minor repairs).
(7) Retail ice delivery station, gasoline filling station.
(8) Theater, moving picture show.
(9) Tourist court, lodges, or motel.
(10) Wholesale office and sample room.
(11) Job printing.
(12) Bakeries.
(13) Bottling works.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/248
(14) Candy manufacturing.
(15) Newspaper printing, art printing.
(16) Electroplating, electric works, including armature winding, galvanizing.
(17) Laundry, dyeing and cleaning works.
(18) Secondhand goods store (where housed entirely in buildings).
(19) Pecan shelling.
(20) Public garage.
(21) Secondhand automobile yards (not including wrecking or repairing).
(22) Storage warehouse.
(23) Wholesale houses.
(24) Auto laundry.
(25) Auto parking.
(26) Commercial skating rink.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
(27) Any use not included in any other district (except for Manufactured Homes as a dwelling)
provided such use is not noxious of offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas
fumes, noise or vibration; provided, further, that no kind of manufacture or treatment no [not] listed
above shall be permitted in a “B-2” District other than the manufacture or treatment of products
clearly incidental to the conduct of a business conducted on the premises.
“B-2-MH” Local Business District and Manufactured Homes
Any use allowed under “B-2” designation and Manufactured Homes.
(Ordinance 625, sec. 3, adopted 11/12/02)
“I” Industrial Districts: Any building or premises may be used for any other purpose not in conflict with laws or
ordinances, in any industrial district, provided, no property shall be used or permit issued for any of the
following uses without the approval of the city commission upon the recommendation of the planning and
zoning commission:
(1) Cement or lime manufacture.
(2) Distillation of bones.
(3) Explosives manufacture or storage.
(4) Fat rendering.
(5) Garbage, offal or dead animal incineration, reduction or dumping.
(6) Junkyards or automobile wrecking yards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/248
(7) Petroleum refinery.
(8) Slaughter and dressing of animals including fowl.
(9) Stockyards.
(10) Gasoline storage in aboveground tanks.
(11) Cotton compress, gin or seed processing.
(12) Feed mill or grain elevator.
(13) Gravel processing or sales.
(14) Fertilizer manufacture.
(15) Farming, curing or storage of rawhide.
Sec. 4. Conditional or special permit uses
(a) The following uses, or structural alterations thereto, which are classified as conditional uses, may be
permitted by the planning and zoning commission in the following specified districts in accordance with the
requirements and procedure specified herein:
(1) Airports or aircraft landing field, in any district.
(2) Baseball park, athletic fields, temporary circuses, carnivals, fairgrounds and rodeos in any
district.
(3) Golf driving ranges, archery ranges, miniature golf courses in any district except an “R-1”
District.
(4) Community centers, owned and operated by nonprofit organizations, commercial swimming
pools in any districts.
(5) Railway rights-of-way in any district.
(6) Private schools, kindergartens and day nurseries teaching the same subjects as public schools in
any district, provided the building or buildings are set back from all required yard lines, in the district
in which they are to be located, two (2) feet for each foot of building height and provided off-street
parking facilities are provided. For schools and kindergartens a minimum building area of thirty (30)
square feet per pupil and a minimum site area of two hundred (200) square feet per pupil shall be
provided.
(7) Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature in any district.
(8) Private housing projects and shopping centers consisting of not less than three (3) acres and
when accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and showing the arrangement of the project in detail
together with essential requirements such as parking facilities, locations of buildings and the uses to
be permitted and means of egress and ingress in any district.
(9) Any use or public building to be erected or used by the city, county, state, or federal
government in any district.
(10) Dog kennels and veterinary hospitals in an “R-3” District or on a farm of five (5) acres or
more, in any district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/248
(11) Hospitals, dental and medical offices, clinics, children's homes, convalescent homes, old
people's homes, maternity homes, in an “R-3” District or in any district where a site of five (5) acres
or more is provided. Hospitals, dental and medical offices, clinics, convalescent homes, old people's
homes, and maternity homes existing in the “R-3” District on the effective date of this ordinance
shall be deemed conforming.
(12) Hotels and motels in the “R-2” District.
(13) Private clubs and community buildings in an “R-3” District or on a site of three (3) acres or
more in any district.
(14) Drive-in theaters in the “B-2” District or on sites of ten (10) acres or more in any district.
(15) Greenhouses and nurseries in any district.
(16) Buildings or the use of premises for public utility purposes or public service corporations,
only when zoning board of adjustment, upon consultation with the planning and zoning commission,
deems such uses or buildings, reasonably necessary for public convenience, safety, health or welfare.
(17) Rock quarries, sand, gravel and earth excavations. At the time the permit is granted, the city
commission may impose reasonable conditions for the protection of the public health and safety, and
may provide for the restoration of such property to a usable condition after excavations have been
terminated.
(18) Cemeteries with perpetual care provisions.
(b) Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use by the planning and zoning commission an
investigation shall be made as to the manner in which the proposed location and character of the conditional use
will effect [affect] the master city plan of Slaton. The investigating committee shall report the results of its study
of said application to the zoning board, and, if the report is favorable toward the application, the zoning board
may, after public notice and hearing according to law, grant the permit including the imposition of conditions of
the use consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of this ordinance, will not substantially and permanently
injure the appropriate use of neighboring property, and will substantially serve the public convenience and
welfare.
Sec. 5. Uses prohibited by other ordinances
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as repealing any existing ordinance of the city regulating nuisances
or permitting uses which are now prohibited by ordinances.
Sec. 6. Newly annexed territory
All territory annexed to the City of Slaton, Texas, hereafter shall be classified as “R-1,” Single-Family Dwelling
District until permanently zoned by the governing body of the City of Slaton, Texas. The zoning commission
shall, as soon as practicable after annexation of any territory to the City of Slaton, institute proceeding on its
own motion to give the newly annexed territory a permanent zoning, and recommend the same to the city
commission, and the procedure to be followed shall be the same as is provided by laws for the adoption of
original zoning regulation.
Sec. 7. Height regulations
(a) The height of buildings in the “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, “B-1” districts shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet or
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, and the height of the buildings in the “B-2” District shall not exceed forty-five
(45) feet or three (3) stories.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/248
(b) One family dwellings in the thirty-five (35) foot height districts may be increased in heights by not more
than ten (10) feet when two (2) side yards of not less than fifteen (15) feet each are provided; such dwellings,
however, shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
(c) In the thirty-five (35) and forty-five (45) foot height districts, public or semipublic buildings, hotels,
apartments, hospitals, sanitariums or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet,
when the front, side and rear yards are each increased an additional foot for each foot such buildings exceed
thirty-five (35) and forty-five (45) feet respectively in height.
(d) The height of buildings in the “R-3” District shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet, or six (6) stories, but
above the height permitted at said yard line, four (4) feet may be added to the height of the buildings for each
one foot the building is set back from the required yard lines; provided, however, that the cubical content of such
building shall not exceed the cubical content of a prism having a base equal to the area of the lot and height of
one hundred (100) feet.
(e) The height of buildings in the “B-2” and “I” Districts shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet, but above
the height permitted at the yard lines, four (4) feet may be added to the height of the building for each one foot
that the building or portion thereof is set back from the required yard lines; provided, however, that the cubical
content of such building shall not exceed the cubical content of a prism having a base equal to the area of the lot
and a height of one hundred (100) feet.
(f) In the “B-2” District a tower may be constructed without reference to the above limitations, provided the
largest horizontal dimensions of any size of the tower shall not exceed sixty (60) feet and provided the horizontal
area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the lot, and provided such tower shall be removed at
least twenty-five (25) feet from all lot lines and at least fifty (50) feet from any other tower.
(g) Chimneys, water towers, penthouses, scenery lofts, sugar refineries, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires,
standpipes, false mansards, parapet walls, similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be
erected as to their height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city.
(h) On through lots one hundred fifty (150) feet or less in depth, the height of a building may be measured
from the curb level on either street. On through lots more than one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth, the height
regulations and basic height measurement for the street permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of not
more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the street.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
Sec. 8. Front yards
(a) In the “R-1” District there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from
the property line of the building, covered porch or covered terrace, or attached accessory building. A lesser
setback noted on the plat may be approved within the discretion of the City Commission. In no case will a front
yard of less than twenty-five (25) feet, as measured from the edge of pavement, be allowed. (Ordinance 593, sec.
1, adopted 6/12/01)
(b) In the “R-2”, “R-3” and “B-1” Districts there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twentyfour
(24) feet from the property line to the front line of the building, covered porch, or covered terrace or
attached accessory building.
(c) In the “B-2” District there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
property line to the front line of the building, covered porch, covered terrace, or attached accessory building.
(d) In the “I” District no front yard is required unless the building is erected or structurally altered for
dwelling purposes, in which event, a front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth is required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/248
(e) Where the frontage on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is zoned for two (2)
classes of districts, the setback on the most restricted district shall apply to the entire block.
(f) If thirty (30) percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street, between two (2) intersecting streets, is
improved with buildings, that have observed an average front yard line, with a variation in depth of not more
than six (6) feet, then the average front yard so established shall be observed; but this regulation shall not be
interpreted to require a front yard of more than forty (40) feet.
Sec. 9. Rear yards
(a) In all districts where buildings are erected or structurally altered for dwelling purposes there shall be a rear
yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such rear yards need not
exceed twenty-four (24) feet.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
b. In the B-1 and B-2 districts there shall be no rear or side yard requirements except where the property abuts
a residential property in which case there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 10% of the depth of
the lot provided that such rear yard need not exceed 15 feet. (Ordinance 531, sec. 1, adopted 11/10/92)
(c) In the “I” District, when property is not used for dwelling purposes, and when not abutting on the rear on a
dwelling district “R-1”, “R-2” and “R-3”, then a rear yard of at least ten (10) feet is required.
(d) In computing the required depth of a rear yard for any building where such yard abuts an alley, the depth
of the lot may be considered to the center of the alley, and the required depth of rear yard measured from the
center of said alley.
(e) An accessory building or garage apartment not exceeding one story in height may occupy not more than
sixty (60) percent of a minimum required rear yard.
(f) An accessory building or garage apartment exceeding one story or more in height, may occupy not more
than forty (40) percent of a minimum required rear yard.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
(g). An accessory building of one story or less, excluding one used or intended for human occupancy, may be
erected on the rear yard line (alley line) in such a manner that no point of the structure extends past such line.
An accessory building of more than one story as well as one intended for or used for human occupancy must be
erected no closer than 7-1/2 feet from the rear yard line (alley line).
(Ordinance 469, sec. 1, adopted 9/10/85)
Sec. 10. Side yards
(a) In Districts “R-I”, “R-2” and “R-3”, and in all districts where a building is erected or structurally altered
for dwelling purposes, there shall be two (2) side yards, one on each side of the building, each a minimum of
five (5) feet.
(b) In the “R-3” District and in other districts where a building is erected or structurally altered for dwelling
purposes for buildings more than three (3) stories in height, but not exceeding six (6) stories in height each of the
two (2) side yards shall be increased three (3) feet in width for each additional story above the third. For
buildings more than eight (8) stories, or one hundred (100) feet in height, there shall be an additional setback as
provided in the height regulations above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/248
(c) In the “B-I”, “B-2” and “I” Districts, if the property is not used for dwelling purposes no side yards are
required; unless a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes, there shall be a side yard of not
less than five (5) feet on the side abutting the dwelling lot. In other cases a side yard, if provided for a business
or industrial building, shall be not less than four (4) feet.
(d) For the purpose of side yard regulations, two (2) or more detached one or two family dwellings shall be
considered as one building when occupying one lot, provided, however, there shall be minimum of ten (10) feet
between the sides of the buildings on the same lot.
(e) In the case of group houses or court apartments, when buildings rear upon the side yard, the width of the
side yard shall be increased by one foot for each building or apartment abutting thereon. If any stairways open
onto or are served by such side yard the minimum width of such side yard shall be ten (10) feet.
(f) The width of a place or court shall not be less than forty (40) feet measured between buildings or from
buildings to the opposite property line, provided that open or unenclosed porches may project into the required
place or court not more than twenty (20) percent of the width of such place or court.
(g) All other requirements including front, side and rear yards shall be complied with in accordance with the
districts in which such group houses or court apartments are located.
(h) Every part of a required yard or court shall open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed except for
the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, etc., provided, however, the above projections shall not
extend into a court more than twenty-four (24) inches nor into a minimum side yard more than twenty-four (24)
inches.
(i) The side and front yard requirements for dwellings shall be waived where dwellings are erected above
stores or shops.
(j) On corner lots the side yard regulations shall be the same as for interior except in the case of side street or
reversed frontage (where the corner lot faces an intersecting street) in which case there shall be a side yard on
the street side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project
beyond the front yard line on the lots in the rear. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the
buildable width of a corner lot facing an intersecting street, and of record at the time of passage of this
ordinance, to less than twenty-eight (28) feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where the
regulation cannot be reasonably complied with.
Sec. 11. Lot area
(a) In the “R-I” District the minimum area of the lot shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
(b) In any residentially zoned area, lot sizes on proposed and platted residential lots may be reduced to 5,000
square feet if approved within the discretion of the City Commission. Otherwise, lot sizes and population
densities shall conform to minimum requirements set forth above. Side yard areas used for compliance purposes
shall not be included as a part of the required area of any other building. (Ordinance 593, sec. 1, adopted
6/12/01)
(c) In the “R-3”, “B-I”, “B-2” Districts the minimum area of the lot shall be seven thousand (7,000) square
feet for a one family dwelling or a two family dwelling; and for apartment houses, or buildings arranged or
designed for more than two (2) families, the minimum area shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet plus six
hundred (600) square feet for each family in excess of two (2).
(d) On any lot held under separate district [sic] ownership from adjoining lots at the time of the passage of this
ordinance such separately owned property being of record at the time, a single family dwelling may be erected
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/248
even though the lot be less than required by the regulations relating to area in the district in which it is located,
provided however, that in any event the combined area of the dwelling and accessory building shall not cover
more than forty (40) percent of the total area of the lot.
(e) No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed
by this ordinance, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the
area regulations herein established; side yard area used to comply with minimum requirements of this ordinance
for a building shall not be included as a part of the required areas of any other buildings.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
Sec. 12. Vehicle parking space
In all zoning districts there shall be provided in connection with appropriate allowable uses off-street vehicle
parking space in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) In all “R” Dwelling Districts, there shall be provided on each lot or lots, as applicable, not less
than one vehicle parking space, either covered or open, sufficient in size to accommodate one
automobile for each family occupying said lot or lots, subject to the following constraints.
(a) Vehicle parking spaces shall be not less than eight (8) feet in width and 16 feet in depth.
(b) Motor vehicles, while stored beyond the front or side building lines, must be stored at all
times wholly upon the area described as a parking space, except as provided in subsection (c)
and (d).
(c) Vehicles may be stored outside an approved parking space for periods not to exceed four
(4) hours while loading or unloading residential items, or for similar uses as approved by the
administrative authority.
(d) Vehicles may park on a city street, subject to any time or space limitations as provided by
other regulations.
(Ordinance 577, sec. 12, adopted 11/9/99)
(2) For each permissible use hereinafter specifically stated or implied in the “B” Districts, there
shall be provided on the property, or upon a site within three hundred (300) feet from the principal
use property (such site being subject to the approval of the planning and zoning commission) a
parking space, open or enclosed, of two hundred fifty (250) square feet for each two hundred (200)
feet of floor area utilized for commercial purposes other than storage.
The following specific requirements, however, shall apply: In all districts there shall be provided
at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered (except as provided in
subsection (2-1) below), off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Bowling alley: five (5) parking spaces for each alley.
(b) Business or professional office, studio, bank, medical or dental clinic: three (3) parking
spaces plus one additional parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area
over the five hundred (500).
(c) Church or other place of worship: one parking space for each four (4) seats in the main
auditorium.
(d) Community center, library, museum or art gallery: ten (10) parking spaces plus one
additional space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area in excess of two
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/248
thousand (2,000) square feet. If an auditorium is included as a part of the building, its floor area
shall be deducted from the total and additional parking provided on the basis of one space for
each four (4) seats that it contains.
(e) Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed seats: one parking space for each
one hundred (100) square feet of floor area used therefor.
(f) Dwellings, including single, two-family and multifamily: one parking space for each
dwelling unit.
(g) Fraternity; sorority or dormitory: one parking space for each six (6) beds.
(h) Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, machinery or
equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair or service shop: two (2) parking spaces
plus one additional parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area over
one thousand (1,000).
(i) Hospital: four (4) parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each four (4) beds.
(j) Hotel: one parking space for each two (2) sleeping rooms or suites plus one space for each
two hundred (200) square feet of commercial floor area contained herein.
(k) Manufacturing or industrial establishments, research or testing laboratory, creamery,
bottling plant, warehouse, printing or plumbing shop, or similar establishment: one parking
space for each two (2) employees on the maximum working shift plus space to accommodate
all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith, but not less than one parking space
for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
(l) Mortuary or funeral home: one parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space
in slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms.
(m) Motor-vehicle salesrooms and used car lots: one parking space for each eight hundred
(800) square feet of sales floor or lot area.
(n) Private club, lodge, country club, or golf club: one parking space for each one hundred
fifty (150) square feet of floor area or for every five (5) members, whichever is greater.
(o) Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein: one
parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
(p) Restaurant, nightclub, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment: one parking
space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
(q) Rooming or boardinghouse: one parking space for each two (2) sleeping rooms.
(r) Sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar institution: one parking
space for each six (6) beds.
(s) School, elementary: one parking space for each ten (10) seats in the auditorium or main
assembly room, or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater.
(t) School, secondary and college: one parking space for each eight (8) seats in the main
auditorium or three (3) spaces for each classroom, whichever is greater.
(u) Theater, auditorium (except school) sports arena, stadium, or gymnasium: one parking
space for each four (4) seats or bench seating spaces.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/248
(v) Tourist home, cabin, or motel: one parking space for each sleeping room or suite.
Subsection (2-1) In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above
uses the following rules shall govern:
(a) “Floor area” shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
(b) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the
nearest whole number.
(c) The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the
same as required for a use of similar nature.
(d) Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this
ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units,
seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the
number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the
enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this
ordinance is enlarged to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more in floor area or in the area used,
said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth
herein.
(e) In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
(3) Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing,
storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution
by vehicles of materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the premises loading space
paved with a hard dustproof, surface in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) In “B” Districts at least one space for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet and one
additional space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in
excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(b) In “I” Districts one loading space for each eight thousand (8,000) square feet or fraction
thereof of floor area.
(c) Each loading space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet.
(4) Groups of uses requiring vehicle parking space may join in establishing group parking areas
with capacity aggregating that required for each participating use. Vehicle parking requirements shall
not apply in a block, fifty (50) percent or more of the area of which was occupied by business or
industrial structures at the time of passage of this ordinance.
(5) Upon public school sites and facilities, or any educational institution where pupils in
attendance are transported to and from same by buses, there shall be provided for each institution
interior site driveways and bus loading and unloading facilities in addition to the required provisions
for off-street parking. General site and layout plans of all school facilities indicating such provision
shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval of general arrangement
regarding traffic circulation, location of entrances and exits, etc.
(6) In order to meet requirements for vehicle parking space where such space is not available on
the property occupied by a business or industrial use, in a “B” or “I” District, the planning and zoning
commission may, after public notice and hearing, grant a permit for the establishment of a parking
area as an auxiliary use, on a lot or lots in an “R-1”, “R-2” or “R-3” District, provided that the entire
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/248
area for the parking area is within three hundred (300) feet of the business or industrial use property
involved and when the proposed parking area adjoins or is across an alley from said business or
industrial use property in a “B” or “I” District, or, in the case of a church or place of congregation of
people and automobiles in a residential district, immediately adjacent to such church or place of
congregation and provided that:
(a) There shall be no sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind on
said parking area.
(b) Entrances and exits shall be approved as to location by the city planning and zoning
commission.
(c) Except for approved entrances and exits, a masonry wall, not more than five (5) feet in
height and not less than four (4) feet in height and not less than six (6) inches in thickness may
be required along boundaries of the parking lot as determined by the city planning and zoning
commission for the protection of adjoining residentially zoned or used property, and if erected
shall conform to the required front yard line.
(d) The lot shall be paved with a dustproof or hard surface meeting the standard
specifications of the city.
(e) No advertising signs may be erected upon such lot except at each street side of the lot to
indicate the operator or purpose of the lot and to indicate entrances and exits, direction of traffic
flow and conditions for parking. Such signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and
shall not extend more than ten (10) feet in overall height above the ground.
(f) Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged as to be reflected away from
residentially zoned or used property.
(g) The planning and zoning commission may impose reasonable landscaping requirements.
Sec. 13. Special regulations
(a) On any lot on which a front yard is required by this ordinance, no wall, fence or other structure shall be
erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth or structure of any kind shall be maintained in such location
within required front yard so as to obstruct the view.
(b) Any fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery, etc., higher than a baseline extending from a point two and one-half (2-
1/2) feet above walk grade to a point four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above walk grade at the depth of front yard
required is hereby declared to be an obstruction to view, except single trees, having single trunks which are
pruned to a height of seven (7) feet above walk grade.
(c) In the “R-I” Districts the minimum frontage of any lot shall be fifty (50) feet at the building line.
(d) In all other districts the minimum frontage of any lot used for a one family residence shall be fifty (50)
feet.
(e) Off-street automobile parking space shall be provided on every lot used for residential purposes, sufficient
to provide space to park one automobile for each family living quarters for which the premises are used. This
regulation shall also apply to servants' quarters, and alley spaces shall not be considered off-street.
(f) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as repealing any existing ordinance of the city regulating
nuisances or permitting uses which are prohibited by ordinances.
Sec. 14. Certificate of occupancy and compliance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/248
(a) No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use until a
certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector stating that the
building or proposed use of a building or premises complies with the building laws and the provisions of these
regulations.
(b) Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for building
permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alteration of such building shall
have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be
kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a
propriety or tenancy interest in the building affected.
(c) No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate
of occupancy and compliance.
Sec. 15. Nonconforming uses
(a) Any use of property existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance that does not conform to the
regulations prescribed in the preceding sections of this ordinance shall be deemed a nonconforming use; except
that any duplex or apartment existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall be thereafter deemed a
conforming use. Any lawful use existing within a building at the time of the passage of this ordinance, in any
business, industrial or manufacturing district, shall be deemed a conforming use upon the lot devoted to such use
at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
(b) The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, although such does not
conform to the provision hereof, may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued, any future
use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of the ordinance. If a building occupied by a
nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or the elements, it may not be reconstructed or rebuilt except to conform
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(c) The lawful use of the building at the time of the passage of this ordinance may be continued, although such
does not conform to the provisions hereof; such use may be extended throughout the building provided no
structural alteration[s], except those required by law or ordinance, are made therein. If no structural alterations
are made, nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification may be continued, provided however,
that in the event a nonconforming use of a building is once changed to a higher or more restricted classification,
it shall not later revert to the former lower or less restricted classification.
(d) The right of nonconforming use to continue shall be subject to such regulations as to maintenance of the
premises and conditions of operation as may be [in] the judgment of the planning and zoning commission
reasonably required for the protection of adjacent property.
(e) Nothing in this ordinance shall be taken to prevent restoration of a building destroyed to the extent of not
more than seventy-five (75) percent of its reasonable value by fire, explosion or other casualty, or act of God, or
a public enemy, nor the continued occupancy or use of such building, or part thereof, which existed at the time
of such partial destruction.
Sec. 16. Zoning map designations
(1) When definite distances in feet are not shown on the zoning map, the district boundaries on the zoning
map are intended to be along existing street, alley or property lines or extensions of or from the same. When the
location of a district boundary line is not otherwise determined, it shall be determined by the scale of the map
measured from a given line.
(2) Where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the zoning map,
the planning and zoning commission may apply the designation shown on the mapped streets in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the plan for the particular area in question.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/248
Sec. 17. Planning and zoning commission
(A) Qualifications and terms. There is hereby created and established for the city of Slaton, Texas, a planning
and zoning commission which shall be composed of six (6) members. The members shall be resident citizens,
taxpayers and qualified voters of the city, all of whom shall be appointed by the city commission, to serve for a
term of one and two years as designated by the city commission. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for the same
terms as provided for the original appointments and in the same manner.
Members of the commission may be removed by the city commission upon written charges after public hearing
and for cause assigned in writing. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation.
(B) Master plan. The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make
and recommend for adoption a master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development of the municipality
and its environs and shall have the power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance
for zoning the city in accordance with Chapter 283, Acts of Regular Session of the Legislature, 1927 (Arts.
1011a to 1011j, R.C.S.). The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or
state law.
(C) Powers. The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its
membership. The city secretary shall serve as ex officio secretary of the commission. The planning and zoning
commission shall have power to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and
undertakings of the commission and to pay for their services and such other necessary expenses, provided that
the cost of such services and expenses shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for the
use of the commission. It shall also have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own
government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city commission and same shall
be subject to the approval by such commission. Such bylaws shall include, among other things, provisions for
(1) regular and special meetings, open to the public; (2) records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by
the public; (3) reporting to the governing body and the public, from time to time and annually; and (4) for the
holding of public hearings on its recommendation.
The commission is hereby vested with the power and authority, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards to make such exemptions to the terms of this ordinance in harmony with its general
purpose and intent and in accordance with general or special rules therein contained for the purpose of rendering
full justice and equity to the general public. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman, who
may administer oath and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent, or
failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be a public record.
(a) Appeals to the planning and zoning commission can be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer, department, or board of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative
office. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days time after the decision has been rendered
by the administrative office, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the
planning and zoning commission a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the commission all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action from [sic] was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts, stated in the certificate, a stay would in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed,
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record. The planning and
zoning commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time.
Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/248
(b) The planning and zoning commission shall have the following additional powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
ordinance.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which the
commission is required to pass under this ordinance.
(3) To authorize upon appeal in special cases, such variances from the terms of the ordinance
as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, the literal
enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
(c) In exercising its powers, the commission may, in conformity with the provisions of Articles
1011a and including 1011j of the 1925 Civil Statutes of Texas, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all
the powers of the officers from whom the appeal is taken.
(d) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the commission shall be necessary to revise any
order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor
of the application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to affect any
variance in said ordinance.
(e) Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the planning and
zoning commission or any taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the municipality may
present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in
whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the courts
within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the commission and not thereafter.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 211.007.
Sec. 18. Completion of existing buildings
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building
actually under construction at the time of the passage of this ordinance and which entire building shall be
complete within one (1) year from the passage of this ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall require any
change in plan, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore
issued and which entire building shall be completed within six (6) months from the date of the passage of this
ordinance. If any amendment to this ordinance is hereafter adopted changing the boundaries of districts, the
provisions of this ordinance with regard to buildings or premises existing or buildings under construction or
building permits issued at the time of the passage of this ordinance, shall apply to building permits issued in the
area affected by such amendment at the time of the passage of such amendment.
Sec. 19. Penalty for violation
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith
or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any buildings in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and each day such violation shall be permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where
anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent,
person or corporation, employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any
such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as above provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/248
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
Sec. 20. Fees and charges
The following charges are hereby established and such charges shall be paid in advance to the office of the City
Secretary of the City of Slaton, Texas, prior to the consideration of filing such and prior to the acceptance of the
application or appeal by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City Commission:
(1) A $50.00 nonrefundable fee for each application for a residential, conditional or special use
permit or variance from the Zoning Ordinance;
(2) A $75.00 nonrefundable fee for each application for a commercial[,] conditional or special
permit use [sic] or variance from the Zoning Ordinance;
(3) A $25.00 nonrefundable fee for an appeal to the City Commission.
(Ordinance 495, sec. 20, adopted 9/8/87)
Sec. 21. Changes and amendments
(a) The city commission may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of
the districts or the regulations herein established.
(Ordinance 173 adopted 3/1/77)
(b) Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the city commission shall
submit same to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report. If a change in use
district is proposed to a specific area those owners and all owners within 200 feet of the proposed area of
change, according to the latest tax roll, shall be notified by mail. Notification shall be by regular delivery and
postmarked 10 days prior to the planning and zoning meeting at which said use district change is to be
discussed. (Ordinance 620, sec. 1, adopted 10/8/02)
(c) A public hearing shall be held by the city commission before adopting any proposed amendment,
supplement or change. Notice of such hearings shall be given by publication one time in the official publication
of the City of Slaton, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15)
days from the first date of publication.
(d) Unless such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been approved by the planning and zoning
commission, or if a protest against such amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the city secretary,
duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more, either of the area of lots included
in such proposed changes or those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending two hundred (200) feet
from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment, supplement or change shall not become effective
except by a three-fourths vote of the city commission.
Sec. 22. Repealing clause
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Sec. 23. Saving clause
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission of the City of Slaton, Texas, that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or to contravene superior law by the
valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this ordinance, since the same
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/248
would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such
unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
EXHIBIT B
HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT
Section 1. Purpose
The City Council of Slaton hereby declares, that as a matter of public policy, the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of landmarks or district of historical and cultural importance and significance is necessary to
promote the economic, cultural, educational, and general welfare of the public. Downtown Slaton represents the
unique confluence of time and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens, collectively and
individually, and produced significant historic, architectural, and cultural resources that constitute their heritage.
This ordinance is intended to:
(a) protect and enhance the landmarks and districts which represent distinctive elements of Slaton's
historic, architectural, and cultural heritage;
(b) foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;
(c) protect and enhance Slaton's attractiveness to visitors and support and stimulate the economy;
(d) insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city;
(e) promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most
appropriate use of property within the city;
(f) encourage stabilization, restoration, and improvement of such properties and their values.
Section 2. Establishment of the Slaton Historic Preservation Commission
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Slaton Historic District Preservation Commission.
(a) The Historic Commission shall consist of 7 (seven) members to be appointed, to the extent
available among the residents of the community, by the city commission as follows:
The City will seek to appoint as members:
• an architect, planner, or representative of a design profession;
• a historian, either by college degree or reputation;
• a licensed real estate broker;
• an attorney;
• an owner of a landmark or property within a historic district.
(b) All Historic Commission members, regardless of background, shall have a known and
demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation within the City of Slaton,
Texas. The Historic Commission as a whole should represent the ethnic makeup of the city and the
City Commission shall strive to accomplish that diversity in its appointments.
(c) Historic Commission members shall serve for a term of 3 years, with the terms to be staggered
among the representatives to achieve staggered terms for the Commission. The initial commission
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/248
shall determine their terms by drawing for lots.
(d) The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Historic Commission shall be elected by and from the
members of the Commission.
(e) The Slaton Historic Preservation Commission shall be empowered to:
(1) Make recommendations for employment of staff and professional consultants as
necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission,
(2) Prepare rules and procedures as necessary to carry out the business of the Historic
Commission, which shall be presented to the City Commission for consideration for
ratification,
(3) Adopt criteria for the designation of historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and the
delineation of historic districts, which shall be presented to the City Commission for
consideration for ratification,
(4) Conduct surveys and maintain an inventory in the office of the City Secretary of
significant historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and all real properties located in
historic district within the city,
(5) Recommend the designation of resources as landmarks and historic districts,
(6) Create committees from among its membership and delegate to these committees
responsibilities to carry out the purposes of this ordinance,
(7) Maintain written minutes that record all actions taken by the Historic Commission and the
reasons for taking such actions,
(8) Recommend owners of landmarks or properties within districts for recognition by means
of certificates, plaques, or markers,
(9) Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural, and architectural preservation
by developing and participating in public education programs,
(10) Make recommendations to the city commission concerning the utilization of state,
federal, or private funds to promote the preservation of landmarks and historic districts within
the city,
(11) Approve or disapprove of applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this
ordinance,
(12) Prepare and submit annually to the city commission a report summarizing the work
completed during the previous year,
(13) Prepare specific design guidelines supplementary to requirements of this ordinance, for
the review of landmarks and districts,
(14) Recommend the acquisition of landmark structures by the city government where
preservation is essential to the purpose of this act and where private preservation is not feasible,
(15) Propose tax abatement programs(s) for landmarks or districts,
(16) Accept on behalf of the city government the donation of preservation easements and
development rights as well as any other gifts of value for the purpose of historic preservation,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/248
subject to the approval of the City Commission.
(f) The Historic Commission shall meet at least quarterly, if business is at hand. Special meetings
may be called at any time by the Chairman (or mayor) or on the written request of any two
Commission members. All meetings shall be held in conformity with the Texas Open Meetings Act,
Texas Civil Statutes, Article 6252-17.
(g) A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of not less than a majority of the
appointed membership.
Section 3. Designation of Historic Districts
(a) These provisions pertaining to the designation of historic districts constitute a part of the comprehensive
zoning plan of the City of Slaton.
(b) When an area is to be considered for designation as a historic district, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall schedule a hearing for such consideration. Real Property owners within a proposed historic
district shall be notified by regular U.S. Mail posted 15 days prior to the Commission hearing on the
recommended designation. At the Commissioner's public hearing, owners, interested parties, and technical
experts may present testimony or documentary evidence that will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed historic district,
(c) The Commission may recommend the designation of a district if it:
(1) Contains properties and an environmental setting which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation as a landmark; and,
(2) Constitutes a distinct section of the City of Slaton by having identifiable boundaries.
(d) Upon positive recommendation by the Historic Commission, the recommendations shall be submitted to
the Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days from the date of action by the Historic Commission. The Zoning
Commission shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation within forty-five (45) days of
receipt of such recommendation from the Historic Commission. Such hearing shall be in the same manner and
according to the same procedures as specifically provided in the general zoning ordinance of the City of Slaton.
The Zoning Commission shall make its recommendation, either positively or negatively, to the City Commission
within forty-five (45) days subsequent to the hearing on the proposed designation.
(e) The City Commission shall schedule a hearing on the Historic Commission's recommendation to be held
within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the recommendation of the Zoning Commission. The City Commission
shall give notice, follow the publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its determination in the same
manner as provided in the general zoning ordinance of the City of Slaton.
(f) The City Commission must make its determination within ten (10) days of the hearing. After such
decision, an owner or the Historic Commission can submit a written appeal for a second hearing within thirty
(30) days of the ruling. If the City Commission fails to make a determination, such shall be considered a
rejection of the recommendation.
(g) Upon designation of a building, object, site, or structure as a historic landmark or district, the City
Commission shall cause the designation to be recorded in the Official Public Records of Real Property of
Lubbock County, the tax records of the City of Slaton, and the Lubbock Central Appraisal District as well as the
official zoning maps of the City of Slaton. All zoning maps should indicate the designated historic district by an
appropriate and consistent mark.
Section 4. Designation of Historic Landmarks
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/248
These provisions pertaining to the designation of historic landmarks constitute a part of the comprehensive
zoning plan of the City of Slaton.
(a) Real Property owners of proposed historic landmarks shall be notified by regular U.S. Mail
posted 15 days prior to the Historic Commission hearing on the recommended designation. At the
Historic Commission's public hearing, owners, interested parties, and technical experts may present
testimony or documentary evidence which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed historic landmark.
(b) Upon recommendation of the Historic Commission, the recommendation shall be submitted to
the Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days from the date action by the Historic Commission. The
Zoning Commission shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation within
forty-five (45) days of receipt of such recommendation from the Historic Commission. Such hearing
shall be in the same manner and according to the same procedures as specifically provided in the
general zoning ordinance of the City of Slaton. The Zoning Commission shall make its
recommendation to the City Commission within forth-five (45) days subsequent to the hearing on the
proposed designation. The City Commission shall schedule a hearing on the Historic Commission's
recommendation to be held within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the recommendation of the
Zoning Commission. The City Commission shall give notice, follow the publication procedure, hold
hearing, and make its determination in the same manner as provided in the general zoning ordinance
of the City of Slaton.
(c) The City Commission must make its determination within ten (10) days of the hearing. If the
City fails to make a decision within that period, such shall be considered a rejection of the
recommendation. After such decision, an owner or the Historic Commission can submit a written
appeal within thirty (30) days of the ruling.
(d) Upon designation of a building, object, site, or structure as a historic landmark or district, the
City Council shall cause the designation to be recorded in the Official Public Records of Real
Property of Lubbock County, the tax records of the City of Slaton, and the Lubbock Central
Appraisal District as well as the official zoning maps of the City of Slaton. All zoning maps should
indicate the designated landmarks with an appropriate and consistent mark.
Section 5. Criteria for Designation of Historic Landmarks and Districts
(a) An historic landmark or district may be designated if it:
(1) Possesses historical, architectural, archeological, and cultural significance.
(2) Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of
local, regional, state, or national history.
(3) Is associated with events that have been significant to the city's past.
(4) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction.
(5) Represents the work of a master designer, builder, or craftsman.
(6) Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the city.
Section 6. Appointment of Historic Preservation Officer
(a) The city commission shall appoint a qualified city official, staff person, or appropriate resident of the
municipal entity to serve as historic preservation officer. This officer shall administer this ordinance and advise
the Historic Commission on matters submitted to it.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/248
(b) In addition to serving as representative of the Historic Commission, the officer is responsible for
coordinating the city's preservation activities with those of state and federal agencies and with local, state, and
national nonprofit preservation organizations.
(c) In the absence of a qualified official or staff person of the municipality, a volunteer resident serving as
preservation officer should be made aware of the liability issues involved in serving in this capacity.
Section 7. General Provisions
(a) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as repealing any existing ordinance of the city regulating
nuisances or permitting uses which are now prohibited by ordinances.
(b) All structures shall be in keeping with the average value and construction of the existing development in
the area.
(c) Plan review requirement: No construction permit, unless it is for interior renovation only of an existing
structure, shall be issued within the Historic District until a plan review as required by this section has been
completed and plans approved. The proponent shall provide the items required as per this ordinance, listed later
on in the document.
Section 7.1 Permitted Uses
(a) All future uses within the historic district shall be of wholesale or retail sales, service, general or
professional office, or residential use. Storage facilities are expressly excluded unless they are an integral part of
the district.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, single family residences shall be permitted on lots adjoining Texas Avenue from
the City square to Industrial Drive. Nothing herein shall require those residences to meet the standards of this
ordinance applicable to commercial or retail properties. Nonetheless, the owners of these residential properties
shall be required to comply with the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to Certificates of Appropriateness
for Alteration or New Construction, including the submission to the City of proposals for changes, alterations,
and improvements, which submissions shall be to the Siaton Historic Preservation Commission.
Economic Hardship Application Procedures for residences on Texas Avenue as found in Section 12 shall be
similarly applicable.
(b) All business shall be conducted entirely within a building. Permanent outside storage and/or display of any
type is prohibited unless approved on a temporary basis by the City Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) Any building being utilized as a residence may remain so after designation. However, any new residential
use within this district must not be contained on the first floor of any structure, but lofts would be accepted on
the second floor. Parking for tenants would be placed at the rear of the building and hidden by a 4' tall fence, if
the site provides adequate space for parking.
(d) All warehousing shall be in conjunction with on premise retail and or wholesale sales. All supplemental
storage shall be attached to rear of the principal building on the site and be subject to all requirements pertaining
to the principal building. The principal structure may not be used for storage.
(e) The following will be permitted uses:
(1) Art Gallery.
(2) Antique[.]
(3) Bakery.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/248
(4) Builder's supply. All materials must be in a building.
(5) Bus station.
(6) Cafe supply dealer, fixtures.
(7) Candy plant.
(8) Canvas goods shop, tents and awnings (no manufacturing).
(9) Church[.]
(10) Commercial private clubs. The sale of alcohol is permitted but only when authorized by State
Law.
(11) Dance hall.
(12) Department store, discount center, family center.
(13) Flower Shop[.]
(14) Electrical supply dealer.
(15) Furniture store, new and used. (All merchandise must be in a building).
(16) Game room, pool, billiard.
(17) Grocery or Food Store[.]
(18) Gym Fitness[.]
(19) Gymnastic or Dance Studio[.]
(20) Hotel or Bed and Breakfast Hotels[.]
(21) Hardware store.
(22) Job printing and lithographing.
(23) Laboratory, chemical, general analysis.
(24) Loft apartments contained completely within the second floor of a building.
(25) Magazine agency.
(26) Meat Market[.]
(27) Newspaper[.]
(28) Nonprofit training center with retail sales.
(29) Paint, tile, carpet, wail covering, and floor covering store.
(30) Pest control service.
(31) Pet shop - totally within a building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/248
(32) Photography Studio[.]
(33) Physicians[.]
(34) Plumbing service.
(35) Print shop.
(36) Private community centers for the social use of the residents of an addition, subdivision,
housing development, or apartment complex that is operated by an association or incorporated group
for their use and benefit.
(37) Produce market.
(38) Quilt Shop[.]
(39) Radio, stereo, or television repair shops.
(40) Rental store (no outside storage or display).
(41) Restaurants with sales of mixed alcoholic beverages as an incidental use.
(42) Restaurants when designed for service and consumption of food inside the building. Patios
shall only be located at the rear of the building within the lot line.
(43) Secondhand goods store or pawnshop.
(44) School[.]
(45) Sign shops, limited to window lettering, painted wall signs, banners and desk signs.
(46) Store fixtures sales (no manufacturing permitted).
(47) Tamale Plant[.]
(48) Theaters and motion picture shows (includes multiple screens).
(49) Battery and accessory stores.
(50) Upholstery shops, furniture (No outside storage permitted).
(51) Wholesale house, sales office and storage - No cotton storage.
Section 7.2 Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted when approved by the zoning board of adjustment.
(a) Shared or leased parking within six hundred (600) feet of the property when business
circumstances, location of parking spaces and normal hours of use are conducive to both businesses,
and such arrangement is demonstrated by a letter of agreement between the two (2) parties. Parking
lots shall be located at rear of buildings and should not be visible from Downtown Square.
(b) Outside dining patios must comply with the Texas/American Disability Act for all walkways
and parking.
(c) Public utility installations such as, but not limited to, railroad right-of-way and tracks,
transformer stations, transmission lines, telephone exchanges, lift stations, pumping stations, but in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/248
no event shall this be construed as permitting such uses as garages and shops, railroad yards, loading
yards or warehouses.
Section 7.3 Yard Requirements
(a) Front yard. Any lot line adjacent to a dedicated street (not an alley) shall be a front line.
(1) The front yard setback for buildings must originate on the front property line and conform to
the development on the adjacent lot or lots.
(2) On corner lots, the front setback shall be no less than zero (0) feet and no greater than the
setback established by the development on the adjacent lot.
(b) Rear yard. There shall be no rear yard requirement.
(c) Side yard. There shall be no side yard requirement.
(d) Projections into required yards.
(1) Unenclosed fire escapes, stairways, porch overhangs and/or balconies, covered or uncovered,
may extend four (4) feet into any required yard.
(e) Lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width.
(f) Lot area. There shall be no lot area requirement.
(g) Floor area ratio. There shall be no floor area ratio requirement.
(h) Height limit. No new or renovated buildings can exceed the height of the tallest current building within the
zoning district.
Section 7.4 Landscaping Requirements
(a) Landscaping for buildings with zero (0) front and side setback shall be restricted to rear yards and parking
islands along the Downtown Square. Landscaping in front yards shall be deemed inappropriate with the historic
character and are not permitted.
(b) All required landscaping on such Parking Islands may be maintained by the City of Slaton or Local
Volunteers and must be visible from the public right-of-way and placed for maximum enhancement of the
property along the Downtown Square.
(c) Landscaped hard surface materials may include only brick, stone, and modular pavers. Landscaping may
also include aggregate poured-in-place, concrete, or asphalt, or similar material.
(d) All new landscaped areas shall use drip-irrigation to avoid spraying onto adjacent streets and capable of
sustaining the plant materials. Irrigation systems shall meet acceptable industry standards and shall be installed
by a licensed irrigator.
Section 7.5 Vision Clearance
(a) Corner lots: Lots on all intersection corners shall maintain a visibility triangle which will require an
unobstructed line of sight as measured from the corner of both intersecting curblines a distance of 25 feet. This
shall require no obstruction to vision with a height greater than 2 feet above the adjacent curt [curb];
(b) Parking Islands: It shall be unlawful to set out, construct, maintain, or permit to be maintained, set out or
constructed any shrub or plant (excluding trees), sign or structure, or any other view obstruction having a height
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/248
of greater than three (3) feet, as measured from the top of the curb of the adjacent street, in the Parking Island.
All trees with a trunk diameter greater than two (2) inches measured three (3) feet above ground level that are
within any of the Parking Island shall be trimmed so that no foliage is less than six (6) feet above the top of the
curb of the adjacent street. No evergreen or coniferous species of tree shall be allowed in the Parking Island.
(c) The exceptions to the visibility obstructions shall include traffic-control signs and signals, and street signs,
utility poles and fire hydrants.
Section 7.6 Off-Street Parking Provisions
Shared or leased parking shall be subject to approval by the zoning board of adjustment.
Any lighting of drives or parking areas shall be so designed as not to cause glare on any other residential or
apartment zoned area in the vicinity.
Plans for off-street parking areas shall be submitted to be checked and approved as to access, ingress and egress
by the city under the terms of this district and the city's driveway regulations.
No overhead or garage doors shall be allowed facing the Downtown Square. All such doors must open onto a
rear alley and be contained within the rear yard.
Section 7.7 Disqualifying Usages
The following shall be disqualified for designation:
(a) All structures on a site shall be disqualified if the principal structure is used exclusively for
storage.
(b) Any structure, business, or site that produces noxious smells, fumes, dust, chemical odors of an
offensive nature, or by products or noise in amounts prohibited by statute or ordinance.
Section 8. Plan Review
Persons developing property within the Historic District are strongly encouraged to schedule a pre-application
conference with the planning department. Plans submitted under the provisions of this section should convey the
exterior design elements of a development and illustrate the property's relationship to its surroundings. A
complete set of documents shall include the following information:
(a) A completed project application form along with detailed description of proposed work.
(b) Owner or representative's name, address, phone and project title.
(c) Photographs illustrating the condition of the property, including all facades of any existing
buildings.
(d) Site plans, maps and Elevation drawings of the proposed changes, especially of the front
facades facing the Downtown Square. All submissions should be to scale and illustrate:
(1) All property lines, north arrow and scale.
(2) All streets, alleys and easements, both existing and proposed. Relationship to the existing
Downtown Square and surrounding Historic District should be clearly understood.
(3) Architectural character and use of materials, including mechanical equipment and other
visible items associated with the structure or development lot. Illustrations should include:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/248
(i) Elevation drawings, photographs and other supporting materials to illustrate the
proposed renovation.
(ii) Specifications for all materials to be used, including samples if necessary for
complete understanding.
(iii) Color specifications with samples preferred.
(4) Location and dimensions of buildings and structures.
(5) Building height and setback from adjacent right-of-way lines.
(6) Proposed ingress and egress to property, and traffic flow and control.
(7) Off-street parking and loading areas, including any additional information required to
calculate parking requirements.
(8) Type, dimension, and character of screening and location of all utilities on site.
(9) If the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering to
be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, method of illumination
(if any), and a plan showing the sign's location on the property.
(10) Location, height and design of outdoor lighting.
(11) Landscape plan including specifications for hard-surface landscape materials.
(12) Illustration of all utilities existent and proposed.
(e) Other information that will assist in the evaluation of site development is encouraged, but not
required.
Section 8.1 Plan Review Process
(a) Prior to issuance of a construction permit, complete plans shall be submitted to the City of Slaton. The
designated staff person shall determine by review of such plans whether the proposed development meets the
intent of this section and the “Design Guidelines for the Historic District of Slaton,” dated 2008, a copy of which
is attached hereto and incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set forth. Within ten (10) working days receipt by
the planning department, both the proponent and the building official will be informed in writing of the staff
person's decision including the need for review by the Slaton Historic Preservation Commission or any
conditions for approval. The staff person's decision may be appealed in writing to the zoning board of
adjustment by the applicant or other interested person within thirty (30) days of the written decision.
(b) If the staff person determines that the proposal contains unique circumstances which cannot be
accommodated by the standards of this zoning district and the “Design Guidelines for the Historic District of
Slaton,” the senior planner shall notify the proponent in writing and the plans shall be placed on the next
available agenda of the Slaton Historic Preservation Commission for recommendations. The Historic
Commission shall use this section and the design standards to determine whether the development meets the
intent of each and to make recommendations.
(c) Factors to be considered by the commission in making their recommendation and attaching conditions
include:
(1) the extent to which the proposal differs from the design standards or the standards of the
ordinance,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/248
(2) the impact of these modifications on existing and future development in the area, and
(3) the public purpose to be served by permitting the requested modifications.
(d) Upon recommendation by the Historic Commission, the staff person may vary the requirements of the
design standards. Variances from the requirements, even if recommended by the Historic Commission, must be
approved by the zoning board of adjustment. The Historic Commission shall provide its recommendations in
writing to the applicant and to the zoning board of adjustment.
(e) For Conditional or Special Permit Uses, upon receipt of an application for a conditional use by the
planning and zoning commission an investigation shall be made as to the manner in which the proposed location
and character of the conditional use will affect the master city plan of Slaton. The investigating committee shall
report the results of its study of said application to the zoning board, and, if the report is favorable toward the
application, the zoning board may, after public notice and hearing according to law, grant the permit including
the imposition of conditions of the use consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of this ordinance, will not
substantially and permanently injure the appropriate use of neighboring property, and will substantially serve the
public convenience and welfare.
Section 9. Certificate of Appropriateness for Alteration or New Construction Affecting Landmarks or
Historic Districts
(a) No person shall carry out any construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, rehabilitation, or
relocation of any historic landmark or any property within a historic district, nor shall any person make any
material change in the light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving, or other exterior elements visible
from a public right-of-way which affect the appearance and cohesiveness of any historic landmark or any
property within a historic district.
(b) All new construction and exterior renovation shall obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed
construction to ensure compatibility with the existing historic resources of the district.
Section 10. Criteria for Approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness
In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall be guided by any
adopted design guideline, and where applicable, the following from The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings. Any adopted design guideline and Secretary of the Interior's Standards
shall be made available to the property owners of historic landmarks or within historic districts.
(a) Every reasonable effort shall be made to adapt the property in a manner which requires minimal
alteration of the building, structure, object, or site and its environment.
(b) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, object, or site and its
environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(c) All buildings, structures, objects, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time.
Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create and earlier appearance shall be
discouraged.
(d) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and
development of a building, structure, object, or site and its environment. These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
(e) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a
building, structure, object, or site shall be kept where possible.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/248
(f) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In
the event replacement is necessary, the new material should reflect the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historical,
physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different
architectural elements form [from] other buildings or structures.
(g) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible.
Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(h) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected
by, or adjacent to, any project.
(i) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be
discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or
cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of
the property, neighborhood, or environment.
(j) Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to buildings, structures, objects, or sites shall
be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the building, structure, object, or site would be unimpaired.
Section 11. Certificate of Appropriateness Required for Demolition
A permit for the demolition of a historic landmark or property within a historic district, including secondary
buildings and landscape features, shall not be granted by the (building inspector or other city official) without
the review of a completed application for a certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Commission, as
provided for in this ordinance.
Section 12. Economic Hardship Application Procedure
(a) After receiving written notification from the Historic Commission of the denial of certificate of
appropriateness, an applicant may commence the hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit
shall be issued unless the Historic Commission makes a finding that hardship exists.
(b) When a claim of economic hardship is made due to the effect of this ordinance, the owner must prove that:
(1) the property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return
represents the most profitable return possible;
(2) the property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a
purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and
(3) efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
(c) The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Historic Commission, local preservation groups and
interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. Such
efforts must be shown in writing to the Historic Commission.
(d) The Historic Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within sixty (60) days from the
date the application is received by the historic preservation officer. Following the hearing, the Historic
Commission has thirty (30) days in which to prepare a written recommendation to the City Zoning Commission.
In the event that the Historic Commission does not act within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the application, a
permit may be granted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/248
(e) All decisions of the Historic Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the applicant by
registered mail and a copy filed with the city clerk's office for public inspection. The Historic Commission's
decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application.
(f) An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness dissatisfied with the action of the Historic Commission
relating to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to the City
Commission within thirty (30) days after receipt of notification of such action. The City Commission shall give
notice, follow publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its decision in the same manner as provided in the
general zoning ordinance of the city.
Section 13. Enforcement
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this ordinance shall conform to any
requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the historic preservation officer to inspect periodically any
such work to assure compliance. In the event work is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of
appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the Historic Commission and verification by the historic
preservation officer, the historic preservation officer shall issue a stop work order and all work shall immediately
cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work is in effect.
Section 14. Ordinary Maintenance
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior
architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district which does not involve a change in
design, material, or outward appearance. In-kind replacement or repair is included in this definition of ordinary
maintenance.
Section 15. Demolition by Neglect
(a) No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within a historic
district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any
exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the Historic Commission, produce a detrimental
effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself.
(1) Examples of such deterioration include:
(i) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(ii) Deterioration of roof or other horizontal members.
(iii) Deterioration of exterior awnings.
(iv) Deterioration of exterior signage.
(v) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
(vi) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, or foundations, including broken
windows or doors.
(vii) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to
the claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety.
Section 16. Penalties
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith
or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any buildings in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/248
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and each day such violation shall be permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where
anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent,
person or corporation, employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any
such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as above provided.
(Ordinance 699 adopted 7/15/08)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
Note–The chapter, article and section numbers and subsection designations in this appendix correspond to the
chapter, article, section and subsection numbers in the Code of Ordinances. However, to avoid confusion, the
article and section numbers appearing in this appendix are preceded by the letter “A.”
CHAPTER 2 ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A2.05 VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Sec. A2.05.033 Registration
(a) (2) Dangerous dog registration fee: $50.00.
(c) Fee for new registration tag when the owner moves or sells a dangerous dog: $25.00.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 3 BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. A3.01.002 Schedule of inspection fees not otherwise specified
The city shall assess and collect the following inspection fees:
(1) For all new building construction the sum of $0.04 per sq. ft.
(2) In the event a structure is remodeled, the following charges shall apply:
(A) Building inspection. $0.02 per sq. ft. with a minimum charge of $10.00.
(B) Electrical inspection. $0.02 per sq. ft. with a minimum of $10.00
(Ordinance 495, sec. 7-140, adopted 9/8/87; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE A3.04 ELECTRICITY
Sec. A3.04.103 Inspection fees–Schedule
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/248
(a) Rough-in work. The inspection fee for rough-in work on all electrical installations shall be computed at the
rate of $0.02 per square foot of construction with a minimum charge of $15.00. (Ordinance 495, sec. 7-72,
adopted 9/8/87)
(b) Remodeling. The inspection fee for the installation of electrical fixtures and/or appliances shall be the sum
of two dollars ($2.00) for the first fixture and for each additional fixture the sum of ten cents ($0.10). The
inspection fee for outlets and/or switches shall be the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for the first five (5) outlets
and/or switches and the sum of ten cents ($0.10) for each additional outlet or switch.
(c) Commercial construction. The inspection fee for the installation of all electrical wiring, fixtures,
appliances, outlets and/or switches shall be the sum of three-quarters of a cent ($0.0075) per square foot.
(d) Neon signs and neon lighting. The inspection fee for connecting neon signs and neon lighting in which not
more than two (2) transformers are used shall be one dollar ($1.00) and the sum of fifty cents ($0.50) shall be
charged for each additional transformer; provided, however, that the maximum fee shall be five dollars ($5.00).
(e) Incandescent signs. For the purpose of this subsection incandescent signs shall include all signs including
billboards which are illuminated with one (1) or more incandescent lights. The inspection fee for incandescent
signs that require not more than two (2) circuits shall be one dollar ($1.00), and the sum of fifty cents ($0.50) for
each additional circuit.
(f) Motors. For consumer operation the inspection fee for electric motors shall be in accordance with the
horsepower ratings: from zero to five (5) horsepower, one dollar ($1.00); for each additional horsepower, the
sum of ten cents ($0.10); provided, however, that the maximum fee for any motor or motors operating from one
(1) meter shall be five dollars ($5.00).
(g) Generators. For consumer operation the inspection fee for electrical generators including switchboard and
exciters of ten (10) kilowatts or less capacity shall be three dollars ($3.00) each.
(h) Motion picture machines. The inspection fee for the installation of a motion picture machine shall be one
dollar ($1.00).
(i) Electric welders. The inspection fee for the installation of an electric welder shall be one dollar ($1.00).
(j) Radio and television receiving antenna. The inspection fee for the installation of a radio or television
antenna shall be one dollar ($1.00).
(1978 Code, sec. 7-72)
(k) Metal siding installation. The inspection fee for inspecting the installation of metal and other metallic
siding following the completion of work shall be $15.00. (Ordinance 521, sec. 1 (7-72), adopted 9/10/91)
Sec. A3.04.104 Same–Reinspection
A charge for each reinspection shall be as follows:
(1) For the first reinspection, a fee of one dollar ($1.00);
(2) For the second reinspection, a fee of two dollars ($2.00);
(3) For the third and each subsequent reinspection, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) each.
(1978 Code, sec. 7-73)
ARTICLE A3.06 PLUMBING
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/248
Sec. A3.06.002 Amendments to code
Section 106.6.2 Insert: Fee schedule:
(1) Inspection for installation, alteration, removal, use location and maintenance of heating, airconditioning
and other equipment systems, the sum of one and one-half cents (0.04) [sic] square foot
with a minimum of fifteen dollars ($75.00) [sic].
(2) Plumbing inspections shall be charged at the rate of four cents (0.04) per square foot with a
minimum of fifteen dollars ($75.00) [sic].
(3) In the event a structure is remodeled, the following charges shall apply; plumbing inspection;
an initial seventy-five dollars ($75.00) permit fee plus an additional one dollar ($1.00) per fixture on
remodeled structure.
(4) On all plumbing red-tagged, there shall be assessed a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
and reinspection shall also be charged at a rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ordinance 745 adopted 6/11/12)
ARTICLE A3.07 MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. A3.07.002 Amendments
Section 106.5.2 Insert: The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in the following schedule:
(1) New construction/additions to building: $0.02 per sq. foot with $75.00 min.
(2) Generic mechanical permit: $75.00 min.
(Ordinance 746 adopted 6/11/12)
ARTICLE A3.12 MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Division 2. Manufactured Home Park or Recreational Vehicle Park
Sec. A3.12.044 License
(b) Fee. The annual fee for each park shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first twenty (20) homes and
one dollar ($1.00) for each additional home. (Ordinance 610, sec. 14-10, adopted 6/11/02)
ARTICLE A3.14 BILLBOARDS, SIGNBOARDS AND BULLETIN BOARDS
Division 2. License
Sec. A3.14.032 Bond; issuance; fee; duration; renewal
License fee and fee for renewal of the annual license for any person to engage in or carry on the business or
occupation of billposting, bulletin painting, distributing, card or banner tacking or any similar business within
the city: $50.00. (1978 Code, sec. 3-25)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/248
Division 3. Highway Beautification
Sec. A3.14.066 Licenses, permits and fees
The minimum fee for a building permit for a sign shall be the greater of $10.00 or $0.25 per square foot, with
double-faced signs being counted as one side. (Ordinance 495, sec. 3-36, adopted 9/8/87)
ARTICLE A3.15 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Division 2. Excavations
Sec. A3.15.031 Permit required; fee
The fee for a permit to excavate across, along, in or about any public street, alley or other public way shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (1978 Code, sec. 19-8)
CHAPTER 4 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A4.04 BUYERS OF JUNK, VEHICLE PARTS, USED GOODS AND SECONDHAND
CLOTHING
Sec. A4.04.001 Permit required; period; fee; transfer
Permit fee to buy and sell goods or junk and wreckage: $2.50 per year. (1978 Code, sec. 15-1)
ARTICLE A4.05 TAXICABS
Division 2. Permit
Sec. A4.05.042 Fee; statement as to vehicles
Taxicab permit fees:
First vehicle: $25.00.
Each additional vehicle: $10.00.
Adding vehicle under the original permit, each: $10.00.
(1978 Code, sec. 20-4)
ARTICLE A4.06 WRECKING YARDS AND JUNKYARDS
Division 2. License
Sec. A4.06.043 Issuance; fee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/248
Wrecking yard or junkyard license application fee: $10.00. (1978 Code, sec. 23-4)
ARTICLE A4.08 COIN-OPERATED MACHINES
Sec. A4.08.004 Sealing machine to prevent operations
Fee for the release of any machine sealed for nonpayment of tax: $5.00. (Ordinance 676, sec. 4, adopted
3/14/06)
CHAPTER 7 MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE A7.03 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND
Sec. A7.03.002 Establishment of amount of fee and assessment and collection
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. (Ordinance 629, sec. 2, adopted 5/8/03)
ARTICLE A7.04 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND
Sec. A7.04.001 Establishment of amount of fee and assessment and collection
(a) Each assessed fee shall be in the amount of $3.00. (Ordinance 672 adopted 3/14/06)
CHAPTER 13 UTILITIES
ARTICLE A13.02 WATER
Division 1. Generally
Sec. A13.02.002 Application for service; meter deposit
Deposit for one three-fourths-inch by five-eighths-inch water meter: $10.00.
Deposit for water meter for cafe, service station or laundry: $25.00.
(1978 Code, sec. 22-20)
Division 2. Billing, Rates and Charges
Sec. A13.02.042 Billing; reconnection charge after delinquency
Fee for reconnection of water service prior to reconnection: $10.00. (Ordinance 495, sec. 22-25, adopted 9/8/87)
Division 3. Backflow Prevention
Sec. A13.02.075 Customer service inspections
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/248
(d) Inspection fee for each customer service inspection: $10.00. (Ordinance 561, sec. 5, adopted 4/14/98)